Sere shy |. (2 à 


|4 Uppsala Universitets 
Bibliotek 


C 


С 


© | SP' Depa kgg eket ; | 
4 
| 


Prācinavamša (Old Hall) 
O Utkara Rubbish Heap 


Sadas 
(Hall of Recit n) 


Patnisala Gārhapatya (Domestic Altar) 


М0 


(Old) Ahavaniya 
(Offering Altar)= 


(New) Gārhapatya, 
Daksinagni (Domestic Altar) 
(Southern Altar) 


O 


MahāvedGreat Altar Space) 


Agnidhriya 


E 


Utkara Rubbish Heap 
O Cātvāla Pit 


Havirdhāna 
(Soma Hall) 


Yūpa 
7 ©) (Sacrificial 
Pole) 


NITY 


Uparava Holes 


A 


Marjaliya 


э ER 9 UR 1 
This is for Agni, not for me 


THE VEDIC RITUAL OF THE FIRE ALTAR 


VOLUME I 


| by Frits Staal 


in collaboration with 
E C.V. Somayajipad and 
| М. Itti Ravi Nambudiri 


| Photographs by Adelaide deMenil 


ASIAN HUMANITIES PRESS 
BERKELEY 
1983 


Avd. för indologi iranistik 
och indoeur. språkforskning 


This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or 
otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out, or otherwise, circulated, without the 
publisher’s prior consent, in any form of binding or cover other than that in which 
it is published and without a similar condition including this condition being 
imposed on a subsequent purchaser. 


All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted 
in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, 
recording or any information storage and retrieval system without permission in 
writing from the Publisher. 


Copyright © 1983 by Frits Staal 


Manufactured in the Republic of Korea 
by Samhwa Printing Co., Ltd. 


Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 


Staal, Frits. 
Agni, the Vedic ritual of the fire altar. 


Bibliography: p. 703 

Includes indexes. 

1. Agnicayana ( Vedic rite) I. Somayajipad, 

C. V. (Cherumukku Vaidikan) II. Itti Ravi 
Nambudiri, M. III. De Menil, Adelaide. IV. Title. 
BL1226.82.A33S7 294.5'38 81-13637 
ISBN 0-89581-450-1 (set) AACR2 


dedicated to 
Baron and Baroness van der Feltz 


CONTENTS 
Preface xxi 
Transliteration XXXIV 
Sanskrit XXXIV 
Malayalam XXXV 
A Note on Pronunciation XXXVi 
Abbreviations xxxvii 
General Introduction I 
PART I 
THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 
Chapter r. Introduction 27 
Chapter 2. The Agnicayana in Classical Vedic Ritual 29 
Sources 29 
The Srauta Rituals 40 
Chapter 3. A Bird’s—Eye View of the Agnicayana 55 
Chapter 4. Traditional Interpretations of the Agnicayana 59 
Chapter 5. Origin and Significance of the Agnicayana 73 
Agni 73 
Fire TT 
Vedic Nomads 90 
Soma 105 
The Cosmic Man II3 
The Altar 125 
Naturally Perforated Stones Я 139 
Chapter 6. Тһе Nambudiri Tradition 167 
PART II 


THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


PRELIMINARIES 
I. Eligibility, Time and Place 193 


CONTENTS 

2. Measurements and Bricks 195 
3. Soma, Antelope Skin and Woods 203 
4. Wooden Implements 206 
5. Clay Implements 216 
6. The Golden Man 240 
7. Other Prerequisites 240 
8. The Ritual Enclosure 244 
g. Dramatis Personae 266 
THE PERFORMANCE 
Introductory Note 274 
Abbreviations i 276 
A Note on the Jaiminiya Sāmaveda 276 
First Day: April 12 and 13, 1975 
EPISODE I. Ritual Preparation of the Ukha Pots and Introductory 

Rites (Ukhasambharanam, Punyahavacanam, 

Upavyaharanam, Samkalpa) 279 
EPISODE 2. Animal Sacrifice for Vayu and Preparation of the Five 

Heads (Vāyavyam Pašu) 303 
EPISODE 3. Election of the Priests and Making Fire (Rtvigvaraņa, 

Agnimanthana) 313 
EPISODE 4. Consecration of the Yajamana (Diksa) 317 
Second Day: April 13, 1975 
EPISODE 5. Adoration of the Ukhā Fire with the Vatsapra Hymn 

and Rites for Gain (Vatsapra-upasthana, Sani) 334 
EPISODE 6. Ritual Preparation of the Pravargya Implements 

(Pravargyasambharanam) 336 
Fourth Day: April 16, 1975 
EPISODE 7. Construction of the New Domestic Altar 

(Garhapatyaciti) | 336 
EPISODE 8. Introductory Offering; Purchase of Soma; Guest Offering 

for Soma (Prayaniyesti; Somakraya; Atithyesti) 347 
EPISODE 9.  Pravargya, Оразай, and Subrahmanya Chant 368 
Third Day: April 16, 1975 
EPISODE 10. Measurement of the Great Altar Space and of the Field 


of Agni (Mahāvedikaraņa, Citisthānakaraņa) 369 


X 


CONTENTS 


Fourth Day: April 16, 1975 


EPISODE II. Setting Up the Field of Agni (Agniksetropadhāna) 
EPISODE 12. The Foundation of the Altar 

EPISODE 13. ‘The First Layer 

Fifth Day: April 17, 1975 

EPISODE 14. The Second Layer 

Sixth Day: April 18, 1975 

EPISODE 15. The Third Layer 

Seventh Day: April 19, 1975 

EPISODE 16. The Fourth Layer 

Eighth Day: April 20, 1975 

EPISODE 17. The Fifth Layer 

EPISODE 18. Rudra, Flow of Milk, and Other Ceremonies on the 


Ninth Day: 


EPISODE 19. 
EPISODE 20. 


EPISODE 2I. 
EPISODE 22. 


EPISODE 23. 


Fifth Layer (Satarudrtya, Kstradhara) 


April 21, 1975 

Further Ceremonies on the Altar 

Carrying Forth of Agni and Oblations (Agnipranayana, 
Adhvarāhuti, etc.) 

Flow of Wealth (Vasor Dhārā) 

Pressing of Strength, Holding of the Realm, and Other 
Oblations (Vajaprasaviya, Rastrabhrt, etc.) 

Setting Up of the Soma Hall and the Hall of Recitation; 
Construction of the Dhisnya Hearths 
(Havirdhānamaņdapakaraņam; Sadahkaranam, 
Dhisnyanirmanam) 


Third and Ninth Day: April 21, 1975 


EPISODE 24. 


Tenth Day: 


EPISODE 25. 


EPISODE 26. 


EPISODE 27. 


Carrying Forth of Soma and Agni; Animal Sacrifice for 
Soma and Agni; Offerings for the Divine Instigators; 
Proclamation of the Yajamāna (Agnisomapranayanam; 
Agnisomiyapasu; Devasuvam Havimsi) 

April 22, 1975 

Continuation of the Soma Ritual; Outdoor Chant for 
the Purified Soma (Bahispavamanastotra) 

The Eleven Animal Sacrifices and the Rest of the 
Morning Pressing (Savanīyapašu; Prātahsavana) 
Midday Pressing and Anointing the Yajamana 
(Madhyandinasavana; Abhiseka) 


Eleventh Day: April 23, 1975 


EPISODE 28. 
EPISODE 29. 


The Third Pressing (7rtiyasavana) 
The Three Ukthya Soma Sequences and the Sixteenth 
(Sodasi) 


xi 


381 
395 
417 
445 
459 


464 


579 


590 


598 
608 
632 
646 


655 


CONTENTS 
Eleventh Day: April 23 and 24, 1975 PLATES 
EPISODE 30. The Three Overnight Rounds (Rātriparyāya) 663 
Eleventh Day: April 25, I : | у 
EPISODE 31. " The CHET nāt for the Ašvins (Ašvinastuti; All photographs are by Adelaide deMenil, unless otherwise noted. 
A$vinasastra) 650 І. Making Fire (agnimanthana) 42 
Twelfth Day: April 25, 1975 9: Ida 50 
EPISODE 32. The Tail of the Ritual (Yajūapuccha) 686 3. The Soma Cart IOO 
4- The Indo-Iranian Fire Offering 126 
APPENDIX. Malayalam Text of the Praisārtham 698 | 5А. The Ukhā Pot 134 
SB. The Mahāvīra Pot 134 
BIBLIOGRAPHY AND ABBREVIATIONS 703 6. Chicken-Fish Pebbles (Photo Beaucage) 142 
7A. Landscape with Perforated Rocks (National Palace 
Museum, Taiwan) 146 
7B. Sage in front of a Perforated Rock (National Palace 
Museum) 146 
8A. Bodhidharma inside a Cave (National Palace Museum) 148 
8B. Perforated Rock in a Private Collection (National Palace 
Museun) 148 
9. Peak of the Jade Maiden (National Palace Museum) 150 
IOA. Perforated Rock in Lake Setting (Photo Cyril Birch) 152 
IOB. Rock with Creeper Trained through Perforations (Photo 
Cyril Birch) ' 152. 
TI; The Ignorant Brahmin 156 
I2. Sālagrāma Stones (Photos Webb, Beaucage) 164 
13. Rgveda Teacher and Pupils (Photo from Anantha Krishna 
lyer, 1912) 176 
I4A-C. Teachers and Pupils in the Trichur Rgveda School 178 
I5A-B. Teaching the Accents of the Rgveda 180 
16. Altar of 1956 Agnicayana 188 
I7A. Putting Clay in the Wooden Frames 200 
17B. Lifting the Wooden Frames 200 
17C-D. Transporting the Bricks 200 
18А. Inspection of Bricks ; 204 
І8В. Inspection of Antelope Skins 204 
I9. The Potter 208 
20A-C, The Carpenter 210 
21A-F. Soma Goblets Made of Nyagrodha Wood 212 
22-32. | Wooden and Clay Implements 218—239 
33A. Fashioning the Golden Man 242 
33B. The Golden Man (hiranmayapurusa) (Photo Beaucage) 242 
34A-B. Making the Roof 250 
35. The Sacrificial Enclosure 254 
36A. Digging the Vedi ' 258 


PLATES 


Preparing the Utkara 

The Southern and Old Sacrificial Altars 

The Southern and New Domestic Altars in Use 
The Two Akkitiripads 

Erkkara Raman Nambudiri Performing the Hiding Rite 
(nihnava) 

The Unnetā Priest 

The Ро, at the Ceremony of Āpyāyana, “Sprinkling the 
Soma with Mantras” 

The Nesta 

The Gravastut at the Apyayana Ceremony 
The Agnidh Assisting the Hota to Adjust His Earstring 
The Hota Recites 

Arrival of the Fires 

Ukhā Pots, Bull and Circle Bricks 

Ritual Preparation of the Ukha Pots 

Recital of Maitravaruna 

Wiping the Human Head 

The Five Heads 

Election of the Priests (rtvigvaraņam) 

The Wife of the Yajamāna (yajamanapatni) 
The Yajamāna at his Consecration 

The New Domestic Altar 

Before the Introductory Offering 

The Kindling Verses 

The Introductory Offering 

After the Introductory Offering 

Measuring Soma (somonmānam) 

After the Soma Purchase 

Enter the Unneta 

Swelling Soma (apyayana) 

The Hiding Rite (nihnava) 

The Pravargya: Circumambulation with Fans 
The Pravargya: The Oblation 

The Pravargya: Peace Chant 

Drinking the Pravargya Milk 

After the Pravargya 

The Subrahmanya 

The Subrahmanya Priest 

Breathing at the Special Resolution 

Measuring the Great Altar Space 

Ploughing the Field of Agni 

Putting Earth in the Center 

Keeping Track of the Consecration 


ху 


PLATES 


Burying Male and Female Pots 

The Bricks of the First Layer 

The Ignorant Brahmin on the First Layer 
Marking Bricks 

The First Layer 

Burying the Ukhā Pot 

Consecrating an Ukha Pot 

The Sandal 

The Second Layer 

The Fourth Layer 

Brahman Consecrating Brick 

The Woman Without Ears 

Touching the Horse 

A Rain-Bringing Brick 

Consecration of Pebbles 

The Ignorant Brahmin on the Fifth Layer 
The Yajamāna Turns the Bricks into Cows 
Rudra 

Flow of Milk 

Rudra: Second Round 

Pouring Water around Agni 

Chants around Agni 

Deposition of Pravargya Implements in the Shape of a Man 
Arrival of Agni 

The Full Oblation 

Flow of Wealth 

Flow of Wealth: Detail 

Conclusion of Flow of Wealth 

Holding of the Realm (rāstrabhrt) 
Fastening the Copper Pipe to the Cart 
The Yajamàna's View 

Fixing the Audumbari Pillar 

Preparing the Uparava Resounding Holes |. 
Arrival of Soma and Agni 

Erection of the Sacrificial Pole 

Pouring Soma 

Offering Soma 

Drinking Soma 

Udgātā's Council to Yajamāna (Photo Parpola) 
Rounds of Morning Chant 

The Eleven Animal Sacrifices 

The Agnidh Brings Fire 

Helpers Carry Fire 

During the Animal Sacrifices 


XV 


PLATES 

104. Enter the Gravastut Blindfolded 634 | ILLUSTRATIONS IN THE TEXT 

105. Pounding Soma 636 

106. Nocturnal Recital by Brāhmaņācchamsin 668 | aie 

107. Nocturnal Recital by Maitravaruna (Photo Parpola) 676 Fig. 1. The Sacrificial Enclosure H4 

108. On the Way to the Final Bath 690 Fig. 2. Customary Positions of the Priests | 46 

109. The Final Bath (avabhrtha) 692 Fig. 3. Sacrificial Enclosure for the Animal Sacrifice 48 

IIO. Burning the Enclosure 694 Fig. 4. Sacrificial Enclosures for the Soma Rituals 53 

III After the Fire 696 Fig. 5. Sacrificial Enclosures for the Agnicayana 55 

i Fig. 6. Fire Altar of the Agnicayana (after Eggeling) 66 

Fig. 7. Bird-Shaped Fire Altar of the Agnicayana 66 
Fig. 8. The Four Basic Measures .197 
Fig. 9. The Shapes of the Bricks 198 
Fig. 10. Stick for Tracing a Circle 244 
Fig. 11. Determination of the East-West Line 245 
Fig. 12. Determination of the East-West Line: Alternative Method 246 
Fig. 13. Determination of the North-South Line: First Method 246 
Fig. 14. Determination of the North-South Line: Second Method 247 
Fig. 15. Dimensions of the Old Hall (Prācīnavamša) 249 
Fig. 16. Dimensions of the Domestic Altar (Gārhapatya) 252 
Fig. 17. Dimensions of the Offering Altar (Ahavaniya) 253 
Fig. 18. Dimensions of the Southern Altar (Dāksiņāgni) 256 
Fig. 19. Dimensions of the Mahāvedi 262 
Fig. 20. Dimensions of the Bird-Shaped Altar 264 
Fig. 21. Ritual Enclosure for Preparing the Ukhā Pots 279 
Fig. 22. Ritual Enclosure for the Animal Sacrifice for Vàyu 306 
Fig. 23. The Bricks of the New Domestic Altar 337 
Fig. 24. Order of Bricks in the First Layer 400 
Fig. 25. “Agnis” Buried under the Atman 405 
Fig. 26. Order of Bricks in the Second Layer 446 
Fig. 27. Paficami Bricks in the Second and Fourth Layers 447 
Fig. 28. Sapāda Bricks in the Second and Fourth Layers 447 
Fig. 29. Adhyardha Bricks in the Second and Fourth Layers 448 


Fig. зо. -Paficamyardha Bricks in the Second and Fourth Layers 448 
Fig. 31. Adhyardhàrdha Bricks in the Second and Fourth Layers 449 
Fig. 32. Paiicamipādya Bricks in the Second and Fourth Layers 449 


Fig. 33. Ettāmši Bricks in the Second and Fourth Layers 450 
Fig. 34. Sülapadya Bricks in the Second and Fourth Layers 450 
Fig. 35. Dīrghapādya Bricks in the Second and Fourth Layers 451 
Fig. 36. Ubhayi Bricks in the Second and Fourth Layers 451 
Fig. 37. Order of Bricks in the Third Layer 460 
Fig. 38. Order of Bricks in the Fourth Layer 465 
Fig. 39. Order of Bricks in the Fifth Layer 478 
Fig. 40. Position of Pebbles in the Fifth Layer 494 
Fig. 41. Agnidhriya Hearth 586 
xvii 


xvi 


Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 


Fig. 
Fig. 


Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 


42. 
43. 
44. 


45. 
46. 


47. 
48. 
49. 
50. 
51. 


ILLUSTRATIONS IN THE TEXT 


The Dhisnya Hearths 
Dhisnya Hearth of the Hota 
Dhisnya Hearths of Maitravaruna, Brāhmaņāccharmsin, Pota, 


587 
588 


Nesta and Acchavaka 588 
Marjaliya Hearth 589 
Position of the Priests during the Isti Ceremonies and 

Animal Sacrifices of the Agnicayana 591 
Position of Priests in the Sadas 609 
Fifteenfold Vistuti of the Morning Butter Chants 627 
Seventeenfold Vistuti of the Midday Back Chants 641 
Twenty-one-fold Vistuti of the Yajfiayajfiiya 652 
Vistuti of the Chant for the ASvins 682 


xviii 


Table 
Table 
Table 
Table. 
Table 
Table 
Table 
Table 
Table 
Table 


Table тт. 
Table 12. 
Table 13. 
Table 14. 
Table 15. 
Table 16. 


Map A. 


Map B. 
Map C. 


к= 
SS ооа лш юн 


TABLES 
The Four Vedas and Their Šrauta Sūtras 36 
The Srauta Rituals 40 
Number of Bricks in the Five Layers 202 
The Sāmidhenī Verses 311 
Sequence of Rites on the Third and the Fourth Day 386 
Names of Bricks in the First Layer 401 
Area of Bricks in the First, Third, and Fifth Layers 404 
Names of Bricks in the Second Layer 452 
Area of Bricks in the Second and Fourth Layers 453 
Names of Bricks in the Third Layer 459 
Names of Bricks in the Fourth Layer 466 
Names of Bricks in the Fifth Layer 479 
Names of Pebbles in the Fifth Layer 495 
Position of Pebbles between Bricks 496 
Distribution of Seventeen Moon Chants 533 
Stutis and Sastras of the Atirātra 616 


MAPS 


Early and Present Distribution of Indo-European Languages, 

and Distribution of Shamanism 9I 
Present Distribution of Vedic Schools 170 
Central Kerala : 195 


xix 


PREFACE 


IN 1955 I VISITED for the first time a traditional Nambudiri Brahmin 
home in a small village in southwest India. We sat on the verandah, which 
was spotlessly clean. Hospitality is a virtue common all over Asia, but my 
hosts’ generosity was overwhelming. Delicious vegetarian dishes were served 
by the eldest son—mounds of rice surrounded by preparations made from a 
variety of vegetables, spices, pickles, and fruits, among which I recognized 
cocoanut, ginger, mango, and banana. I ate all these from a banana leaf 
on the floor by myself, watched with undisguised curiosity by the male 
members of the family. Earlier, I had bathed in a corner of the garden where 
numerous buckets of water were made available. These were followed by a 
towel and a mundi, the garment of unbleached cotton that the Malabar Dis- 
trict Gazetteer describes as “а white cloth tied round the waist, tucked in on 
the right side, and hanging loose to the ground." I sometimes saw women's 
eyes through a window; more rarely, an elephant in the compound. At that 
time, though a student of the Vedanta, or “End of the Vedas,” I knew little 
about the Vedas. I considered them ancient and distant, and it would hardly 
have occurred to me to connect them with my charming hosts. As it turned 
out, they spent most of their time bathing or engaged in Vedic ritual when 
I was not sharing their company. 

During my second visit I was armed with a tape recorder, an upright 
Philips machine of ample weight and dimensions, which Professor van Bui- 
tenen had used in Poona, and which belonged to the Netherlands Organiza- 
tion for Pure Research (Z.W.O.). My heart sank whenever a little boy car- 
ried it on his head across a river. I recorded Kathakali and other Malayalam 
songs, a concerto by a famous singer, and increasing amounts of Vedic re- 
citation and chant. One result of these early researches was my book Nam- 
budiri Veda Recitation, published in 1961. 

Visits to Kerala of irregular duration followed in more rapid succession. 
In 1962 I was accompanied by J. E. B. Gray of the School of Oriental and 
African Studies. We made complete recordings, lasting some thirty hours, 
of the Rgveda recitations, Samaveda chants, and Yajurveda formulas that 
accompany the Agnistoma, a ritual celebration that lasts five days. We did 
not witness any such ritual. The brahmins recited and chanted for our 
tape recorder, and the occasion was to them like a general rehearsal. We 
tried to gain access to a real performance, but none was at hand, and we 
would not have been allowed in any case. One Nambudiri offered to organize 
a faithful imitation of the ceremony, to be performed for our sakes, but we 
declined. 

In the sixties, some leading Nambudiris became concerned about the 
weakening and possible disappearance of their Vedic traditions. At the same 


ххі 


PLATE 85 


PREFACE 


time I began to urge that their largest ceremony, the twelve-day Atirātra— 
Agnicayana, which had occurred in 1956 and had never been witnessed by 
outsiders, should be performed once more so that it could be filmed and 
recorded. After years of intermittent discussion, in which Professor E. R. 
Sreekrishna Sarma and Dr. Asko Parpola participated, the Nambudiris 
agreed. They asked only that in exchange for being given the privilege of 
attending, filming, and recording the performance, scholars help defray the 
cost of the ritual. The Agnicayana was performed from April 12 to 24, 1975. 
The circumstances that led to this performance are related in greater detail 
in the second volume of this book (“Тһе Agnicayana Project": Part III, 
pages 456-475). 

Over the decades, while I was beginning to penetrate the riches of their 
Vedic heritage, I made many Nambudiri friends and came to know them 
better. I found them sincere, straightforward, and disinclined to take them- 
selves too seriously. After initial reluctance, they are eager to explain the 
intricacies of their recitations, chants, and ceremonies; they never claim 
knowledge they don’t really possess; they will not preach or become pom- 
pous, and express no interest in coming to America. Though no longer 
adverse to modernization, they remain attached to their simple habits. 
Stripped of former privileges, they have preserved their ability to practice 
the art of living. This book is offered to them with the wish that material 
progress will not destroy that rare ability. 


Agni is not only fire and the name of a God, but also the name of the 
Agnicayana ceremony itself, and the name of the bird-shaped altar con- 
structed during that ceremony. This book deals with Agni in all these forms. 
It is not a book primarily made from books, but derives, in the first place, 
from my Nambudiri friends. It would be difficult to list all those who have 
helped to make it possible over the years. The expertise described in the 
following pages is extensive and varied, and is embodied in a sizable section 
of the community. For example, in the course of the long Agnicayana cere- 
mony, the ritual implements of another rite (the pastoral Pravargya) have 
to be put on the altar in the shape of a man. One person knew precisely how 
this should be done. When the chief priest was about to perform the rite, 
he appeared and demonstrated it. 

Without being able to thank all, let me pay tribute to four Nambudiris 
upon whom I have always relied and who, at the time of writing, are in their 
seventies. Two of them have directly collaborated with me in the present 
volume, especially in its Part П: Cherumukku (Cerumukkü) Vaidikan Val- 
labhan Somayājipad and Muttatukkattu Itti Ravi Nambudiri. 

Cherumukku Vaidikan, or C.V. as he is respectfully called, occupies a 
central position in the ritual realm of the Rg- and Yajurveda. He is the lead- 
ing force of one of the two Vaidika families who continue to perform the large 
rituals. He carries his knowledge lightly, but his authority is unquestioned. 


£ 


PREFACE 


He has a formidable mind, combined with an efficiency that is rare. He 
arranged for the Agnistoma recordings of 1962, and when the preparations 
for the 1975 performance (originally planned for 1974) were about to col- 
lapse, the situation could only be saved—and was saved—through his 
power and decisive action. 

Itti Ravi, as he is affectionately called, is the undisputed master of the 
Jaiminiya Sāmaveda, the school of Sāmaveda that survives primarily among 
the Nambudiris. He has devoted his life to the maintenance of the tradition 
of these chants: he reconstructed from his memory, with the help of his 
pupils, those that were on the verge of being forgotten, had them recorded 
whenever there was an opportunity, and committed them to writing. Thanks 
to his constant activity the materials are now at hand, and the only unpub- 
lished school of the Vedas is ready for publication. It was my good fortune to 
meet Itti Ravi during my first visit to Kerala. Ever since, I have learned and 
recorded from him. The extent of his knowledge is as phenomenal as the 
length of his breath. 

One of my oldest friends is Matampü Narayanan Nambudiri, B.A., 
B.L. After early training in his native Yajurveda, he took to the study of 
law and became an advocate. Like С.У. and Itti Ravi, he was politically 
active and took part in the Nambudiri Yogaksema Mahāsabhā, an organiza- 
tion concerned with the modernization of the Nambudiri caste system. Since 
he was opposed to animal sacrifice and refused to attend rites that involved 
such sacrifice, the 1975 performance was the first of its kind that he witnes- , 
sed. His Gandhian attitude did not diminish his enthusiasm for Vedic cul- 
ture, and this zeal, combined with a modern outlook, made him a valuable 
ally in bridging the gaps between my plans and reality, and between some- 
times opposing factions. 

The doyen of Nambudiri scholars is Erkkara Raman Nambudiri. In 
1966, he recited the Kausitaki Brāhmaņa for its editor, E. R. Sreekrishna 
Sarma. In 1976 his book Amnayamathanam, “The Kindling of Tradition,” 
was published in Malayalam. Another book on ekāha, ahina, and айта is 
about to appear. As long as Erkkara failed to support, for respectable rea- 
sons, our desire to film a Vedic ritual, there was nothing that could be done 
about it. However, it is characteristic of him that when he changed his mind 
and came to feel that there is merit in having on film and tape what otherwise 
might be irretrievably lost, he also assumed full and active responsibility. In 
spite of his indifferent health, he consented to be present inside the sacrifi- 
cial enclosure throughout the ceremonies, so that all could benefit from his 
deep knowledge and wide experience. 


The 1975 performance was organized by Cherumukku Vaidikan and Itti 
Ravi Nambudiri. Their responsibilities and roles will become apparent in 
the course of this work. Our collaboration at the writing stage is easily 
described. The description of the performance in Part II of the present 


PREFACE 


volume was written in drafts that were separately submitted to C.V. and Itti 
Ravi for their scrutiny. They then sent me their corrections and additions. 
Many of these exchanges took place through correspondence, but fortunate- 
ly I have been able to sit at their feet again in the course of this work, and 
after the manuscript had begun to take shape. These sessions were not con- 
fined to the correction of what I had written. They induced me to reorganize 
the material so as to express its structure more clearly, and to incorporate 
new facts and insights. For example, much of the information on measure- 
ments and the ritual enclosure in the “Preliminaries” (Part II) derives from 
days spent with Itti Ravi in 1977. Late in 1978, the Smithsonian Institution 
enabled me to go to India once more and to consult with my collaborators 
for the last time before the manuscript would be completed. Some of the 
additional results of this trip are presented in three chapters of Part Il 
(in the second volume). As a result of our close and extended collaboration 
I can now assert with confidence, that Part П of the book exhibits a major part 
of C.V.'s and Ītti Ravi's combined knowledge of the ritual. The occurrence 
of their names on the title page is therefore not merely decorative. At the same 
time, I alone am responsible for mistakes that remain. 

My indebtedness to others, hardly less numerous, is for support that has 
also been indispensable. When the Nambudiris had decided to permit the per- 
formance to be studied and documented, an international committee was 
set up, consisting of Professors R. N. Dandekar and C. G. Kashikar (Poona), 
Klaus Mylius (Leipzig), Asko Parpola (Helsinki), V. Raghavan (Madras), 
E. R. Sreekrishna Sarma (Tirupati), J. A. B. van Buitenen (Chicago), and 
myself as chairman. Dr. Parpola initiated the correspondence, which soon 
grew into formidable proportions. We invoked the assistance of Vedic schol- 
ars all over the world, and the response was invariably positive. Among the 
enthusiastic supporters was Dr. Pierre Rolland, whose tragic and untimely 
death occurred in 1974. 

The first preparations began to take shape. Dr. Kashikar provided a 30- 
page description of the Agnicayana, based upon šrauta sūtras, šulba sūtras, 
and prayogas. Dr. Parpola provided a list of the sāman chants from Jaiminīya 
sources, which was later supplemented and extended by Itti Ravi. Cherumukku 
Vaidikan gave an oral description, in Malayalam, of the seguence of rites to 
Professor Sreekrishna Sarma, who translated this into English in a pamphlet 
of 21 pages. Professor J. C. Heesterman from Leiden visited Berkeley during 
January-March, 1975, lectured on the Agnicayana section (Chapter 10) of 
Baudhāyana Srauta Sūtra, and helped me to prepare a booklet of instruc- 
tions for the cameramen. Mr. J. E. B. Gray, London, prepared from our 
recordings a full transcript of the recitations of the Soma-pressing day. 
I wrote a general pamphlet on the study of Vedic ritual, to be used in ap- 
proaching foundations. 

I felt strongly that the filming and recording should not be done by San- 
skrit scholars, but be in professional hands. Thus started the research for 


XXIV 


PREFACE 


technical assistance and, at the same time, financial support. I have always 
hated begging for money, which has become a very time-consuming part of 
all large scholarly projects. Financial support was particularly hard to obtain 
in the seventies for projects that were not fashionable, or were considered 
to lack practical utility or “relevance.” 


Operating from Berkeley—with the advice and assistance of Dr. Mark 
Juergensmeyer, and with the help of the administrative staff of the Center 
and the Department of South and Southeast Asian Studies—I approached 
numerous foundations and individuals, generally without tangible result. 
Fortunately, we were assisted not only by the members of the executive 
committee, but also by other scholars from all over the world. I should like 
in particular to mention the active participation of Professors A. Scharpé 
(Belgium), C. von Fiirer-Haimendorf and J. E. B. Gray (England), N. Naka- 
da and N. Tsuji (Japan), J. Gonda and J. C. Heesterman (Netherlands), T. 
Asch and E. C. Dimock (U.S.A)., and W. Rau (West Germany). This world- 
wide network resulted in the following grants, donations, and commitments: 


Smithsonian Institution, U.S.A. (in rupees) $49,449 
The Rock Foundation 40,261 
National Endowment for the Humanities, U.S.A. 15,000 
Netherlands Organization for Pure Research (WOTRO/ZWO): 

Dfl. 30,000 12,300 
School of Oriental and African Studies, London: £1500 3,495 
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft: DM 6,650 2,860 
University of Gent, Belgium: francs 65.000 1,672 
Dr. Asko Parpola, Helsinki 1,000 
Professor N. Tsuji, Tokyo 1,000 
Mr. S. Iwamoto, Tsurumi University: Y 50,000 170 


I am especially indebted to the Smithsonian Institution, The Rock Founda- 
tion, and the National Endowment for the Humanities, not only because 
their contributions were the largest, but also because they sustained their 
interest in the project and continued to support us on later occasions. 

In the meantime, the Government of India had been approached 
through the Indian Consulate-General in San Francisco, the Indian Em- 
bassy in Washington, Dr. Dandekar and Dr. Raghavan. Following the 
enthusiastic support of Dr. Kapila Vatsyayan, the Government of India 
expressed great interest in the project and agreed to provide the necessary 
permissions and facilitate the importation of equipment. 

The rupee grant from the Smithsonian Institution, authorized by the 
Government of India, was administered through the American Institute of 
Indian Studies. Mr. P. R. Mehendiratta of the Institute put all the facilities 
of his office at our disposal and helped with the administration of the pro- 
ject, its financial implementation, and the processing of numerous docu- 


XXV 


PREFACE 


ments. His participation in the project started in 1974, and he continued to 
provide background support from New Delhi throughout the actual per- 
formance. A detailed financial report on the rupee grant was prepared at his 
Delhi office. Some information on our budgets will be provided in the ac- 
count of “The Agnicayana Project” in the second volume. 

Late in 1974, I secured the participation of Professor Robert Gardner 
of the Department of Visual and Environmental Studies, Harvard Univer- 
sity. Henceforward the direction of films and still photography, and indeed 
the supervision of the entire visual and sound effort, was in his hands. Gard- 
ner and I visited Kerala in December 1974, made the final arrangements, 
concluded agreements with the performers, and initiated a period of active 
consultation and cooperation that continued without interruption for the 
next four months. 

When the performance started on April 12, 1975, I began to realize 
that there were many basic things I did not know. I came to understand only 
then what is meant when we say that ritual is "activity" (Karman). Ritual is 
not a thing that can be easily understood if one only has access to texts. More 
importantly, whatever texts may say, language does not explain such activity. 
It is we who ask for explanations in terms of linguistic expressions. For the 
ritualists, action comes first, and action, which includes recitation and chant, 
is all that counts. Now, however, a curious convergence became apparent, 
for the same holds for cameramen, photographers, and sound engineers. 
Textual scholars will find it hard to understand how much I learned about 
Vedic ritual by seeing how Robert Gardner, who until then had known 
nothing about it, set about to film it. Despite the time we had spent pre- 
paring for the event, the rites generally took me by surprise. We could not 
enter the ritual enclosure, and it was not always possible to see clearly. Ear- 
phones enabled me to hear what was going on inside while it was being re- 
corded on tape. All in all, I was often lost. In confusion, I would look for 
Gardner, who was always where the action was, filming it with his assistants 
there, while Adelaide deMenil was doing the still photography. I am grate- 
ful to them, therefore, not only for providing massive documentation, but 
also for making me see. 

While most of the films were shot by Gardner and Renn Burke, they 
were assisted for sound by Kunju Vasudevan Nambudiripad and Professor 
M. Narayanan Nambudiripad, who, unlike all non-Nambudiris, could enter 
the enclosure. The film crew consisted, in addition, of Mankada Ravi Varma 
and Sarwesh Kumar. Most of the still photographs were taken by Adelaide 
deMenil, and a fair number by Dr. Parpola and Dr. Ikari. Professor Edmund 
Carpenter assisted with the technical organization, made sketches and 
measurements of sacrificial implements, and collected information of various 
kinds. Professors N. A. Jairazbhoy, E. Carpenter, and myself were in charge 
of the sound recordings, sometimes helped by other visitors, e.g., Dr. Romila 
Thapar. More detailed information about our equipment and mode of 


XXVI 


PREFACE 


operation will be provided in the second volume. 

We returned with almost 80 hours of recorded tape, 20 hours of color 
film, more than 4,000 still photographs (color and black/white), a set of sacri- 
ficial implements (now in my Berkeley office), and abundant notes, sketches, 
and drawings. The first need was for an inventory of these materials. Back in 
Berkeley I began with the 20 hours of film. I had access to a balky Moviola 
editing console for less than a month, and prepared 78 pages of tentative 
annotations with the assistance of Harold Arnold, my wife Saraswathy, and 
(for the Pravargya) Wayne Surdam. The first draft of the annotations was 
completed by August, 1975, and an abridged outline is published below 
(Part V, in the second volume). These annotations were used in preparing 
the 45-minute film “Altar of Fire," produced by Robert Gardner and myself 
and released early in 1977. In the meantime I also learned to find my way in 
the mass of tapes and photographs, though until now there has not been 
sufficient time to prepare a proper catalogue. 


The way was now paved for writing up the results. During 1976-1977, 
this work was made possible through the assistance of a research grant from 
the National Endowment for the Humanities. I started with an analysis of 
the background, which resulted in Part I of the present volume (“The Agni- 
cayana Ritual”). In this part, limited use is made of the data collected in 
India. Though my primary inclination is to work in the field, this first part 
could not have been written had I not been in residence at Berkeley. Our 
Berkeley Campus not only provides incessant intellectual stimulation, but its 
athletic facilities preserved my ability to transport books, films, and tapes, 
and prevented me from getting stiff when spending long hours at my desk. 
Also, Berkeley still houses some of those almost legendary scholars who 
combine insight with the unfailing control over large masses of facts. A 
telephone conversation with Edward Schafer, for example, provides precise 
answers to numerous questions in a matter of minutes. Our library would 
yield such information only grudgingly and after weeks or months of frustra- 
tion. 

I am therefore especially grateful to some of my Berkeley colleagues: 
Professors Murray B. Emeneau and George L. Hart of South Asian Studies 
for things Dravidian; J. K. Anderson, Thomas Rosenmeyer, and Michael 
Nagler of Classics for Greek; Leonard Lesko and Martin Schwartz of Near 
Eastern Studies for Egyptian and Indo-Iranian, respectively; Edward H. 
Schafer of Oriental Languages and Raymond N. Tang of the East Asiatic 
Library for Chinese. Robert F. Heizer of Anthropology has taught me most 
of what I now know about fire by generously providing a pile of offprints. 
Lewis and Lois Lancaster have helped me with Buddhism and pottery, res- 
pectively, and Margaret Lock has assisted me with Shamanism. Ned K. 
Johnson and his associates at the Museum of Vertebrate Zoology—Mer- 
cedes S. Foster and Steve Bailey—have informed me about birds. Joseph H. 


xxvii 


PREFACE 


Peck, Jr., of the Museum of Paleontology, has helped me with fossil am- 
monites. Richard Reeder of the Department of Geology and Geophysics 
identified the ‘“‘chicken-fish” pebbles. 

From outside the Berkeley campus I also received a great deal of as- 
sitance, especially in connection with publications. For this I should like 
to thank Robert Gardner and his assistant Hope Norwood at Harvard, 
J. E. B. Gray in London, Jeff Masson in Toronto, Don B. Griffin in Tus- 
caloosa, and Barbara Miller and Dorothy Norman in New York. My in- 
debtedness to the articles that appear in Part III of the second volume will be 
apparent at the appropriate place. Special interest attaches to the trans- 
lation of the 10th chapter of Baudhāyana Srauta Sūtra by Yasuke Ikari and 
Harold Arnold in Part IV of the second volume. 

In preparing the text of Part II, which constitutes the bulk of the first 
volume, I derived much help from all the articles and documents that 
had been prepared, and from the numerous Vedic texts and related publica- 
tions, with which Vedic scholars are already familiar. However, the following 
description is principally based upon the materials we brought back from 
India. With the help of my own field notes I went repeatedly through our 
recordings, films (now available as videotape cassettes), and photographs. 
Whenever there was a discrepancy between the ancient texts and our own 
field data, I recorded the latter, checking explicitly with Cherumukku Vaidi- 
kan[or Itti Ravi if there seemed to be any reason for doubt. The reader 
should not jump to the conclusion, therefore, that unfamiliar forms are 
“mistakes,” even if elementary rules of the language seem to be disregarded, 
as for example in agnaye idam na mama, “this is for Agni, not for me” (see 
below page 47). 

While the Atirātra-Agnicayana unfolded itselfin my mind in all its splend- 
or and perplexity, the manuscript began to grow. Dr.Ruth-Inge Heinze helped 
me to edit the manuscript and typed large portions of it in exemplary fashion. 
Ruth Suzuki typed the latter portions with fantastic speed and accuracy. My 
wife Saraswathy helped me in matters of style. Yvonne Kins, Helen Tu, 
Keith Jefferds, and Pamela MacFarland assisted in numerous ways, includ- 
ing style, references, and books. Adrienne Morgan prepared the illustrations 
in the text and the maps—a difficult task that she executed with expertise and 
imagination, as a glance at Figures 27-36, for example, will show. 

A difficult dilemma was whether to include in the description of the 
ritual the text and translation of the numerous recitations and chants. A 
simple alternative would be to merely refer to them by means of the numerous 
abbreviations customary among Vedists. It might be argued that, since the 
participants do not often understand them, it would be best to delete the 

texts. Be that as it may, they certainly know them. To omit them and confine 
oneself to references would not only give the book the appearance of a tele- 
phone directory, it would also do an injustice to the perfomance, and be 
useless to nonspecialists. I accordingly decided to provide something, and 


XXVili 


PREFACE 


the next question was whether to provide texts, translations, or both. To 
omit the original form, which is ritually significant, would almost be sacrilege. 
Moreover, most readers, when presented with Sanskrit forms, would want 
to know their meaning. In the case of many of the chants, and recitations 
such as the sodasin, “the sixteenth,” there is no meaning, and so there was 
no problem. In the remaining cases, the great majority, I reluctantly decided 
to provide the text together with a translation into English. In preparing the 
texts I was helped by Pamela MacFarland, Professors R. N. Dandekar and 
T. N. Dharmadhikari, Poona, and Professors E.R. Sreekrishna Sarma and 
S. Sankaranarayanan, Tirupati. 

In translating the texts I received a great deal of assistance. My first thanks 
go to Professor Wendy Doniger O’Flaherty, who helped me with translations 
from the Rgveda. Neither of us is a specialist in Indo-European, one require- 
ment for the traditional Vedic philologist. Both of us feel, however (as she 
says in the Introduction to her Anthology from the Rgveda: Penguin 
Classic, 1981) that "there is so much in the Rgveda to interest and excite 
non-Vedists, it seems a shame to let it go on being the treasure of a tiny, 
exclusive group, hidden as it is behind the thorny wall of an ancient and 
cryptic language.” The difficulties, however, are formidable: “As a result, 
there are places where the reader may be puzzled. Good. The hymns are 
meant to puzzle, to surprise, to trouble the mind; they are often just as 
puzzling in Sanskrit as they are in English.” 

One of the main features of the Atirātra-Agnicayana—its huge dimen- 
sions—made itself felt in connection with the translations. Wendy could not 
cover more than a relatively small portion because of her other commitments 
and the daunting distance between Berkeley and Chicago. I decided, there- 
fore, to follow existing translations in many cases, even though they are 
often unsatisfactory. I changed them whenever I felt I knew how they should 
be changed, and in all cases sought to improve their readability. This applies 
especially to Keith’s translation of the Taittirlya Samhita, which is in biblical 
English. The Rgveda translation by Geldner is in German, and that by Re- 
nou, almost complete, in French. Several other texts have been translated 
by others, and some have remained untranslated. All required a lot of work. 

In polishing the English translations I was helped by several students: 
Dennis Lahey, Wayne Surdam, and especially Pamela MacFarland. When 
the work was nearing completion, I learned that Professor Stanley Insler of 
Yale was translating the Rgveda and had completed nearly half of it. He 
graciously offered to look through my translations, not only of the Rgveda, 
but of all the recited texts. Again, the mass of the material constituted a 
stumbling block. Stanley scrutinized more than half the translations, and 
offered me corrections and suggestions for improvement. He spent a great 
deal of time, but it became clear that he could not complete the work without 
sacrificing every other task in which he was engaged. It is also frustrating for 
a skilled translator to correct the efforts of an unskilled colleague instead of 


XXIX 


PREFACE 


offering fresh translations of his own. Fortunately, there were several verses 
and hymns of the Rgveda that Professor Insler had already translated. 
Adding numerous others, he has given me permission to include and publish 
here for the first time the following Rgvedic verses that underlie the 29 
stuti chants of the Atirātra: 


stuti Rgveda source 
1 (bahispavamāna) RV 9.62.25-27; 9.61.28-30 ; 9.66.10-12 
2 RV 1.12.13 
3 RV 1.23.4-6 
4 RV 1.7.1-2,4 
5 RV 7.94.4-6 
6 КУ 9.61.10; 9.54.1; 9.61.11-12; 9.107.4—-5; 
9.87.1-3 
7 RV 9.64.1-2 
8 RV 4.31.1-3 
9 RV 8.49.1-2 
10 RV 8.66.1-2 
11 КУ 9.1.1-3; 9.63.7; 9.65.25; 9.101.1-2; 
9.75.1-3 
12 RV 6.48.1-2 
13 RV 6.16.16—18 
14 RV 8.21.1-2 
15 КУ 8.98.7—9 
16 see pages 660-663 
17 RV 8.92.1-3 
18 RV 7.31.1-3 
19 RV 8.2.16-18 
20 RV 8.92.19-21 
21 RV 8.17.11-13 
22 RV 8.81.1-3 
28 RV 8.45.2224 
24 RV 8.2.1-3 
25 RV 3.51.10,12,11 
26 RV 1.5.1-3 
27 RV 1.30.7-9 
28 RV 8.13.1-3 
29 RV 7.16.1-2; 7.81.12; 7.74.12. 


Stanley Insler has also contributed the translation of the text of the first 
Sastra recitation by the hota priest (RV 8.48.3—4; 3.13.1—7) and the varuna- 
praghāsa verses (ВУ 10.176.2-4; 3.29.4; 6.15.16; 3.29.8; 2.9.1—2) recited by 
the hota during the Carrying Forth of Agni (Episode 20). Stanley’s transla- 
tion are recognized at a glance: he uses “у,” "thou," and “ее,” where 


XXX 


PREFACE 


I would have “уои”. These discrepancies happen to illustrate the gap between 
Reveda and Yajurveda, which is of the same order as that between Sha- 
kespeare and contemporary American literature. 

I am grateful to all who have helped me with the considerable amount 
of translation Agni has required. Excluding the translations by Stanley 
Insler, I bear the final responsibility for the form in which the translations 
now appear. In conclusion, I would like to adopt, and extend to the Yajurve- 
da, what van Buitenen said in his description of the Pravargya (1968, 54): 
*My colleagues will understand that my renderings . . . do not pretend in 
any way to be definitive. There is hardly a line in the Rgveda which does not 
present its own problems. . . . It was my intention at least to show what 
kind of hymns were recited at the ritual and I have hoped for at least a fair 
approximation of their contents.” 

Apart from Vedic Sanskrit, there are a few translations from Malaya- 
lam, the native language of the Nambudiris. With respect to these I have been 
helped most by Professor E.R. Sreekrishna Sarma. He has also established 
the text and translated the long ‘‘Praisartha” addressed to the patron of the 
ritual on the occasion of his consecration. Dr. N. S. Mooss, Vayaskara, 
Kottayam, helped me with the names and identification of plants and trees. 

The year following the completion of the text, 1979, was disastrous 
for Sanskritists and Oriental scholars generally. Four scholars of worldwide 
fame, including two members of our international committee and two con- 
tributors to the second volume of this book, passed away within the span of 
six months. Professor V. Raghavan, doyen of Indian Sanskritists, died on 
April 6, 1979. Professor C. Hooykaas, the leading authority on the religion 
of Bali, died on August 13, 1979. Professor J.A.B. van Buitenen, still engaged 
in his translation of the Mahabharata, died on September 21, 1979. Professor 
N. Tsuji, dean of Japanese Sanskritists and Vedic ritualists as well, died on 
September 24, 1979. We who remain pull closer together in a vain attempt to 
fill the gaps. 

While I was preparing the manuscript for the press, I was searching for 
a publisher. I had no success, even though I had started the search as early 
as 1975. One reason for this lack of results was that I felt that the book I 
had in mind should be illustrated with plates, using the beautiful photographs 
made by Adelaide deMenil in black and white as well as in color. This feeling 
reflected my growing conviction that ritual should not merely be read about, 

but should also be seen, and—if possible—heard. I was unwilling to com- 
promise by proposing to sacrifice either comprehensiveness or quality, feeling 
that the excellent materials brought back from India deserved a definitive 
scholarly account, with adequate presentation of information, texts, pictures 
and—if possible—sound. 

There was another reason for my lack of success in finding a publisher. 
Until the National Endowment for the Humanities decided to support pub- 
lication costs, it was relatively easy to obtain money for projects in the 


XXXi 


PREFACE 


humanities, and almost impossible to find support for publishing them. 
The assumption was, apparently, that university publishers would take care 
of the manuscripts. However, this had long ceased to be the case. No one can 
keep up with the avalanche of manuscripts that the ideology of publish or 
perish has unleashed. 

Since producing the book I had in mind would be expensive, I had to 
find the money. I wrote more letters than I care to recall. In approaching 
publishers and foundations, I received help from Berkeley’s Chancellor 
Bowker and from the Berkeley Foundation of the University of California. 
I also corresponded with UNESCO and with the Government of India. 
There are great similarities between these three bureaucracies, and wereached 
a point where I was uncertain whether their wheels were still moving, or had 
ground to a halt. In 1978, when despair was near the Rock. Foundation 
donated $90,000 to enable me to transform the almost completed manus- 
cript into a spectacular book. There were no formalities, no application pro- 
cedures, no reports, and in no time the arrangements were completed. 
Disputes arose, however, over a number of subjects, chief among them the 
Rock Foundation’s claim that Asian Humanities Press had misused the grant 
funds by spending them for ordinary working capital purposes rather than 
conserving and using them only for the material production cost of Agni. 
The publisher did not deny using the grant funds in this manner, but con- 
tended that it had the right to do so provided that it could replace them 
with other funds when needed. Both sides retained legal counsel. Numerous 
discussions ensued among the foundation, the publisher, the University of 
California as the formal grant recipient, and myself. The Rock Foundation 
was represented by Edward M. Stadum, and it is through his efforts that 
these negotiations were brought to a successful conclusion and publication 
was finally achieved. 

I owe a great debt to Dr. Muneo Tokunaga who checked the Sanskrit 
texts, to Professor R. N. Dandekar who supervised their printing at the 
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Poona, and to Mrs. B. S. Staal 
who assisted with the preparation of the indexes. Insiders will note that 
these volumes are to some extent inspired by Gordon Wasson’s book 
on Soma. This is as it should be, for Agni and Soma are the closest of ritual 
companions. Moreover, I value not only Wasson’s book and his friendship, 
but admire the boldness of his hypothesis, and agree with him that Vedic 
culture is too important to be left to the Vedists. 

I am deeply indebted to Adelaide deMenil, who made the photographs 
of the 1975 performance, and permitted me to select and use what I wanted. 
Two plates were provided by Dr. Asko Parpola from his photographs taken 
on the same occasion. I am grateful to him, to Professor Cyril Birch and 
Kuo Li-ying for photographs they made in the People’s Republic of China 
and in Japan, respectively, and to Professor George Dales, who drew Plates 
22-32 and helped with the description of ritual implements. Grateful acknow- 


xxxii 


PREFACE 


ledgement for the use of illustrations is also made to Ajit Mookerjee, London 
and New Delhi; Professor G. R. Sharma, Allahabad; the Collection of the 
National Palace Museum, Taipei, Republic of China, where I was helped 
in particular by Miss Wang Ch’ing-hung, Mr. Liu Tang-ping, and Mr. 
Mark Landes; the E.M. Scratton Collection, Ashmolean Museum, Oxford; 
the Archaeological Survey of India; and the American Oriental Society. 
I thank Louis T. Judson for helping me produce the tape cassettes that ac- 
company these volumes, another delicate and time-consuming task. 

The University of California, and in particular the two departments of 
Philosophy and of South and Southeast Asian Studies, have repeatedly 
allowed me to be absent, and at most other times made do with my physical 
presence when my mind was in the Agnicayana. The same holds for my 
students and my family, so much so that my son Nanoo, before he could 
properly talk, already referred to the ritual as “ugly China.” I am truly grate- 
ful to my colleagues, students, and family for granting me such privileges, 
without which it would not have been possible to complete this book. 

Finally I should give vent to a question that I have sometimes asked 
myself. Why should I, a philosopher and Sanskritist, have spent years of 
my life with an obsolete ceremony? Am I weary of the present? Or am I 
merely tired of words and meanings, and have turned to sounds and activi- 
ties? If I look at the issue negatively, this may be so, though my turning is 
still a turning of words. However, from a positive point of view, I have long 
stood in awe of this unique survival, so archaic yet so sophisticated, so close 
to the early history of man, and so lovingly preserved through millennia that 
elsewhere saw the birth and death of entire civilizations. While pyramids, 
temples, cathedrals, and skyscrapers were built and fell into decay, languages 
and religions came and went, and innumerable wars were fought, the Vedas 
and their ritual continued to be transmitted by word of mouth, from teacher 
to pupil, and from father to son. What a triumph of the human spirit over the 
limitations of matter and the physical body! A continuity verging on im- 
mortality—though not of any individual person. And so I found myself 
involved not merely in the past, but in the present and the future as well. 
A curious combination of circumstances and accidents put me in touch with 
this venerable tradition, and then in almost complete possession and control 
of its physical manifestations on tape, plate, and film. The time had come for 
the leading Nambudiri ritualists to be willing, indeed eager, to reveal and 
elucidate to me these cultural treasures, which had always been hidden from 
outsiders. Here was a unique opportunity, indeed a responsibility, to continue 
the oral tradition by means of a book. Here was something for which I was 
so well placed and equipped that I could almost believe that only I could do 
it. I was fortunate and responded to the challenge as a matter of course. 


San Francisco Frits STAAL 


RRR eee же eS ee 


| 
| 
| 


; Р IONS 
Transliteration | TRANSLITERAT 
SANSKRIT | MALAYALAM 
Е E ķi a en = 83 so 2 
а І r 1 y Я 1 T 1 u 
u 
a i ж вю eoo 9" 
| i f = ā 1 ü 
ü | 
a оф ag a во 
sit e é 9 © 
: o 
бод) 
T : 89 
Е sit ai 2 
ai m 
T E x s 
ka Е Е U q ka ca ta li ad 
ca ta ta pa 
pa 
al o 
= mā P 
z Y sj kha cha tha an 
Kin cha tha tha šā tha pha 
pha , 
3I uo a a» g 
= 3 т а ја да Pu 
Ба ja da da Я 8 J da ba 
ba 
ое; OW auo 
3 © | S w è 
А E = gha ha dha 
gha jha dha dha ч | jh dha m 
bha | 
= 6з eo 6m 
1 i 3 ha fia na s7 n 
A fia na na И : na ma 
ma 
со) O EJ 
4 5 " a ya ra А ai 
ya ra la va 
va 
ao uo оч 
a ar q a | һа ba ga read) 
ha $a ga sa sa 
(03 Ф 8 
a 3 | 2 
К аһ eo 
ah la st la Ја ra, tta am 
am 
| 
| 
XXXlV 


XXXV 


A Note on Pronunciation 


THE NAMBUDIRI PRONUNCIATION of Sanskrit and the pronunciation of 
Malayalam are similar. Special features of Veda recitation are mentioned 
separately (page 173). In general, in Sanskrit and Malayalam, vowels are 
pronounced as in Italian or Japanese. They are short (a, i, u, r, 1) or long, that 
is, twice as long as the short ones (4, i, ū, 7, е, 0, ai, au). The consonant r is 
pronounced as in Italian, while the vowels r and / contain a vocalic element 
similar to the short i in the third syllable of English ability. Among the con- 
sonants, there is a series of dentals (t, th, d, dn, п, S) and a corresponding 
series of retroflexes or cerebrals (f, th, d, dh, n, g). The former are produced 
when the tip of the tongue touches the teeth (as in French), the latter when 
the tongue is bent backward and touches the palate (the English pronuncia- 
tion of 7, d, n, and s is more or less in between). In the Sanskrit s and s, the 
tongue points in the same respective directions, but breath passes over it. 
The palatals are pronounced when the tongue touches the front of the palate: 
c as in English chair; j as in jar; fi as in Spanish; and § as in sheet. The as- 
pirates (kh, gh, ch, jh, th, dh, th, dh, ph, bh) are pronounced with a clearly 
audible release of breath following the consonant: th as in anthill; dh as in 
bald-head, etc. The m expresses nasalization of the preceding wowel. The 
Nambudiri % sounds almost like the ch in German ach (which is different 
from the pronunciation elsewhere in India, which is like an % followed by a 
short echo of the preceding vowel). In Yajurveda, h sounds fully like German 
or Arabic ch, when followed by k. In Yajurveda and Sāmaveda it sounds like 
J when followed by p. The № is pronounced like ng. Most other consonants 
are pronounced as in English. 

Malayalam sounds differ from Sanskrit in several respects. Under certain 
conditions, the dentals are pronounced like alveolars, as in English, where 
the tip of the tongue touches the upper ridge of the teeth, close to the palate. 
The Ја, which is characteristic of the Jaiminiya Sāmaveda, is pronounced 
like r in American English, but further back. The /a is retroflex, the ra is 
palatal, and the tta is similar to the double ¢ in English attention. Many 
words in Malayalam end in a short vowel, like the vowel between English 
but and French tu. This is transliterated as ù. 

Unlike English, Sanskrit differentiates between the stem of a noun (e.g., 
agni, visnu, savitr) and the nominative case (e.g., agnih, visnuh, savitā). Y 
generally refer to nouns by their stem form, except for the names of some of 
the priests, such as hota, pratiprasthātā, etc., because the Nambudiris refer 
to them in this form. 


XXXVI 


AA 

AB 

AG 
ĀpGS 
ApSS 
ApSulvaS 
AGS 
ASS 

AV 
BAU 
BGS 
BharSS 
BSS 
BSulvaS 
CU 

GG 
GobhGS 


ABBREVIATIONS 


Aitareya Aranyaka 
Aitareya Brahmana 
(Jaiminīya) Aranyageyagana 
Apastamba Grhya Sūtra 
Apastamba Srauta Sūtra 
Apastamba Sulva Sūtra 
Aégvalayana Grhya Sūtra 
Āšvalāyana Srauta Sūtra 
Atharvaveda Samhitā 
Brhad Āraņyaka Upanisad 
Baudhāyana Grhya Sūtra 
Bhāradvāja Srauta Sūtra 
Baudhāyana Srauta Sūtra 
Baudhāyana Sulva Sūtra 
Chāndogya Upanisad 
(Jaiminīya) Grāmageyagāna 
Gobhila Grhya Sūtra 
Hiraņyakeši Grhya Sūtra 
Hiraņyakeši Srauta Sūtra 
Jaiminīya Ārcika 
Jaiminīya Brāhmana 
Jaiminīya Srauta Sūtra 
Kapisthala Samhitā 
Kātyāyana Srauta Sūtra 
Kātyāyana Sulva Sūtra 
Kausitaki Brāhmaņa 
Khadira Grhya Sūtra 
Kāthaka Samhitā 

Kena Upanisad 
Lātyāyana Srauta Sūtra 
Mānava Srauta Sūtra 
Maitrāyaņī Samhitā 
Maitrayaniya Upanisad 
Pāraskara Grhya Sūtra 
Paiicavimša Brāhmaņa 
Rgveda Samhitā 
Sāmaveda Samhitā 
Šatapatha Brāhmaņa 
Sankhayana Grhya Sütra 


xxxvii 


VS(K/M) 
vss 


Sankhayana Srauta Sūtra 

Taittiriya Aranyaka 

Taittiriya Brahmana 

Taittiriya Samhita 

Taittiriya Upanisad 

Vaikhānasa Srauta Sūtra 

Vaitāna Srauta Sūtra 

Vārāha Srauta Sūtra 

Vājasaneyi Samhitā (Kāņva/Mādhyandina) 
Vādhūla Srauta Sūtra 


xxxviii 


GENERAL INTRODUCTION 


I. 


MORE THAN THREE thousand years ago, nomads crossed the mountain 
ranges that separate Central Asia from Iran and the Indian subcontinent. 
Leaving behind the dry steppes of their ancestral home, they entered the fertile 
plains of the upper Indus and came in contact with scattered remnants of an 
earlier civilization. These nomads imported the rudiments of their social and 
religious system along with their Indo-European language, which developed 
into Vedic, and later into Sanskrit. They worshipped fire, called agni, and 
adopted the cult of soma—a sacred plant, probably a hallucinogen—which 
grew in the high mountains. 

The interaction between these Central-Asian adventurers and earlier 
inhabitants of the Indian subcontinent gave birth to Vedic civilization, 
called after the four Vedas: Rgveda, Sāmaveda, Yajurveda, and Atharva- 
veda. These Vedas, oral compositions by bards and priests, have been 
transmitted by word of mouth to the present day. Their guardians, the brah- 
mins of India, are each attached to one of the Vedas by birth. The Vedas 
depict Vedic religion, in the words of Louis Renou (1953, 29) as "first and 
foremost a liturgy, and only secondarily a mythological or speculative sys- 
tem.” 

The larger Vedic rituals were primarily dedicated to Agni and Soma. 
Agni was not only a god in his own right, but the divine messenger and 
intermediary. The offerings, primarily of clarified butter (ghee), were poured 
into sacrificial fires installed on altars, and Agni transmitted them to the gods. 
Special libations were made of juice extracted from the stalks of the Soma 
plant. Remnants of the offerings were consumed by the celebrants. The cere- 
monies were accompanied by recitations from the Rgveda and chants from 
the Sāmaveda. According to the Rgveda itself (7.26.1), pressed juices unac- 
companied by sacred hymns have no effect. The celebrations required the 
execution of multifarious activities, distributed among priests from different 
Vedas, who officiated on behalf of, and for the benefit of, a ritual patron, 
the yajamāna. 

One of the most elaborate of these ceremonies was called Agnicayana, 
the “piling of Agni,” or, simply, Agni. This ritual originated around 1,000 
B.C. During its performance, a large altar in the shape of a bird, dedicated 
to Agni and itself also called Agni, was piled from more than a thousand 
bricks. The Agnicayana plays an important part in the Vedic literature 
after the Rgveda, and especially in the Yajurveda. Unlike the Rgveda, which 
remains curiously alien to India (see Renou 1960), the Yajurveda occupies 
the center of Vedic culture. It constitutes the foundation of the ritual and of 
the edifice of the Vedic schools. More distant from the Indo-European back- 


I 


<<< EE WP 


GENERAL INTRODUCTION 


ground than the Rgveda, the Yajurveda exhibits a more Indian flavor, is 
closer to the beginnings of Hinduism and Buddhism, and preserves features 
of earlier Indian cultures. In all these respects, the Agnicayana ritual occu- 
pies a similar position. Though it incorporates the Indo-European fire cult 
and the Indo-Iranian cult of Soma, these begin to be overgrown by numerous 
features not found outside India. These features are not Indo-European or 
Indo-Iranian, but are recognizably Indian. The Agnicayana shows us India 
beginning to assert herself. 

Though Vedic ritual was confined to an elite, its performances must 
have been relatively common for about five centuries. This period—which 
lasted for a shorter time than Manichaeism or Islam, but longer than Pro- 
testantism—may be called the age of karman (“ritual activity”). Around 550 
B.C. Vedic culture began to decline. Further east and south, new religions 
and cultures rose to prominence. Though Hinduism and Buddhism are 
replete with Vedic elements, they belong to another age, the age of jfíana 
(“knowledge”). Hinduism continued to look upon the Vedas as its source, 
formally transmitted by the brahmins, regarded as eternal revelation, “оѓ 
nonhuman origin” (apauruseya) and no longer understood. Buddhism re- 
jected the Vedic heritage, the authority of brahmins, and the supremacy of 
ritual. In due course it evolved its own hierarchies and ceremonies. Frag- 
ments of the original Vedic ritual survive to the present day in the domestic 
rites of the brahmins, such as marriage ceremonies. Despite attempts to 
revive them, we hear less and less of the larger Vedic ritual celebrations. In 
the eleventh century A.D., the logician Udayana could declare that the great 
Vedic ceremonies were no longer performed (Renou 1960, 21, note 4). 

India, however, is a land of miracles. In a distant corner of southwest 
India, Kerala, far away from the original home of Vedic civilization, a few 
families among the isolated and orthodox community of Nambudiri brah- 
mins have maintained their Vedic tradition and continue to perform two Ve- 
dic rituals: the Agnistoma, which lasts five days, and the Agnicayana or 
Agni, which lasts twelve days and continues through some of the nights, 
from which the name Atiratra (“overnight’’) derives. We know little of the 
history of these performances; their continuation was unknown to the out- 
side world. The Nambudiri performances are not artificial or scholarly re- 
constructions (as have taken place in some other parts of India), nor are 
they the results of recent revivals. The tradition is authentic and alive. 
Though this will be apparent from the present work, it can be directly observed 
in the attitude of the performers. When the Nambudiri ritualists are told 
that, according to the classical texts, certain rites used to be performed dif- 
ferently in the past, they say, "Interesting." Not for a moment would they 
consider changing their own ritual practice in the light of such information. 
They perform the rituals as they have learned them from their preceptors. 
It is their tradition. 

During the last hundred years, the Agnicayana has been performed 


2 


GENERAL INTRODUCTION 


seventeen times; during the last fifty years, five times. After a gap of almost 
twenty years, it was celebrated again in 1975. For the first time in history, it 
was attended by outsiders. On this occasion, the performance was not only 
witnessed but filmed, photographed, recorded, and extensively documented. 
The only restriction was that non-Nambudiris could not enter the ritual 
enclosure, in which most of the ceremonies took place. This 1975 perfor- 
mance of the Agnicayana, which was possibly the last, is the subject matter 
of the present publication. 


2. 


The elaborate ritual performances of the Vedic period and the supreme 
importance attached to them in Vedic civilization demand an explanation or 
at least an interpretation. In the earliest Vedic literature itself, rituals, along 
with meters and chants, are depicted as instruments used by gods and de- 
mons to fight and conquer each other, and sometimes to create. Even when 
the aims are not explicit, gods and demons are frequently described as en- 
gaged in ritual. It is obvious, however, that priests who perform rites on 
behalf of a yajamāna cannot always be thought of as conquering or creating. 
Moreover, the later commentaries, especially the Brahmanas attached to the 
various Vedic schools, provide rituals with a great variety of interpretations, 
sometimes inconsistent with each other. Many of these are obvious ration- 
alizations. Some invoke events, myths, or legends that have nothing to do 
with the rites at hand. On the other hand, the most important episodes of 
Vedic mythology, those that reflect cosmogonic events, are not reflected 
or used in any rites (Renou 1953, 16; cf. below page 117). Renou concluded: 


We must be content with very general theories if we are to avoid 
arbitrary explanations such as those put forward in the old Brahma- 
nas, where we find fabricated accounts of the origin of various de- 
tails in the liturgical ceremonial. In these stories there is much that 
deserves attention, but the nidana or bandhu, the hidden connection 
that they try to establish, cannot be accepted; it is too visibly the 
product of the priestly mind. It is recognized in the texts that com- 
prehension must cease at a certain point: they declare "paro ksaka- 
ma hi devāh,” “the gods love what is out of sight” (1953, 16; with a 
modification in the translation). 


The recitations that accompany the rites often express specific desires: 
for health, strength, sons, victory, heaven, and immortality. The list of 
wishes and desires is not so different from that of modern man. It is not 
exclusively spiritual, as some contemporary visionaries have claimed, nor is 
it wholly materialistic, as some critics have asserted. As can be seen at a 


3 


GENERAL INTRODUCTION 


glance from the recitations recorded in this book, the same desires are re- 
peated over and over again. Does this mean that they were never fulfilled? 
In spite of a certain poetic variation, such repetitiveness would almost seem 
offensive, not least to the gods. However, it is universally believed, and by 
the best of minds, that repetition increases effectiveness. Today, similar 
repetitions are thrust upon us by politicians and the media—not to mention 
commercials, Bertrand Russell was criticized for his antiwar speeches by a 
general: “Ро you not think there is some lack of a sense of humour in going 
on reiterating the same thing?" Russell observed that, if it would not serve 
any purpose to repeat himself, "I failed to see why he was so anxious to 
prevent me from doing so." 

By the time the Vedic rituals had reached their greatest elaboration, 
these reiterated wishes receded into the background. Their place was taken 
by a codification of the two kinds of rites we have already met: the grhya 
or domestic rites—which are “rites de passage," life-cycle rites or sacraments, 
accompanying such events as birth, initiation, marriage, and death—and the 
Srauta rites, which the French call “rites solennels.” There are several gen- 
eral and formal differences between these two kinds of ritual. For example, 
the $rauta rites require three fire altars and the services of several priests, 
whereas the domestic rites require only one fire (the domestic fire) and one 
priest (the domestic priest). While the function of the domestic rites appears 
to be fairly straightforward, the significance of the Srauta rites is not ob- 
vious. The Srauta ritual, with its myriad ramifications, exhibits the unhampered 
development of ritual construction and creativity. It is therefore more 
important for the understanding of ritual than the domestic rites. There are, 
moreover, Srauta rituals that last a thousand years, which shows that some 
of the rites were purely theoretical. Such theoretical constructs (which the 
grammarian Patafijali compared to the infinite uses of language) should 
not be brushed aside, as was done by Hillebrandt, who referred in this con- 
nection to “myth and fantasy” of the ritualists (1897, 158). On the con- 
trary, they are as important for the theory of ritual as are concrete cere- 
monies. Many rites have, in fact, an intermediate status. The Agnicayana, 
which was performed in 1975, is a $rauta ritual that seems to have been 
always "real,” though some of its extensions, which the texts describe, 
smack of theory. 

The Srauta Sūtras of the late Vedic period offer several definitions of 
ritual. One that is often quoted characterizes it as comprising three things: 
dravya, "the substance (used in oblations)"; devatā, “the deity (to which 
oblations are offered)”; and tyāga, "renunciation (of the fruits of the ritual 
acts)." The tyaga is a formula pronounced by the yajamāna or patron at the 
culmination of each act of oblation. When the officiating priest, on behalf 
of the yajamana, makes the oblation into the fire for one of the gods, for 
example Agni, the Yajamāna says: 


GENERAL INTRODUCTION 


This is for Agni, not for me (agnaye idam na mama). 


At this point a contradiction begins to appear, which becomes increasingly 
explicit in the ritualistic philosophy of the Mimamsa. The reason for per- 
forming a specific ritual is stated to be the desire for a particular fruit or 
effect. The stock example of the Mīmāmsā is: 


He who desires heaven shall sacrifice with the Agnistoma ritual 
(agnistomena svargakamo yajeta). 


But this fruit is renounced whenever the yajamāna utters his tyaga formula 
of renunciation. The effect, therefore, is not obtained. 

The resulting picture is further complicated by another apparent con- 
tradiction. The rites are subdivided into two classes, “obligatory” (nitya) 
and “optional” (kāmya). Unlike the Agnicayana, which is kāmya, the Agni- 
stoma is a nitya rite: every brahman has the duty to perform it. So here is a 
ritual that appears to be optional, since it is confined to those who desire 
heaven (nobody’s duty), but that is also not optional because it is a prescribed 
duty, and that does not bear any fruit because its fruits are ultimately 
abandoned. The texts reflect such contradictions. The Mīmāmsā Sūtra, basic 
manual of the ritual philosophy of the Mīmāmsā, lays down that the rites 
lead to happiness, but the subcommentary “Straight Spotless” (Rjuvimala) 
observes that this does not apply to obligatory acts. 

The Mīmāmsā philosophers faced another difficulty. When a ritual per- 
formance is completed, no fruit is seen. The yajamana, on whose behalf 
the rites have been performed, does not rise up and go to heaven. Rather 
the opposite: he returns home and is, as the texts put it, the same as he was 
before. In particular, he must continue to perform the morning and evening 
fire rites (Agnihotra) for the rest of his life. The Mimamsa concluded, quite 
logically, that the fruit of ritual activity is—temporarily—unseen. It will 
become apparent only later, e.g., after death. An elaborate theory was de- 
vised to show that this is in accordance with the mechanism of karman, 
according to which every cause has an effect. A special logical theorem, 
called arthapatti, was invented in support of this theory. The followers of the 
Mīmāmsā were criticized by others (e.g., the philosophers of the Advaita 
Vedanta) for postulating such unseen effects. For whatever our contempor- 
ary fads may suggest, in India the unseen is resorted to only under duress. 
What the Mīmāmsā in fact ended up teaching is that the rituals have to be 
performed for their own sake. 

The notion of tyāga, “renunciation,” has attained an important position 
in Hinduism through the teachings of the Bhagavad Gita. Here Sri Krsna 
advocates, as the highest goal of life, a mode of activity in which acts are 
performed as usual, but the fruit (phala) of action (karman) is always re- 
nounced (karma-phala-tyāga). 


GENERAL INTRODUCTION 


Unlike the Brāhmaņa literature and the Mīmāmsā, the Srauta Sūtras 
are not concerned with interpretation. They confine themselves to descrip- 
tion and address insiders. They were in no sense teaching manuals. Their 
description is not enumerative, but highly structured, and uses abstract 
principles of organization. The Srauta Sūtras exhibit the science of ritual 
as an intellectual discipline. In doing so they influenced and determined 
the development of scholarly and scientific methodologies in India. The ritual 
rules (sūtra) are formulated carefully and consistently, the use of metarules 
(paribhāsā) enables the authors to explicate structure and avoid redun- 
dancy, and the logical organization of the system of rules is brought out ex- 
plicitly. All these features developed gradually and paved the way for the 
work of the Sanskrit grammarians. Directly or indirectly, they contributed 
to many of the more technical features of Indian logic and philosophy, which 
are often expressed in sūtra form. It is not the complexity of the ritual itself, 
but the Srauta Sütras' explicit, systematic, and exhaustive characterization 
of that complexity that is the first manifestation of the Indian scientific and 
scholarly genius. 


3. 


It is difficult to exaggerate the importance of ritual for the civilizations 
and religions of India, for it is their basic feature. Accordingly, for a Hindu 
or Jaina, and to some extent for a Buddhist, what he does is more important 
than what he thinks, believes, or says. Earlier, I referred to the orthodoxy of 
the Nambudiri brahmins. It would have been more appropriate to use the 
term orthopraxy (from Greek dp0és, “right,” дбба, "opinion," and zpaéis, 
action”). Ritual activity is physical activity and is therefore primarily re- 
lated to the body, unlike thinking or believing, which are mainly connected 
with the mind. Ritual affiliation is therefore determined by birth, and not by 
choice or preference. Unlike religious sects, ritual traditions coexist more or 
less peacefully, they are mutually exclusive, and there is neither desire nor 
mechanism for conversion. This feature, too, has become a mark of Indian 
religions. 

The study of the Vedic ritual ceremonies was taken up by European San- 
skrit scholars in the nineteenth century. In 1805, Colebrooke mentioned 
several $rauta ceremonies, quoting from the Satapatha Brahmana. He did not 
mention the Agnicayana by name, but referred to it when mentioning that 
four books of the text “teach the consecration of sacrificial fire: and the 
tenth, entitled Agnirahasya" (see below page 63) “shows the benefits of these 
ceremonies” (Colebrooke 1873, 54). The first survey that resulted from these 
European studies appeared at the end of the century in Hillebrandt’s Ritual- 
Literatur: Vedische Opfer und Zauber of 1897. 

Around the turn of the century, Willem Caland (1859-1932) opened up 


6 


GENERAL INTRODUCTION 


the study of Vedic ritual in its full depth and complexity. By publishing and 
translating some of the Srauta Sūtras (upon which the excerpts from Bau- 
dhāyana in our second volume are based) he showed that there was a science 
of ritual, and explicated for the first time in a Western language the Indian 
systems of ritual rules. Apart from ritual, he wrote extensively on the arcane 
subtleties of the Sāmaveda and explained its liturgical raison d’étre. He left 
a few questions unanswered. In due course, I obtained their answers from 
Itti Ravi. The paradigm of the Soma rituals was described by Caland and 
Henry in the two volumes of their Agnistoma of 1906. As we have seen, this 
is the five-day ritual that the Nambudiris have preserved. 

Since the publication of the monumental “Caland and Henry,” Western, 
Indian, and Japanese scholars have explored the ritual texts, and especially 
the Srauta Sūtras, in breadth and depth. Hillebrandt dealt with the Darša- 
pūrņamāsa (Full- and New-Moon ceremonies), Schwab with the Pašubandha 
(Animal Sacrifice), Dumont with the Ašvamedha (Horse Sacrifice) and the 
Agnihotra (Daily Fire Worship), and Tsuji with the Šrauta Sūtras of the 
Rgveda and Yajurveda. Renou published a monograph on the ritual schools. 
The Vaidika SamSodhana Mandala of Poona contributed a series of studies, 
culminating in a collective work, directed by Dandekar and Kashikar, entitled 
Šrautakoša, an encyclopaedia in several volumes on the $rauta ritual. Re- 
nou provided a small dictionary of technical terms used in the ritual, as well 
as several specialized studies. More recently, the Šrauta Sūtras of the Sāma- 
veda were studied by Parpola; the Ašvalāyana Srauta Sütra of the Rgveda 
by Mylius; the Baudhayana, Bharadvaja, and Varaha Srauta Sūtras of the 
Krsna Yajurveda by Kashikar; and particular rites by a host of others, for 
example, the Rājasūya or Royal Consecration by Heesterman, the Pravarg- 
ya by Van Buitenen, the Sarvamedha and the Samsava by Mylius, and the 
Mahavrata by Rolland. More general and interpretative studies have been 
written by Lévi, Rau, Gonda, Heesterman, Thite, Biardeau, Malamoud, and 
many others. 

Some of the Sulba Sūtras, dealing with the measurement and construc- 
tion of Vedic altars by means of a cord or rope (Sulba)—formerly explored 
by Thibaut, the historian of mathematics Cantor, Van Gelder, and Raghu 
Vira—have been studied recently by Satya Prakash, Swarup Sharma, and 
Seidenberg, and have been published by the Research Institute of Ancient 
Scientific Texts of New Delhi. Numerous links of the Srauta ritual with his- 
tory, archaelogy, art, architecture, music, religion, anthropology, economics, 
linguistics, literature, mathematics, science, mythology, magic, and philo- 
sophy are only beginning to be explored. Gonda’s study on the origins of 
the Indian drama in the Vedic ritual and Kashikar’s study on Vedic pottery 
are examples of what can be done. A new area of research involving botany 
and pharmacology is opened up by the works of Wasson and Flattery on the 
hallucinogenic origins of the Soma. 

Insofar as information on the ritual is concerned, all such studies are 


7 


GENERAL INTRODUCTION 


confined to texts. Yet, as Renou observed, “опе cannot grasp even the 
outward meaning from reading the text by itself unless one is gifted with the 
rare virtuosity of a Caland" (1953, 34). Direct information on living ritual 
in contemporary India is mostly confined to temple ritual, the domestic ritual 
of the higher castes, other caste rites, village rites, and tribal rituals. Traces 
of the Rājasūya are preserved in Southeast Asia and in Nepal, and in India 
in temple worship and pūjā, which retain elements of the consecration rite 
(dīksā). 

Until recently it was quite unknown that the Srauta rituals, which are 
much more spectacular than any of these other rites, continue to be performed 
in India, albeit rarely and in a few inaccessible places. The fact that these 
almost three-thousand-year-old rituals are still alive would have astonished 
Hillebrandt or Caland. Once these survivals were discovered, it became 
obvious that many of the basic issues concerning the interpretation of the 
ritual, as well as numerous problems of a more technical nature, could only 
be brought closer to a solution if the living traditions were studied. At the 
same time it became clear that this study is a matter of urgency, since many 
of the few surviving authentic traditions are on the verge of extinction. What 
ensued was a new era of Vedic research, which involves close collaboration 
with the traditional Indian ritualists, and which might be more properly 
called Vedic fieldwork (an expression first used by Kashikar in his Presiden- 
tial Address to the Vedic section of the 24th All-India Oriental Conference, 
Varanasi 1968). An unexpected feature of this work is that the informed 
interest of scholars from all over the world gives fresh hope and inspiration 
to the rare Vaidikas who try to keep the Srauta traditions alive. A chapter 
in our second volume (Part III, pages 193-251) will show how extensive these 
Vedic survivals are. 

Scholars who came in contact with the living tradition directed their 


attention first to the recitations of the Veda, which are not only prominent 


features of the ritual, but which are more easily accessible because they can 
be heard outside the ritual context. Nonbrahmins are not allowed to hear 
Vedic recitation or to attend Vedic rituals. This continues to make Vedic 
fieldwork a delicate affair. Not surprisingly, the first barrier was overcome 
first. Recordings were made and studied by Bake, Gray, Howard, Parpola, 
Raghavan, Sreekrishna Sarma, Van Buitenen, and myself. The Government 
of India, through its Sanskrit Commission, urged that complete recordings 
of the Vedas be made. All-India Radio also took an active interest. Subse- 
quently, films of Srauta ceremonies were made by Van Buitenen (of the 
Vajapeya) and by me (of fragments of an Atyagnistoma). When the ritual be- 
gan to be studied also in its social context, it became apparent that much 
work was left undone by anthropologists. Except for recent work by Men- 
cher, basic information on the Nambudiris, one of the main communities that 
maintains its Vedic culture, remains available mainly in the older manuals 


8 


GENERAL INTRODUCTION 


of ethnographers (e.g., Anantha Krishna Iyer), historians (e.g., Padmanabha 
Menon), and British District Collectors (e.g., Logan and Innes). 

If nothing else, the present publication will show that a great deal of 
Vedic fieldwork remains to be done and should be done before it is too late. 
At this point in history, each time one of the older Vedic ritualists dies, a 
portion of the 3,000-year-old tradition is irretrievably lost. 


4. 


Vedic ritual is not only likely to be the oldest surviving ritual of man- 
kind, it also provides the best source material for a theory of ritual. This is 
not because it is close to any alleged "original”” ritual. Vedic ritual is not 
primitive and is not an Ur-ritual. It is sophisticated and already the product 
of a long development. But it is the largest, most elaborate, and (on account 
of the Sanskrit manuals) best documented among the rituals of man. 

We now have to record one of the more striking failures of modern 
scholarship, especially striking since it has largely gone unnoticed. Vedic 
ritual, the best source material for a theory of ritual, has been ignored, with 
one exception to which I shall return, by precisely those scholars who have 
been concerned with the theory of ritual. The resulting picture is not edify- 
ing: on the one hand we have a highly developed science of ritual, laid down 
in Sanskrit texts and made accessible and interpreted to non-Sanskritists 
by several generations of Sanskrit scholars; on the other hand we have ideas 
on the nature of ritual by anthropologists, psychologists, and students of 
religion, which fail to take the former into account and are, by comparison, 
surprisingly simplistic and naive. 

There are several reasons for this state of affairs. First of all, the theorists 
of ritual have usually confined themselves to generalities. There is no large 
body of empirical ethnographic work on ritual that theorists can draw 
upon. Accordingly, theorists tend to quote ritual facts selectively in support 
of some theory or other. Since details are rarely described exhaustively, the 
real intricacies are not generally touched upon. In all the work on ritual by 
anthropologists, ethnographers, and students of religion I am familiar with, 
there is nothing that approaches the thoroughness of the Indian Srauta Sū- 
tras. The situation is very different from that in most of the sciences. In bio- 
logy it is known how many teeth every animal has, and in philology what the 
numerals of every language are. Only masses of detailed knowledge of this 
kind can pave the way for adequate theories, which tend to spring up in an 
imaginative mind steeped in facts. The Indian science of ritual could develop 
into a rigorous intellectual discipline, on a par with mathematics, physics, 
or linguistics, because it was based on vast amounts of precise empirical 
knowledge of ritual and rituals. 


GENERAL INTRODUCTION 


The absence of a Western counterpart to the Indian science of ritual is 
not due to the fact that rituals are not important. A striking fact about ritual 
activity is that all men, and probably many other animals as well, engage in 
it. Perhaps the absence of a science of ritual is due to the fact that the dis- 
cipline of ritual lacks the utilitarian and pragmatic value that other sciences 
are believed to have. A physicist can always claim that his work may have 
military significance, a linguist can always hope that his research is relevant 
to the computer industry, but a ritualist has no illusions of this kind. It is 
conceivable that the emphasis on relevance (which means that scholars 
should follow the whims of others rather than their own) has prevented peo- 
ple from taking ritual seriously and from paying adequate attention to its 
rich detail and real intricacies. 

A specific reason for the neglect of the study of Vedic ritual is that the 
exclusiveness of its brahmin guardians has been adopted by some of the 
Sanskritists whose task it is to expound and clarify it. As a result, some pub- 
lications on Vedic ritual are unintelligible to readers without Sanskrit. This 
does not apply to some of Caland’s work. His translation of Apastamba’s 
Srauta Sūtra, for example, appeared in three volumes, the first of which was 
published in the Quellen der Religionsgeschichte, a sourcebook accessible to 
all students of religion. In order to read the present book no knowledge of 
Sanskrit is needed, though it does not follow that its contents are simple and 
easily assimilated. 

This is not the place to try to demonstrate fully the inadequacy of the 
Western approaches to the study of ritual. However, I shall provide a few 
examples and establish their inadequacy by showing that they fail to apply 
to Vedic ritual. First let us dispose of the emptiest of all these theories, if it 
is a theory at all: the idea that ritual effects a transition from the realm of the 
profane to that of the sacred. (Instead of “transition” we also meet with 
“communication,” a weaker version of the theory.) Though this idea may 
correspond to some believers’ sentiments, it is very unclear. Terms such as 
“transition” or “communication” are vague and do not pose too much of a 
problem, but “sacred” and "profane" certainly do. On one interpretation 
the theory may be saved by turning it into a tautology: the distinction 
between profane and sacred is the distinction between the status of a person 
or object before and after a relevant ritual is embarked upon. Accordingly, if 
sacred and profane have been defined in terms of ritual, ritual cannot be de- 
fined in terms of sacred and profane. This is circular and uninformative. 

Given another interpretation, this theory would assume that the dis- 
tinction between sacred and profane is already established and known from 
elsewhere. For example, “sacred”? might have been shown to apply to the 
domain of the gods, and “profane” to that of men. However, a satisfactory 
distinction of this kind is not easily found. Moreover, if it were found, the 
terms would not introduce anything new. The theory would merely claim 
that ritual effects a transition from the realm of men to that of the gods (or 


IO 


GENERAL INTRODUCTION 


acommunication between the two). As a matter of fact, the Vedic ritual offers 
an immediate contraction. During the Agnipranayana rite (Episode 20 of 
Part П), a transition is effected from the Old to the New Altar. The former is 
said to be the abode of men, and the latter that of the gods. Thus a transition 
from the domain of men to that of the gods is effected within the ritual. The 
distinction therefore cannot serve as a concept in terms of which ritual itself 
may be defined. 

Another theory that has long been fashionable is that rites reenact 
myths. This idea, which originated more than a century ago, was partly in- 
spired by the Babylonian festival of the New Year, which involves a recital 
of the myth of creation. But whether or not it is applicable elsewhere, it is 
certainly inconsistent with Vedic ritual. As we have already seen, the Vedic 
rites are, in general, not related to any myths. In the few cases where there is a 
historical connection, it has no longer a ritual function. The officiating ritu- 
alists may not be aware of it, just as speakers of a language need not know the 
etymology of a word, which is no longer connected with the word's meaning 
or function. Just as etymology is not linguistics, the notion that rites reenact 
myths has nothing to contribute to the science of ritual. Moreover, in the few 
cases where historians can trace a mythological connection, the rites lead a 
life of their own, full of ritual features that have nothing to do with, and are 
not explicable in terms of mythology. An example is the construction of the 
fire altar from a thousand bricks. This is probably related to a hymn in the 
Rgveda that refers to a Man with a thousand heads, eyes, and feet (see below 
page 113). Though the precise relationship is not clear, the mythological back- 
ground seems to be safeguarded in this case. However, this background has 
no ritual significance. What is ritually relevant is that numerous rules are 
followed that determine the shape of the bricks, their arrangement, the order 
in which they are piled, and the various mantras with which they are con- 
secrated. Many additional rules pertain to specific features relating to the 
placement of the bricks, the activities and behavior of the priests in relation 
to them, the recitations over the completed layers, over the completed altar, 
and so forth. These are the bread and butter of ritual activity, the activities 
determined by tradition and/or texts, the knowledge of which distinguishes a 
ritualist from an outsider. Moreover, none of this enormous amount of ritual 
has any mythological background or significance. The idea that rites reenact 
myths may be applicable to Vedic ritual in a few isolated cases and, in those 
cases, in a very general way, but it fails to explicate any specific rite. It fails, 
therefore, even as a component of a general theory of ritual. 

The same holds for the related theory, current among anthropologists, 
that rituals are used to transmit cultural and social values to the younger 
generation. Whether or not this theory holds elsewhere, there is no evidence 
in support of it from the area of Vedic ritual. It is tautologically true that 
rituals transmit ritual values, whatever these are, but it is difficult to pinpoint 
other values that Vedic rites such as are described in this book transmit in 


II 


PLATE 86 


GENERAL INTRODUCTION 


general. It is obvious that ritual performances create a bond between the 
participants, reinforce solidarity and territory, boost morale, and constitute 
a link with the ancestors. So do many other institutions and customs. Such 
side effects cannot be used to explain ritual. It is true that a few rites are 
specifically dedicated to the ancestors, but this does not explain the great 
majority of rites, and throws no light on the nature of ritual in general. 

The idea that rites and myths are closely connected is a typically Western 
idea. It is connected with the notion of “orthodoxy,” which stresses the 
importance of opinions and ideas. To the Indian ritualist it is the activity that 
counts. As a mode of existence it is perfect in itself and does not stand in need 
of something else. Unfortunately, anthropological studies have mainly de- 
veloped against a Western background, and continue to be dominated by the 
search for a connection between rites and myths. Even Lévi-Strauss, who has 
many worthwhile things to say on ritual in general, offers, as a kind of defini- 
tion, that ritual “consists of utterances, gestures and manipulations of ob- 
jects which are independent of the interpretations which are proper to these 
modes of activity and which result not from the ritual itself but from impli- 
cit mythology" (1971, 600). Vedic ritual does not support the last clause. 
However, the distinction between ritual and proper activities is certainly 
applicable to it. Almost any rite could illustrate this. Consider the important 
ceremony, already referred to, of Agnipranayana, "transporting the fire." 
Agni is transported from the Old to the New Altar. First the adhvaryu priest 
of the Yajurveda addresses some of the other priests with a formula, prompt- 
ing them to perform their respective ritual tasks. Then he lifts the clay pot 
containing the fire, and begins to move east, addressing recitations to Agni 
and other gods. Several priests form a procession, each executing his own 
rites and recitations (see Part II, Episode 20). 

To the onlooker, the main result of this performance seems to be that 
the fire is deposited on the New Altar. This result, however, can only be 
reached in the ritually prescribed manner and has only ritual use. If it were 
an ordinary activity, I could come in from the outside and assist in the 
proceedings by picking up the fire from the Old Altar and depositing it 
on the New Altar, or by making a wheelbarrow available. However, if I 
did such things, the ceremony would be desecrated, interrupted, and expia- 
tion rites would have to be performed. Similar disruption would result if 
anyone used the sacred fire for any but a ritual purpose, e.g., to heat water 
for tea. 

The two kinds of activity, ritual and ordinary, can be juxtaposed without 
conflict or contradiction. After making fire in the ritually prescribed man- 
ner, by rubbing two pieces of wood together, a priest may leave the sacred 
enclosure and light a cigarette with a match. But the two domains should not 
be mixed. If a priest were to light a cigarette from the sacred fire, it would 
be bad; he would have confounded different realms and roles. If, on the 
other hand, he were to go outside the enclosure, produce fire by rubbing two 


I2 


GENERAL INTRODUCTION 


pieces of wood together, and light his cigarette from that fire, he would be 
considered mad or at least eccentric. This would not, incidentally, disqualify 
him from performing ritual tasks. The ritual and ordinary ways of making 
fire are neatly demarcated. 

The so-called structuralist approach, often associated with the work of 
Lévi-Strauss, may well be applicable to the study of Vedic ritual, but it would 
have to be formulated more adequately. Since it is by definition a synchronis- 
tic approach, remnants of diachronistic methods of explanation (e.g., "rites 
derive from myths") would first of all have to be excised from it. 

A more unadulterated form of structuralism occurs in the work of the 
earlier anthropologist Van Gennep. Van Gennep coined the expression “rites 
de passage," the title of his book of 1909, which is largely applicable to the 
Vedic domestic (grhya) rites but does not contribute to the understanding 
of the &rauta rites. After completing his book, Van Gennep noted that in 
many societies marriage ceremonies include an aspersion rite that he inter- 
preted as a fecundity rite. Identical aspersion rites are employed, in the same 
and in different societies, when a slave is acquired, when a new ambassador 
arrives in town, to make rain, or to expel someone. Van Gennep gave differ- 
ent interpretations to each of these rites, and concluded: 


The aspersion rite does not have any personal or basic meaning in 
the state of isolation, but it is meaningful if seen as a component 
part of a particular ceremony. The meaning of the rite can, conse- 
quently, only be found by determining the relation it has with the 
other elements of the whole ceremony (Van Gennep 1911, in 
Waardenburg 1973, T, 299). 


This seems a promising kind of structural approach, and though it is 
sketchy, there is nothing in the Vedic ritual that contradicts it. I am not 
familiar with any attempt to develop this approach systematically and in 
detail, so that the data of the present book, for example, could be used to 
test it. This is in general the complaint one is forced to make about these 
anthropological contributions, not to mention the religious ones, which 
are very much vaguer: if they mention Vedic ritual at all, they are no more 
precise, and much less enjoyable, than Foster's Hill of Devi (1953, 36): “As 
each guest finished, he sang a little song from the Vedas in praise of some 
god, and the Rajah was, as usual, charming.” 

Earlier I mentioned that there is one exception to the general neglect 
of Vedic ritual by theorists of ritual. This exception is contained in the work 
of Hubert and Mauss, who used the Vedic animal sacrifice as source material 
for the construction of a ritual paradigm (un schéme abstrait du sacrifice, 
1909, 22). Their study is thorough and admirable, though it stays rather close 
to the texts made accessible mainly by Schwab. Hubert and Mauss did not 
know that these rituals are still performed, so that some of the data were 


13 


GENERAL INTRODUCTION 


inaccessible to them. When it comes to structure, the authors noted little 
more than that rites have a beginning, a middle, and an end. More can be 
done (see Part III, Chapter 00). At least their own essay was a real beginning, 
though nothing of similar quality seems to have followed. 

In the area of psychology, the only worthwhile contribution I am fami- 
liar with is the brief article Freud devoted to the subject. Freud noted three 
points of similarity between rites and neurotic obsessions: “‘the fear of pangs 
of conscience after their omission," their “complete isolation from all other 
activities," and “the conscientiousness with which the details are carried 
out." He also enumerated three differences: 


the greater individual variability of neurotic ceremonial in con- 
trast with the stereotyped character of rites (prayer, orientation, 
etc.); its private nature as opposed to the public and communal 
character of religious observances; especially, however, the distinc- 
tion that the little details of religious ceremonies are full of meaning 
and are understood symbolically, while those of neurotics seem silly 
and meaningless (Freud 1907, in 1953, II, 27-28). 


While the similarities discovered by Freud seem to be real, the differences 
are not. The first difference is overstated: Freud was more familiar with 
the variability of obsessive acts than of rites. The present book will easily 
redress the balance. The second difference does not obtain: many Hindu and 
Buddhist rites are performed by a single priest, an audience being optional. 
This holds for temple and iconic ritual, and especially for Tantric rites, which 
combine ritual with meditation and Yogic practice, in India, Indonesia, and 
the Far East (cf. Staal 1975, 191-193; Hooykaas, in Part III, pages 382-402). 
As for the other side of the alleged difference, 1 am not qualified to chal- 
lenge the view that neurotic obsessive behavior is only private. I doubt 
Freud would have been as emphatic had he lived in California. 

Regarding the third difference, the thrust of Freud's article is that 
Obsessive acts are meaningful, and therefore similar to religious rites. His 
paper does not show that obsessive acts have general meaning, but illustrates 
how they refer to particular events, “от the most intimate, and for the most 
part from the sexual experiences of the patient." Here Vedic ritual could 
offer at least some support. For example, the birth of Agni from the kindling 
blocks that are rubbed together is clearly connected with the sexual act (see 
below page 76). Sex, however, predates Freud. Beyond throwing light on a 
few particular rites and, perhaps, ritualists, I do not see how Freudian theories 
could explain ritual activity in general. 

Obsessiveness in ritual is often reported, though it does not seem to be 
a necessary feature. Moreover, it may merely reside in the eyes of the be- 
holder who is unfamiliar with particular ritual procedures. Speakers of a 
language also adhere painstakingly to numerous rules when they utter a 


14 


GENERAL INTRODUCTION 


sentence. This does not seem obsessive even to a person who does not know 
the language, though it might seem so to a being who does not know any 
language. Lévi-Strauss has been criticized for neglecting this obsessiveness or 
anxiety that may accompany or underlie ritual. Instead of replying to his 
critics that the anxiety is theirs, Lévi-Strauss has located it in the ritualists’ 
fear that reality, which they cut up, cannot be put together again (1971, 
603, 608). However, the ritual of the fire altar contradicts this assumption. 
It involves the construction of a large altar that allegedly puts together the 
universe, the god Prajāpati, or the yajamāna. Since the participants need 
not be familiar with these mythological notions, we should confine ourselves 
to saying that the altar is put together. If we admit mythology, as Lévi- 
Strauss does, it weakens his case further. However, it is irrelevant, as these 
notions are probably a later rationalization. (In the Soma rituals, Prajapati 
is certainly an afterthought: Oldenberg 1919, 31; see below page 160). It 
is an undeniable fact that the altar is put together without anxiety. 

To the extent that there is obsessiveness in ritual performance, its ex- 
planation does not seem to pose much of a problem. An activity that has to 
be performed painstakingly and in accordance with strict rules can easily 
become obsessive. Ritualists may be obsessed by rites, stockbrokers by the 
market, or mathematicians by proofs. I have been obsessed by the Agnicaya- 
na, at least to some extent, or else I would not have completed this book. 
There is scope for obsession wherever there is serious concern. The more 
complex the domain, the greater the concern that mistakes have been made. 
The Agnicayana performance of 1975 was followed by a long series of expia- 
tion rites for mistakes that were or might have been committed. No anxiety 
or discomfort was felt, however, unless it was due to the excessive heat. Like 
solidarity, obsessiveness may be a side effect of ritual. It is not a necessary 
feature. 

Biologists have used the term “ritualization” with reference to certain 
types of animal behavior (e.g., Huxley 1966). Some anthropologists have de- 
nied that there is any connection between such ritualization and human 
rituals. As far as I can see the question is wide open. I hope biologists will 
use the detailed descriptions offered in this book to determine whether there 
is any resemblance to animal ritualization. 


5. 


In the previous section I have claimed that theorists of ritual have neg- 
lected Vedic ritual. Though true, this might merely be an oversight, easily 
accommodated. What we have seen, however, is worse. All the theories 
mentioned fail to be applicable to Vedic ritual and are therefore basically 
inadequate. Moreover, their inadequacies cannot be resolved by patchwork. 
At this point the reader may voice a suspicion. Perhaps Vedic ritual con- 


15 


GENERAL INTRODUCTION 


stitutes an exception. Perhaps Vedic ritual is too sophisticated, highly de- 
veloped, and intellectual. This may be so—I could not tell without under- 
taking a major comparative survey of rituals. However, I suspect that such 
criticism is on a par with saying that it does not matter that a certain theory 
of language does not apply to Sanskrit or English, because Sanskrit or 
English are too sophisticated, highly developed, and intellectual. If anyone 
were to make such a claim, the conclusion would be simple and immediate: 
his theory of language is itself insufficiently sophisticated, developed, and 
intellectual. The same verdict must apply to the theories of ritual we have 
reviewed. If they cannot account for Vedic ritual, they must go. 

There is a general reason for this inadequacy: all these theories are of 
the reductionist kind. They attempt to reduce ritual to something else. Vedic 
ritual shows that ritual is, at least in part, a discipline engaged in for its own 
sake, which cannot therefore be thus reduced. Most Indian theorists of ritual 
have sensed this, and some have stated it in so many words. Basically, the 
irreducibility of ritual shows that action constitutes a category in its own right. 
To reduce it to ideas or anything else seems the scholar's prerogative, but in 
this case it appears doomed. It is likely, at this stage, that no general theory of 
the reductionist kind can explain the majority of Vedic rites such asare treated 
in this book.! This is especially clear in the case of such elaborate ceremonies 
as I referred to in connection with the piling of the bricks. These specific rites 
cannot be explained by a general desire for strength or heaven, a yearning for 
the sacred, a wish to reenact myths, sexual anxiety, or any such motivation, 
which—from the ritual point of view—can only be regarded as extraneous. 
Such rites show, on the contrary, that ritual follows its own principles and 
leads a life of its own. Once this is realized, it becomes increasingly obvious. 
When the bricks of the altar have been finally deposited and consecrated 
(which takes five days: one day for each layer) there is an unexpected sequel: 
118 pebbles are placed on the top layer, in specific positions between the 
bricks. Again each pebble is consecrated with mantras. And so it goes on, 
rite after rite. Ritual exhibits a very detailed and specific knowledge. I esti- 
mate that the extent of specialized knowledge needed to put the altar together 
ritually is on a par with the extent of technical knowledge required to build 
an aeroplane. The bird-shaped altar is in fact a kind of aeroplane, only it 
takes off in a different way. 

The Soma ceremonies require similarly complex constructions, though 
the intricacies are different in kind. Here numerous subtle relationships are 
maintained between recitations of the Rgveda and chants of the Samaveda. 
They are carefully balanced, and each is subject to numerous rules; syllables, 
groups of syllables and verses are repeated, partially repeated, or undergo 


11 say “at this stage” because it is not inconceivable that a future science of ritual, 
which would account for all such specific rites, would itself turn out to be reducible to 
another science, as chemistry is to physics. But we are far from having reached such a 
stage of advancement in our understanding of ritual. 


16 


GENERAL INTRODUCTION 


transpositions; certain parts are hidden; specific priests officiate in specific 
roles. When dealing with some of the intricacies of these chants, even Caland 
lost heart: Au surplus, cette méthode de chant comporte encore une infinité 
de régles, qu'il est impossible de consigner ici (Caland and Henry, 180, note). 
The Soma sequences exhibit mind-boggling complexities that relate almost 
entirely to the form of the chants and recitations, and can therefore be de- 
scribed in purely formal terms. In order to achieve this, the priests cooperate 
closely, and the results resemble the movements of a musical composition of 
Wagnerian proportions. 

Some of these complexities, and much of the ritual tendency toward 
proliferation, are due to recursive features. These are features that result 
from rules that are applicable to their own output. A simple example is the 
rule: 


B>ABA 


This rule expresses the fact that a structure B is joined on both sides by an- 
other structure, A. Since the rule applies to any B, it applies to the B of its 
output: 


АВА А (АВА) А or ААВАА 


By reiterating this procedure, an indefinite number of structures А may be 
attached to B on both sides: 


... AAABAAA... 


The recursive features of Vedic ritual include this structure, and many more 
complex structures (for illustrations, see pages 127—134 of Part III in the sec- 
ond volume). Such features will have to be taken into account in any general 
theory of ritual structure. They are indicated, and sometimes explicated, in 
the Srauta Sütras. 

A simple application of a recursive structure is the insertion of the so- 
called isti rite (basically a vegetable oblation: see pages 46-47). Isti rites can be 
inserted in specific, but indefinitely many places, so that the ritual system is 
indefinitely expandable. Such recursive features are not confined to Vedic 
ritual. They occur in the elaborate rituals that characterize contemporary 
bureaucracies. An isti rite is in certain respects like a committee or a report. 
Committees create new committees and reports lead to more reports. At the 
University of California we have a Committee on Committees, which symbo- 
lizes and initiates such recursiveness, which then operates throughout the 
system. I once argued that a certain committee should be abandoned be- 
cause it served no purpose. My arguments were taken seriously and time was 
spent on debating whether a subcommittee should be created to look into 
them and submit a report. As we have already learned from our cursory sur- 
vey of the interpretations of Vedic ritual, invisibility of results is no bar to the 
proliferation of rites. Rites obey principles of their own, and humans find 


17 


GENERAL INTRODUCTION 


rationalizations to explain them. Such rationalizations are also invoked to 
explain the proliferation of committees and reports: supporters claim that 
they safeguard justice and fairness; critics attribute them to suspicion and 
paranoia; the truth is that ritual forces are at work, which are greater than 
man. 

One reason that the absence of visible or otherwise detectable results 
causes no concern is that large rituals are ends in themselves. A bureaucracy 
grows and does not mind a diminution of its effectiveness and an increase in 
waste provided that its rules and regulations are maintained and further 
developed. Vedic ritual manifests the same tendency to be absorbed in itself. 
The rites have no practical utility and have lost their original function, if ever 
they had one. The ritualists perform them not in order to obtain certain ends, 
but because it is their task. Lack of practical utility, incidentally, is a char- 
acteristic that ritual shares with many of the higher forms of human civiliza- 
tion. It may be a mark of civilization. 

There is an analogy between rites which are without function, and ritual 
language which is without meaning. We have already observed that an 
important characteristic of Vedic ritual is the emphasis on recitation and 
chant. Under duress, ritual acts may be neglected, glossed over, or changed, 
but recitations must be maintained at all cost, and without modification. 
This has been the case in the past, and continues to be so in the present. The 
construction of the fire altar involves the deposition of more than a thousand 
bricks, of specific sizes and shapes, and in a complicated pattern. However, 
the physical deposition of the bricks is unimportant; what counts is their 
consecration by mantras. This is obvious from the simple fact that, though 
the order of bricks is ritually prescribed, the bricks are actually put down 
in any order, and not at the proper time. When they are consecrated, how- 
ever, the prescribed order is adhered to and the correct time is observed. This 
emphasis on ritual consecration also explains the pebbles, mentioned before: 
they must have been introduced simply because there were more mantras 
than bricks. That this emphasis on mantras has been the same for at least 
2500 years is demonstrated by a statement in the Satapatha Brahmana (9.1. 
2.17): “This fire altar is language, for it is constructed with language." 

During the 1975 performance of the ceremony several changes were 
made. One of the most important was that no animals were killed during the 
fourteen animal sacrifices traditionally prescribed. The goats were represented 
by cakes made of a paste of rice flour. This modification did affect the rites, 
since it is not easy to kill rice cakes by strangulation and cut them open to 
take out particular internal organs. However, the mantras were recited in the 
prescribed manner and it was felt that the essence of the ritual was thereby 
preserved. 

If it is remarkable that recitations are more important than acts, it 
is not less remarkable that these recitations are not generally understood. 
This unintelligibility is an inherent feature of mantras. It is not simply due 


18 


GENERAL INTRODUCTION 


to the meaning having been forgotten. Whoever can remember a mantra 
can certainly remember its meaning. However, mantras are significant not 
as meaningful expressions, but as units recited on specific ritual occasions. 
In its purest form, this view was defended by the ancient ritualist Kautsa, 
according to whom the mantras are meaningless (see below, page 61). This 
is consistent with the fact that the formal features of the recitations and 
chants are ritually the most important. Hence the emphasis on syllables, 
meters, insertions, and transpositions, none of which make any sense in 
terms of meaning. An extreme example is provided by the Sixteenth Recita- 
tion (Sodasi-Sastra), which is also one of the most sacred and mysterious 
(Part II, Episode 29, pages 660-663). 

In the history of the religions of India we increasingly meet with man- 
tras that are unintelligible and mysterious, not because they have lost their 
original meaning, but because they had no meaning to begin with. A well- 
known example is the mantra OM, which originated in the Vedic recitations. 
Though an entire Upanisad is devoted to its interpretation, the interpreta- 
tion is pure rationalization. Unlike language, such mantras are universal. 
They do not stand in need of translation. The abundance of such sacred 
noises in Buddhism facilitated its introduction into China, where their way 
was paved by the magical formulas of Taoism (cf. Staal 1979a). 

In the case of the Sāmaveda chants, their meaninglessness is more 
obvious and admits of a simple explanation in historical terms. Basically the 
Sāmaveda consists of mantras, mostly taken from the Rgveda and set to 
music. The texts are adapted to the melodies, so that many words are changed 
and new syllables are inserted. Thus we meet in the chants with sequences 
such as: hā yi or kā һуа һуа hvā һуа һуа. Meaningful words may also be in- 
corporated, e.g., suvar jyotih. This expression has a meaning by itself (‘‘celes- 
tial light”) but not in its melodic or ritual setting. The chants of the Sāma- 
veda are often Lieder ohne Worte, “Songs without Words," as is indicated 
by their name, sàman, which means “melody” as well as **the hum of bees." 
Faddegon referred in this connection, quite appropriately, to “‘Ritualistic 
Dadaism" (1927), showing thereby—as did Wasson and Flattery—that the 
fashions of one period sometimes enable us to understand another. 

In Vedic ritual the chants and recitations that accompany the acts are 
partly meaningless. This meaninglessness may be original or derived. A 
similar situation obtains with respect to the rites themselves. They are 
often devoid of function or outside reference, which again may be original 
or derived. A few illustrations will make this clear, and will show that this 
state of affairs is not confined to Vedic ritual. 

Some of the earliest rituals of mankind seem to have originated in con- 
nection with the use of fire. As we shall see (Part I, page 78), carrying 
fire became a ritual activity as soon as it was no longer necessary, i.e., as 
soon as man had discovered methods for kindling fire. The two main types 
of ritual fire, “perpetual fire” and “new fire," represent the two main periods 


I9 


GENERAL INTRODUCTION 


in the history of fire, the early age of fire collecting and the later age of fire 
production. During the ceremonies that will be described in this book, there 
are seven occasions at which new fire was made by rubbing two pieces of 
wood together. At all other times the fires were kept. The making of new fire 
is not accompanied by mantras and is therefore less ritualized than the car- 
rying of perpetual fire, which is generally accompanied by mantras and other 
rites. The historical explanation is that the transportation of fire is much 
older, and became superfluous much longer ago. 

While many rites that pertain to fire go back to the early stages of human 
evolution, other Vedic rites reflect later and historical periods. Many rites 
are inspired by the adventures of Vedic nomads who entered the Indian 
subcontinent from the northwest (Part I, Chapter 5, p. 90). The sacred fire 
(going back to the Indo-European period) and the sacred Soma plant (going 
back to the Indo-Iranian period) are ritually transported from west to east, 
as they were carried by the Vedic nomads in the course of their eastward ex- 
pansion. The priests recite battle hymns that make sense only in the context 
of these early adventures. The rites refer to enemies who are sometimes 
historical, at other times purely ritual. The modern performers are not aware 
of any of these historical roots, which are not reenacted or celebrated and are 
as unimportant to the ritual as the etymology of a word is to its meaning. 

The cult of Soma, originally a hallucinogenic plant, has undergone the 
most massive ritualization. This is apparently connected with the fact that 
the original Soma was lost and replaced by substitutes at an early period 
(Part I, page 109). This is similar to the disappearance of features of the 
paleolithic hunt, which seem to survive only in ritual sacrifice. In this 
connection Burkert has sounded a warning: scholars are prone to assert 
that the original idea behind a ritual has been lost or misunderstood (1979, 
38). In some cases it is likely that there never was an idea behind it. Even if 
there was, it is no longer functional in ritual performances, and is therefore 
without ritual significance. 

The tendencies of rites to be without function and of ritual language to 
be without meaning are conspicuous in the area of Vedic ritual. This is not 
the place to enquire to what extent these are general characteristics of all rit- 
ual. If they are, this would offer a simple explanation for the inadequacies 
of the Western theories of ritual we have reviewed, for all theorists of ritual 
have assumed that ritual cannot merely have intrinsic value, but must be 
provided with meaning, function, or outside reference. If the assumption is 
wrong, this would indicate that theorists are in this respect not different from 
ordinary believers, who always assume that rites have special, if not ex- 
traordinary effects. 

When Vedic ritual entered the counterculture in the United States, a 
center was set up in Randallstown, Maryland. It distributes a journal, pam- 
phlets, and books that claim that ashes from the Agnihotra fire may cure 
fever, skin fungus, and ringworm, and alleviate cancer of the rectum. A 


20 


GENERAL INTRODUCTION 


pharmaceutical firm in Bodensee, Switzerland is quoted as confirming these 
findings. Apparently, such specific cures are expected by Westerners, too 
sophisticated to be satisfied with health, strength, and immortality in gen- 
eral.! However, if we are able and willing to abandon our own specific ex- 
pectations and desires and to immerse ourselves in the rites as they are per- 
formed, we realize that Vedic ritual is very different from a health cure, a 
psychoanalytic session, an anthropological meeting, or a religious service. 
When we begin to develop a sense for its structure and orchestration, we 
discern that the ritual resembles, at least structurally, a musical performance. 
As a matter of fact, some of the syntactic rules that ritual and language 
share are also found in music. The structures ABA, ABBA, ABCBA, and 
AABAA, for example, all occur in Bach’s six sonatas for violin and harpsi- 
chord. Why men and probably some other animals use and delight in such 
structures and not in others, equally plausible or implausible, has not yet 
been explained. 


6. 


Words are not the most effective means for describing activities, ritual 
or ordinary. How simple it is to peel an apple, yet how cumbersome to de- 
scribe that process in words, especially to someone who has never seen an 
apple or used a knife. With respect to rites, the task of their description was 
undertaken in the Srauta Sūtras. It is also the principal aim of Part II of this 


- book. In formulating the descriptions, I have experienced some of the prob- 


lems with which Baudhāyana and other authors of Srauta Sttras were 
struggling more than 2,000 years ago. In the course of my work my admira- 
tion for them has grown. However, there is a difference between those ma- 
nuals and the present publication. The Srauta Sūtras, though fully explicit, 
address an audience of initiates and connoisseurs. The authors made judi- 
cious use of references, cross references, and abbreviations, all explained with 
the help of metarules (paribhāsā). For example, in the Srauta Sutras of the 
Yajurveda, “he” always refers to the adhvaryu priest. Whenever an oblation 
is referred to, and is not otherwise specified, it is to be understood that it is 
an oblation of ghee, made by the adhvaryu into the sacrificial fire by means 
of the juhū ladle or by means of the sruva if the juht is already otherwise 
employed. Vedic recitations, nowadays generally referred to by numbers, are 
quoted by the beginning words, the end being marked by the particle iti. 


1 Actually the Agnihotra center at Randallstown is not the first manifestation of Vedic 
ritual in American popular culture. The priority goes to Batman, as Michael O’Flaherty 
has shown. In the January, 1976, issue of the Batman journal, the hero is shown a slide 
of a mysterious rug and exclaims: “Just as I thought—the figure of Agni, the Vedic 


god of the altar fire! This is a prayer rug of an obscure sect of the Vedas . . . a most 
sacred object. . . In fact, even photographing it is considered desecration!’ 
2I 


GENERAL INTRODUCTION 


The resulting prose is characterized by a highly nominalized, formulaic style, 
which—in some of the later texts—begins to resemble algebra. 

By contrast, the present volume addresses an audience not merely of 
experts, be they Sanskritists, Indologists, or even Vedic ritualists. Through- 
out my work I have tried to keep in mind that my readers would be historians, 
anthropologists, psychologists, students of religion—in fact anyone inter- 
ested in the great manifestations of civilization, provided he has the Sitzfleisch 
and reads from the beginning. Since the subject is explained ab ovo, the des- 
cription is even longer than the relevant parts of the Srauta Sūtras, composed 
for insiders, which are published and translated in the second volume. And 
yet, in spite of its intrinsic value, I would have hesitated to present a work so 
large and so exotic were it not for its audiovisual component. In fact, this 
component is better suited to its subject matter than the 250,000 words of 
the entire text. The photographs of the rites form an integral part of the 
book. The same holds with regard to the cassette tapes, which give an 
idea of the power of the oral tradition. I have found that Western tradi- 
tions and sensibilities are such that most Westerners are attracted by the 
pictures but mystified by the recordings. It is good to plunge oneself into 
both before one undertakes any systematic reading. Ideally, readers should 
first see the film “Altar of Fire,” which it has not been feasible to include in 
this package. This provides an immediate experience of some of the cere- 
monies, and after 45 minutes one has reached just that mixture of under- 
standing and bewilderment that propels one to take on the book. 

The organization of the book is straightforward. This first volume con- 
sists of two parts and a Bibliography. Part I provides the background. It deals 
with Vedic ritual in general, its sources and traditional interpretations, the 
historical and prehistorical background, and the community of the per- 
formers. As I have already indicated, much of this background, though inter- 
esting for the understanding of Indian culture and for a variety of other 
reasons, need not possess any ritual significance. 

Part II of the first volume, its main part, offers a detailed description of 
the 1975 performance of the ritual. It is preceded by a description of the 
preparations that discusses time, space, materials, and personnel. The princi- 
ples of the description, which is selective and nonbehavioristic, are explained 
in an Introductory Note (pages 274-276). The description is concerned with 
the 1975 performance, not with what is prescribed in the classical texts. 

The second volume consists of three parts, numbered III-V. Part III is 
a collection of contributions by different scholars whose work illuminates 
the ritual from a variety of perspectives. Some of these authors attended 
the 1975 performance. Part IV contains texts and translations of the re- 
levant ritual manuals. The first of these, Chapter 10 of the Baudhayana 
Šrauta Sūtra, provides a detailed description of the Agnicayana ritual and 
should be compared with the description of Part II by anyone who wishes 
to study the difference between the classical tradition and the 1975 perfor- 


22 


GENERAL ĪNTRODUCTION 


mance. Part V gives a brief outline of the twenty hours of film and eighty 
hours of recordings made in 1975 under the direction of Robert Gardner, 
which were subseguently used in the production of the film "Altar of Fire.” 
It also provides texts and translations of the material available on the accom- 
panying cassettes. Finally, there are a Glossary and Indexes. There are cross 
references throughout, and each volume is separately introduced. 


23 


PART I 
THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


Chapter 1. INTRODUCTION 


THE FIRST PART of this book deals with the Agnicayana ritual and pro- 
vides background for a description of its 1975 performance. 

This first section is based partly upon classical texts, including discus- 
sions of these texts by modern interpreters. The Agnicayana, as described. 
in such texts, should be distinguished from the Agnicayana as performed by 
Nambudiri brahmins in 1975. The Nambudiri performance is not revivalistic 
and is therefore not based upon a scholarly study of ancient texts. It is 
based upon the Nambudiri tradition, handed down from teacher to pupil 
and from father to son, largely orally, but with the occasional assistance of 
manuscript manuals in Malayalam. Because it represents a living tradition, 
there are discrepancies between the tradition and the texts. 

Throughout this first part I shall refer to the 1975 performance only 
occasionally, because the performance will be documented in other parts of 
the book. Relevant portions from some of the most important classical ritual 
manuals will be given, in text and translation, in Part IV. 

Chapter 2 of Part I will introduce the texts and the hierarchy of rituals. 
This chapter is full of names and demands some effort on the part of the 
reader. It introduces the roles of the dramatis personae (who will themselves 
be introduced in Part II) and is therefore an indispensable part of the volume. 
The Vedas themselves are important primarily because they provide the 
recitations for the ritual. In the Rgveda there are numerous references to ri- 
tual, but they are too fragmentary to permit its reconstruction. The Yajur- 
veda is the ritual Veda par excellence, but it does not provide systematic 
descriptions of ritual. In the later Vedic period, roughly from 700 to 300 B.C., 
a number of specialized manuals were compiled that provide a general classi- 
fication of &таша rituals and a minute description of each of them. Some of 
these texts are manuals of Vedic schools, which are preserved in the Nam- 
budiri tradition. Texts and translations of relevant portions are provided in 
Part IV of this book. Other manuals belong to schools that havelong been ex- 
tinct. N. Tsuji treats one of these in Part III (pages 135-160). Chapter 2 of 
Part I will first survey the textual sources, and then provide an overview of 
the &rauta rituals described in these sources, indicating the position of the 
Agnicayana. 

Chapter 3 of Part I will provide a bird's-eye view of the Agnicayana 
based upon the classical texts. A more detailed and illustrated description of 
episodes of the 1975 performance will be given in Part IT. This is further 
documented by the description of records and films in Part V. 

Chapter 4 of Part I deals with some of the traditional interpretations of 
the Agnicayana. The ritual manuals provide only descriptions, and presup- 
pose that the performers were familiar with the meaning of the rites. Other 


27 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


portions of the Vedic literature deal with the meaning of ritual and of rituals. 
The Brahmanas in particular are devoted to ritual interpretation and spec- 
ulation, but the numerous, not always consistent, and sometimes fanciful 
interpretations that these works provide show clearly that, even at this early 
period, any meaning many episodes may have had was already lost. The texts 
themselves declare that “the gods love what is out of sight" (paro’ksapriya 
devāh: Satapatha Brahmana 6.1.1.2, etc.). Obscurity kindles the imagina- 
tion. The ritual speculations of the later Vedic literature lead to the begin- 
nings of Indian philosophy, and stand at the origin of many developments in 
later Hinduism. 

Chapter 5, the longest chapter of Part I, discusses the origin and signif- 
icance of the Agnicayana. This chapter has been divided into several sections 
in an attempt to bring some order to the vast amount of material. The ori- 
gin of the Agnicayana takes us back almost to the dawn of civilization. When 
we come to later prehistoric times we face two distinct civilizations. On the 
one hand we have the materially simple culture of the Indo-Iranian nomads, 
who were wandering on the dry steppes of Inner Asia. On the other hand 
we know of a highly evolved city culture, which flourished, roughly at the 
same time, a thousand miles further south and on the other side of the 
formidable mountain ranges of the western Himalayas, in the fertile valleys 
of the upper Indus. It has been fashionable for some time to trace everything 
Indian that is not found in the earlier Vedas to this Indus civilization. I 
shall resist this temptation, because our knowledge of the Harappā culture, 
though extensive, is limited and one-sided, based as it is upon archaeological 
data and controversial seals. Yet it cannot be denied that there are numerous 
features of the Agnicayana that cannot be derived from the nomadic culture 
of the Indo-Iranian invaders. 

Thapar, Parpola, Heesterman, and Seidenberg treat these early periods 
from different points of view in Part ITI of this book (in the second volume). I 
provide an analysis of ritual structure there. To introduce and supplement 
these chapters, I shall deal with A gni, fire, the Vedic nomads, Soma, the Cosmic 
Man, the altar, and naturally perforated stones in Chapter 5 of Part I. 

Chapter 6 of Part I treats Vedic traditions among the Nambudiris, in- 
corporating some material from my book Nambudiri Veda Recitation (1961). 
A long history, spanning almost twenty-five centuries, leads from the Vedic 
period to contemporary Nambudiri society. As regards the Vedic ritual, most 
of this history remains unwritten. Some definite but scattered information 
can be derived from epigraphical evidence, mostly from the medieval period. 
References in epic and literary works are numerous but are rarely specific. 
The picture gains precision only in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, 
when many of the Srauta rituals were already on the verge of extinction. 
Kashikar and Parpola will survey $rauta performances in recent times in Part 
III. For further information on the history of the Nambudiri community, see 
K. Kunjunni Raja, M.G.S. Narayanan, Kesavan Veluthat, M.R. Raghava 
Varier and others in Part III in the second volume. 


28 


Chapter 2. THE AGNICAYANA IN 
CLASSICAL VEDIC RITUAL 


SOURCES 


OUR KNOWLEDGE OF Vedic culture is, in the first place, derived from the 
four Vedas: the Rgveda (RV), a collection of poems, hymns, and invocations 
of deities, reflecting myths, rites, battles, and insights of many kinds; the 
Yajurveda (Y V), verse and prose largely concerned with ritual; the Sāmaveda 
(SV), which consists mostly of parts of the Rgveda set to music; and the 
Atharvaveda (AV), a collection that is somewhat similar to the Rgveda, but 
that pays more attention to magic, and probably reflects a different stratum 
of society. 

Each of these Vedas consists of several portions, the earliest of which is 
called samhita. Like other concepts applied to the Vedas, this term emphasi- 
zes form more than content. The term samhità means “‘conjunction, conti- 
nuity” and refers to the continuous recitation of the text. In such continuous 
recitation, euphonic combinations (sandhi) apply between words, as in cur- 
rent speech. For example, agnih nah yajfíám úpa vetu is recited as agnír no 
yajfiám úpa vetu, “Agni, may he come to our ritual." At the same time, the 
rendering of the accent of a word might influence the pronunciation of the 
immediately preceding and following words. 

The samhitā recitation contrasts with the padapātha, “word-for-word 
recitation,” from pada, “word,” in which sentences are decomposed into 
separate words. Such decomposition implies that the sandhi combinations 
are dissolved, and that the influence of the word accent is confined to the 
word itself. For example, in the above illustration, the padapātha is: agníh / 
nah | yajfiám | úpa | vetu. The padapatha, available for each of the samhita 
texts, preserves the earliest linguistic analysis of these texts. 

The word “text,” which we tend to use in such contexts, is in fact inap- 
propriate: we are not dealing with books that were written down, but with 
orally transmitted compositions. The translation of veda as “knowledge” or 
"wisdom," though correct, is also misleading. The predominant Indian way 
to approach the Vedas is to consider them in the first place as recitations. This 
is indicated by the term samhitā. 

In the case of the Rgveda there is only one samhita, which is called 
Rksamhita. References to the Rgveda, without further specification, are to 
the Rksamhita. In the case of the other Vedas, there are several samhitā tradi- 
tions, referred to by different names. In the case of the Yajurveda, the one 
that is relevant for the Nambudiri Agnicayana is the Taittiriya Samhita. 

Throughout the centuries, the Vedic recitations have been transmitted 
orally by members of the brahmin community. Each brahmin belongs by 
birth to one of the Vedas, and is initiated into the recitation of his particular 


29 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


Veda by his father or by a teacher, either at home or in a Vedic school. Elab- 
orate mnemotechnic methods have been devised to safeguard the proper 
formal transmission of these compositions, and to eliminate or decrease the 
danger of losing words, syllables, or accents. The simplest of these methods 
is the memorization of the padapatha alongside the samhitā recitation. There 
are several mnemotechnic modifications (vikrti), in which the words of the 
padapātha are recited in certain definite combinations and permutations. In 
a simple extension of the padapātha, each word is repeated once. Even this 
is not as simple as it seems, for the sandhi combinations and the accents are 
also modified according to rules. One of the more complex modifications is 
called ghana. If the words of the padapatha are represented by numerals as 
1/2/3/4]Į/..., the ghanais1221123321123/233223443 
2234/.... The beginning of the ghana of the sentence illustrated before 
thereby becomes: agnir no no‘gnir agnir no yajfiam yajfiám no‘gnir agnir no 
yajnam | . . . . The ghana of the English translation would begin as follows: 
Agni may may Agni Agni may hehe may Agni Agni may he/ . . . . Many of 
these modifications can be heard on Levy-staal (1968). Their rules are given in 
phonetic treatises called pratisakhya, attached to each of the branches of the 
Vedas. For each ofthe hymns of the Rgveda the names of the composer or seer 
(rsi) and of the deity (devatā) to whom the hymn is dedicated, are preserved. 
The names of the original meters (chandas) are also handed down traditional- 
ly. The metrical structure itself has not been retained in the actual practice of 
recitation. In texts that were originally accented, the location of the original 
accent is maintained in the oral transmission; the original rendering of the 
accent, however, is generally lost. 

According to the lawbook of Manu, a brahmin who does not know the 
Vedic verse is as useless as a eunuch among women (Manusmrti 2.158, quoted 
Ingalls 1959, 3). In actual practice the knowledge of brahmins varies greatly. 
The minimum each brahmin knows is the Gāyatrī, a three-line verse from 
the Rgveda (3.62.10): ““May we receive this desirable light of the god Savitr, 
who shall impel our thoughts.” This verse, recited daily during the Sandhya 
ceremony (cf. Srinivasan 1973), is taught at the time of Upanayana, the inves- 
titure with the sacred thread that each brahmin undergoes at his initiation 
ceremony, or "second birth.” 

Alongside this transmission of sound, there has not been a comparable 
or equally ancient oral tradition that preserves the meaning. With the de- 
velopment of classical Sanskrit, and of middle and modern Indian languages, 
there has accordingly been a gradual loss of the meaning of much of the 
recited material that had been composed in the older Vedic language. The 
reciters might be familiar with the names of the deities that are invoked, or 
might know the meaning of some Vedic words that occur in the recitation, 
and that also occur (though often with a different meaning) in classical San- 
skrit or in modern Indian languages. However, in recent times, they generally 
do not understand longer phrases. The reciters are primarily preservers of the 


30 


2. THE AGNICAYANA IN CLASSICAL VEDIC RITUAL 


Vedic tradition, not Vedic scholars. They are dedicated to the preservation of 
their sacred heritage for posterity. Without them, scholars of the Vedas would 
have nothing to be scholars of. Had the reciters themselves been scholars 
concerned with meaning, the original sounds might have long been lost. 

Separate from this formal transmission there is an entire development 
of intellectual traditions in India, which was concerned with meaning, but 
which gradually moved away from the Vedic heritage and evolved the numer- 
ous systems and schools of thought that make up much of later Hinduism. 
The Vedas were preserved in their pristine purity, uninterpreted, unaffected 
by what went on elsewhere, and accordingly without exerting much influence 
on these later developments. And so we witness a development that is prob- 
ably without parallel: for about 3,000 years, a class of people devoted 
themselves in relative isolation to the formal preservation of a large number 
of oral compositions, confining themselves almost entirely to sound. This 
transmission has been at least as faithful as have been manuscript traditions 
in other parts of the world. Sound, though perhaps not as durable as stone 
or clay, has proved much less susceptible to wear and tear than paper. As a 
result, we have access to one of the ancient literatures of mankind almost in 
its original form and in its entirety. 

This extraordinary effort of memorization can largely be explained by a 
simple fact: when the Vedas were composed, writing was unknown in the 
community to which the composers belonged. It is a matter of controversy 
whether at a much earlier period a regular system of writing was used in the 
Indus civilization, which at one time had occupied the same areas that the 
Vedic nomads entered. But even if a writing system did exist, it is not open to 
doubt that the art of writing had disappeared with the advent of the Vedic 
culture. When writing was later introduced (or reintroduced) from elsewhere, 
it was considered alien to the Vedic heritage and therefore unfit as a re- 
ceptacle for the Vedas. In the beginning, this foreign invention was mostly 
confined to commercial use and to royal edicts. It was gradually adopted in 
all branches of learning, and finally the Vedas themselves were committed to 
writing. For a long time, however, writing continued to be considered impure 
and even offensive. A later Vedic text, the Aitareya Aranyaka (5.5.3), states 
that a pupil should not recite the Veda after he has eaten meat, seen blood or 
a dead body, had intercourse, or engaged in writing. Unlike the ancient 
civilizations of the Near East and of China, Vedic civilization flourished with- 
out literacy. In India, writing has always been held in lower esteem than 
memory or the sound of recitation. This explains, among other things, the 


* importance attached to mantras, a term originally applied to the Vedic verse. 


The oral transmission of the Vedas from father to son or from teacher to 
pupil is known as adhyāya, “learning” or “recitation.” This is contrasted 
with prayoga, “ritual application,” which refers to the general use of Vedic 
texts in ritual, or viniyoga, which refers to the recitation of a particular man- 
tra at a particular point in the ritual. Vedic ritual is primarily characterized 


31 


Part I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


by the recitation, by one or more priests, of Vedic passages. The structure and 
organization of this recited material follows the requirements of the ritual. 
As a result, sentences and verses are often taken out of their original context 
(which is preserved in adhyāya only) and adapted to new surroundings. A 
reciter who is familiar with the prayoga has learned different arrangements 
of fragments of the oral tradition that he has already memorized, and knows 
where to insert them into ritual structures. This new dimension of learning 
may be handed down orally too, and without any connection with ritual acti- 
vity. And so we meet with three kinds of knowledge, handed down orally, 
each presupposing the former. Most reciters preserve the Vedic texts in their 
original, or presumedly original, order. Some among them have, in addition, 
learned how recitations have to be modified and rearranged for use in ritual. 
A few have preserved the ritual practice itself, and know what, how, where, 
and when to act as well as to recite. 

The importance of recitation in the realm of Vedic ritual is not merely 
a recent development, which might be explained by the fact that ritual re- 
citations are more easily preserved than the ritual activities they accompany. 
Throughout the Vedic period, the importance of language has been empha- 
sized, and many ritual acts are only performed by uttering mantras, as is stated 
repeatedly in the Vedic literature. Thus we need not be surprised when we 
find, for example, that Satapatha Brahmana 9.1.2.17 declares with reference 
to the Agnicayana, “This fire altar is language, for it is piled up with lan- 
guage” (already quoted on page 18). 

With regard to ritual, the four Vedas are not on a par. The Rgveda con- 
tains numerous references to ritual practices. Many priestly functions and 
names of priests are mentioned, and there are terms for particular rites and 
ritual recitations, for altars, and especially for rites connected with Soma. 
However, the precise significance of many of the ritual terms is unclear and, 
taken as a whole, these references are too fragmentary to permit the re- 
construction of specific rituals. Potdar (1953) has tried to establish four stages 
of ritual development in the Rgveda, but when it comes to formulating the 
differences, he is relatively vague. Kashikar (1964) has, moreover, shown that 
there are many exceptions to Potdar’s presumed generalizations. 

In the Yajurveda the situation is different. In the samhita traditions we 
find mantras that are to be recited at the rituals, and prose passages explain- 
ing them. The ritual specification that is provided is generally consistent with 
the detailed descriptions given. in the later ritual manuals attached to the 
Yajurveda. The ritual that emerges from these descriptions is generally re- 
ferred to as “Vedic ritual.” I shall sometimes call it “classical Vedic ritual" 
to distinguish it from earlier rituals, such as the ritual of the Rgveda or the 
lost rituals of the original inhabitants of the subcontinent. The arrangement 
and organization of the Yajurveda itself is largely determined by ritual con- 
siderations. Not only is much of its subject matter ritual, but the text itself is 
used in rituals. The Rgveda, on the other hand, is used only in part in the clas- 


32 


2. THE AGNICAYANA IN CLASSICAL VEDIC RITUAL 


sical ritual, and many portions have no ritual connection. The Rgveda con- 
sists, for the greater part, of “family books,” and does not have a clearly 
visible ritual structure. It would be rash to assume that it originally had such 
a structure that was lost subsequently. It is true that ritualistic interpretations 
of the Rgveda have found favor among scholars from Bergaigne to Bloom- 
field, who wrote, for example: “If we had before us the ritual practices which 
accompanied the Rgvedic hymns at the time of their composition, the Rgveda 
would lose much of its obscurity” (quoted in Kashikar 1968, 9). This may be 
true in some cases; but on the whole, those scholars look at the Rgveda 
through the eyes of the Yajurveda. 

In some parts of the Sāmaveda, a ritual arrangement has been adopted. 
It occupies, in this respect, a place between Rgveda and Yajurveda. The 
Sāmaveda consists, for the largest part, of material taken from the Rgveda 
and set to music. This adaptation from texts to melodies has resulted in 
numerous textual changes and in the insertion of much new material, orig- 
inally perhaps necessitated by the requirements of melody. An example will 
make this clear. The first melody of the Jaimintya Samaveda is based upon 
the following mantra from the Rgveda: 


agna à yāhi vitaye grnano havyadātaye aa атак «йай 
ni hota satsi barhisi smt ETNA | 
Agni, come to the feast, after being extolled, f Hat aka afe u 


come to the gift of offerings! 
As Hota sit down on the sacrificial grass!” 
(RV 6.16.10 = TB 3.5.2.1; with this mantra the second brick of the fire altar is 
consecrated. See below page 388) 


In the Jaiminiya Sāmaveda this mantra is transformed into: 
à gna yi | à yahiva yi | tāyā yi tāyā yi/grņāno havyada | tāyā yi taya yi | nā yi 


hota | sā tsa yi bà au ho va | hi si || 
(GG 1.1) 


The oblique bar (**/”), used to demarcate the portions of this chant, has a 
specific meaning: each portion (bhakti) should be sung with one breath. 
Meaningless syllables, such as au ho va, are called stobhas. They inspired 
Faddegon to speak of “‘Ritualistic Dadaism" (1927). While the majority of 
the melodies (sāman) are based upon verses (rk) of the Rgveda, some derive 
from other sources, and others have no source at all. The latter consist en- 
tirely of stobhas, sometimes interspersed with bits and fragments of mantras. 
An example is one of the songs that accompany the consecration of the 
*Space-Filler" bricks of the first layer (Part II, page 444; see also Table 15): 


agnom | agna ho agna ho agna ha à vu và | г jyotih || 
(AG 25.32) 


This is a composition on the name Agni with jyotih, “light”, added in the 
33 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


finale as illumination or embellishment. Such pieces are common in the 
Aranyegeyagana, “Songs to be Sung in the Forest," from which the above 
song has been taken. 

The structure of the Sāmaveda is complex. The mantras that underlie the 
the melodies are listed in the Arcika, “List of Verses,” and the melodies are 
listed in the Gramageyagana, “Songs to be Sung in the Village," and in the 
Aranyegeyagana. The same melodies recur in the Uhagana and Uhyagana 
(which the Nambudiris call Usani), but other verses are added, and the 
material is arranged in the form and order required in the ritual. Some of 
the principles underlying this arrangement will become apparent in the course 
of the following description. The texts of the Jaiminiya will be described in a 
separate note (below, pages 276-278). 

A few of the melodies of the Samaveda are based upon mantras from 
the Atharvaveda. The Atharvaveda itself, though perhaps as ancient as the 
Rgveda, has an entirely different background and was added only later to 
the "three Vedas.” It has been introduced into the classical ritual to a very 
limited extent. On the whole, it may be characterized as yajfanupayuktah, 
"not employed in the ritual" (Madhusüdana, in Renou 1947, 214; cf. Renou 
1955a). 

The Yajurveda provides principles of organization that will enable us to 
establish some order in the mass of rites that constitute the classical ritual, 
and in the mass of texts that describe and interpret these rites from different 
points of view. The classification of rituals will be taken up in the next section 
(The Srauta Rituals). The classification of texts reflects, to a large extent, the 
subdivision of the Vedas into schools (Sakha). Like the classical ritual, and in 
close connection with it, these schools developed primarily in Yajurvedic 
circles. The Yajurveda is divided into two domains: the (older) Black (Krsna) 
Yajurveda and the (later) White (Suk/a) Yajurveda. The Black Yajurveda 
comprises four schools, each with its own samhitā. Each samhita contains a 
mixture of two types of passages: mantra and brahmana. In general, mantra 
passages are in verse and are recited during rites, but they also comprise yajus 
formulas; brahmana passages are in prose and describe or elucidate the 
mantras and their connection with the rites. Both are accented. From the 
standpoint of Yajurveda, and from the ritual point of view, the Rksamhita 
consists entirely of mantras. So does the one samhita of the White Yajurveda, 
the Vajasaneyi-Samhita. 

: Let us now return to the subdivision of each of the Vedas into several 
portions, of which the samhitā is the first. There are three other categories: 
Brahmana, Aranyaka, and Upanisad. It is to be noted that there is therefore 
an ambiguity in the term brāhmaņa, as applied to Vedic texts. On the one 
hand, it means a prose passage that describes or interprets rites. When used 
in this sense, I shall write brahmana without capital. On the other hand, 
"Brahmana," with capital, denotes the second category of subdivision of 
each of the Vedas, which is often a collection of brahmana passages. The 


34 


a” 


2. THE AGNICAYANA IN CLASSICAL VEDIC RITUAL 


two senses remain distinct even where they are coextensive. 

In the Black Yajurveda, one of the four schools (the most important one 
for most of this book) is called Taittiriya. The four subdivisions are called 
after it: Taittiriya Samhita (TS), Taittiriya Brahmana (TB), Taittiriya 
Aranyaka (TA), and Taittiriya Upanisad (TU). The name Taittiriya is 
derived from tittiri, “partridge,” traditionally taken to refer to a teacher. 
The suggestion that it was originally the name of a totemistic clan is without 
foundation. Like the Taittirtya Samhita, the Taittiriya Brahmana and the 
Taittirtya Aranyaka consist of a mixture of mantra and brahmana passages, 
both accented. Among the other schools, mention may be made of the 
Maitrāyaņī, since this is the school with which Tsuji deals in Part III, Volume 
П. In the case of the White Yajurveda, the two schools may be regarded 
as two recensions of the same text. The Vājasaneyi Samhita (VS) of the 
White Yajurveda, as we have seen, is in verse and consists of mantras. Its 
important brāhmaņa, the Šatapatha Brahmana (SB), “Вгаһтапа of the 
Hundred Paths,” will be quoted frequently. 

In the case of the Rgveda, two schools are referred to, but their distinc- 
tion is largely theoretical with respect to the Rksamhita, and becomes ap- 
parent only from the Brahmana onward. The two Brahmanas of the Rgveda, 
the Kausitaki and the Aitareya, are in prose and are not accented. In the case 
of the Sāmaveda, many schools are referred to, but for all practical purposes 
they fall into two groups: the Kauthuma-Rāņāyanīya and the Jaiminiya. 

Table 1 provides a survey of the names of the principal subdivisions and 
schools of the Vedas. 

In later times, the entire Vedic corpus of recitations is referred to as 
$ruti, “what is heard,” i.e., “what is revealed." It is regarded as apauruseya, 
“of nonhuman origin." Numerous other texts were attached to this sacred 
revelation, many of which deal with more specialized topics, viz., phonetics 
(treated in the prātišākhya literature, already referred to), ritual, altar con- 
struction (involving geometry), grammar, etymology, metrics, and astrono- 
my. Together with others, these manuals are considered smrti, ‘“‘what is 
remembered." They are accordingly less authoritative than $ruti. This 
implies that in case of conflict between $ruti and smrti, $ruti prevails. Many 
of these manuals are written in a particular style, the sütra style, which is 
formulaic and aphoristic and tends to brevity. The sütra style initiates a new 
development, characterized by analysis and a more logical, philosophical, 
and scientific approach. Because of their brevity, the sütra works are often 
obscure and require commentaries (bhāsya, vrtti, tikā) for their elucidation. 

In the present context the only sūtras that are relevant are the ritual 
sūtras. These are of two types: Srauta sūtra and grhya sutra. The former, 
which are generally older (though not in the case of the Atharvaveda), deal 
with the $rauta rites, rites “based upon $ruti." In French these are called les 
rites solennels. The latter deal with the grhya rites (from grha, “home, 
house”), domestic or life-cycle rites such as the ceremonies performed at the 


35 


Part I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


ba 


Hiranyakesin 
Vaikhanasa 
Kathaka 
Manava 


ayana 
Varaha 


Sankhayana 


Vādhūla or Badhüla 


Bharadvaja 


Srauta Sūtras: 


Asval 
Baudhayana 
Apastam 
Kātyāyana 
Lātyāyana 
Drāhyāyaņa 
Jaiminīya 
Vaitāna 


r 


or 
Talavakāra 
etc. 


THE FOUR VEDAS AND THEIR SRAUTA SUTRAS 


Upanisad: 
Aitareya 
Kausitaki 
Taittiriya 
Katha 
Maitri 

Isa and 
Brhadaranyaka 
Chandogya 
Kena 
Mundaka, 
Mandukya, 


Or 


Aranyaka: 
Aitareya 
Kausitaki 
Taittiriya 
Katha 


TABLE I 


Or 
Sankhayana Sankhayana 


Brahmana: 
Aitareya 
Kausitaki 
Taittiriya 
Katha 
Satapatha 
Paficavimša 
Sadvimša 

. Jaiminīya 
Gopatha 


Samhitā: 
Rk 
Taittirīya 
Kāthaka 
Maitrāyaņī 
ajasaneyi 
Sama 
Atharva 


| V 


āyaņī 


Krsna (Black) 

Taittirīya 
anayaniya 
or 

Talavakara 


Ra 


Schools: 
Šākala 
Vāskala 
Kāthaka 
Maitr 

Sukla (White): 
Mādhyamdina 
Kāņva 
Kauthuma- 
Jaiminīya 
Paippalāda | 


Atharvaveda Saunaka 


Rgveda 
Samaveda 


— Yajurveda 


2. THE AGNICAYANA IN CLASSICAL VEDIC RITUAL 


occasion of a birth, initiation and investiture with the sacred thread (Upa- 
nayana), marriage, or death. As we have already seen, there are several gen- 
eral and formal differences between the two kinds of ritual. For example, the 
&rauta rites require three fire altars and the services of several priests, whereas 
the grhya rites require only one fire (the domestic fire) and one priest (the 
purohita). While the function of the domestic rites is fairly straightforward, 
the significance of the Srauta rites is not obvious. This constitutes one of the 
main problems and attractions of the study of the $rauta ritual. The Srauta 
ritual exhibits the unhampered development of ritual construction and 
creativity. As we have already seen, there are Srauta rituals that last a 
thousand years, which shows that these rites were not always performed, but 
were sometimes purely theoretical. These theoretical constructions are impor- 
tant, for they help us to understand the concept of ritual structure (as dealt 
with, for example, in Part III, pages 127-1 34). The rituals that will be referred 
to in this book are all srauta rituals. 

The &rauta sūtras are known by different names and are attached to the 
various Vedic schools. They are listed in Table 1. It is clear from this table 
that ritual flourished especially in the Yajurveda. “Avec le Yajurveda on ac- 
cède à la tradition la plus importante, celle qui est au centre méme du culte 
et que viennent alimenter des textes considérables" (Renou 1947, 137). The 
reason why there are so many different texts, reflecting different schools, is 
partly ritual. The larger celebrations require the collaboration of four groups 
of priests, one for each of the four Vedas. Each group evolved its own manual. 
Such manuals complement each other, like the music printed for different 
instruments that together make up one orchestra. With the development and 
further differentiation of the ceremonies, problems arose within the same 
Veda. Various solutions to such problems were adopted by different groups 
of ritualists, which led to a differentiation into branches or schools, in due 
course reflected in different $rauta sūtras. Even within a $rauta sūtra, other 
opinions may be incorporated, or listed as options (as is done, e.g., in the 
Dvaidha section of Baudhayana Srauta Sütra), which later develop into se- 
parate traditions. 

Later, works were composed that deal with a single ritual by combining 
the contributions of the different groups of priests; some of these works are 
called prayoga or paddhati. This has been carried further by modern scholars, 
e.g., Hillebrandt (1880: Full- and New-Moon Rituals), Schwab (1886: ani- 
mal sacrifice), Caland and Henry (1906: Agnistoma). Such works are like 
the conductor's score, but include in addition other recensions and options. 

Most of the sciences treated in the early sütra literature are similarly 
differentiated according to Veda and $akha, "branch" or Vedic school. The 
prātišākhyas, attached to each of the Vedic branches (as their name indicates: 
“опе for each branch"), deal with the phonetic characteristics of their own 
branch. These phonetic treatises are therefore typically confined to the 
analysis of a specific corpus of utterances. The exception is grammar, which 


37 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


pertains to all the Vedas. The oldest work of grammar that is preserved intact 
is the grammar of Pāņini. This work is not a catalogue of facts about a parti- 
cular text, but a grammar of Sanskrit that provides rules for the derivation of 
linguistic forms, and in so doing expresses a general theory of langauge (for 
the contrast with the prātišākhya literature, see e.g., Staal 1967, Chapter 2; 
1972, 140-141; 1974). After centuries of domination by the Vedic schools, 
grammar came, therefore, as a liberation (Renou 1947, 213). This universali- 
zation signalled the breakdown of the edifice of the Vedic schools and of 
Vedic culture itself, and led to entirely new developments. The Upanisads con- 
tributed to these events in a similar way: their affiliation to the Vedic schools 
became increasingly academic, and all later Upanisads were attached to the 
Atharvaveda by fiat. 

Specimens from the $rauta sūtras are given in Part IV of this book, and 
in one contribution of Part III. With the exception of the late Vaikhānasa, 
the period of the $rauta sūtras is roughly from 700 to 300 в.с. The earliest 
author of a $rauta sütra, Baudhāyana, is the inventor of the sūtra genre, 
which has remained one of the chief vehicles for the expression of Indian 
scholarly and scientific culture. The sūtra style is ideally suited to concise and 
factual description, pushing condensation to the extreme by the use of nomi- 
nal composition, and eliminating all interpretation and speculation. While 
Baudhāyana's Srauta Sütra marks the origin of sūtra composition, Panini's 
grammar is its apogee. Baudhāyana's style is still, in some respects, reminis- 
cent of the Brahmana literature, and in this respect constitutes a transition. 
Baudhayana's work was called pravacana, a term that probably underlines its 
explicit character, as distinct from the esoteric tendencies of the Brahmanas 
(Renou 1963, 180; for a slightly different interpretation see Gonda 1977, 
514-515). Much later, the sūtra style was characterized as vi$vatomukha, 
"facing in all directions," viz., fully perspicuous. This applies very well to the 
Baudhāyana Srauta Sütra, which is the most detailed and explicit of the 
$rauta sütras. 

Caland took pravacana to mean “‘oral teaching." Writing in fact became 
known during the later part of the sūtra period, but it remains unclear to what 
extent it may have been used in the Srauta literature. The sūtra style, with its 
formulaic character, is very suitable for memorization, even more so than 
the Vedic recitations themselves (cf. Renou 1947, 33-34, 222-223; 1963, 199). 
Though Western scholars, used as they are to reading and writing, have found 
it hard to believe, sütra composition may very well have been an oral exer- 
cise, like the composition of the Vedas themselves. 

Just as each brahmin belongs by birth to one Veda, he belongs, within 
his Veda, to one school. This implies that he should perform rituals in 
accordance with the sütras of his own school. But since the larger $rauta 
rituals require participation among priests belonging to different schools, co- 
operation among the different schools becomes necessary. The system of Ve- 
dic schools is therefore a structure of fixed units, which, however, are inter- 


38 


2. THE AGNICAYANA IN CLASSICAL VEDIC RITUAL 


dependent and complement each other. 

In this sense, the organization of the Vedic schools is similar to the 
social organization of the brahmin community: brahmins are endogamous 
with respect to caste, but exogamous with respect to gotra (a kind of clan to 
which a brahmin also belongs by birth). Vedic affiliation and marriage alli- 
ance are independent of each other: a brahmin need not marry within his 
Veda. The organization of the Vedic schools is also, in some respects, similar 
to the structure of sects in later Hinduism. This has been generally misunder- 
stood by foreigners, including most Western scholars. Saivism and Vaisna- 
vism, for example, are not rival religions enjoining a belief in Siva and Visnu, 
respectively, nor are they rival options. They are separate traditions. Such 
affiliations are largely determined by birth, and have little to do with private 
preference or individual option. Conversions must have occurred when the 
Vedic nomads began to interact with the indigenous population. Though a 
movement of conversion in the opposite direction appeared in Jainism and 
Buddhism—a late retaliation to the invasion by the Vedic nomads—conver- 
sion remained alien to classical Hinduism. There have been periods of intense 
religious strife, but for political rather than religious reasons. Moreover, in 
Vedic religion as well as in Hinduism, it is relatively unimportant what a 
person privately thinks or believes; what counts are his public and coopera- 
tive activities. Hence the emphasis on orthopraxy, "right activity," rather 
than orthodoxy, “right opinion” (Staal 1959). 

The overall picture that arises from the ritual texts indicates, in the 
words of Heesterman (1962, 2): 


‚. . that Vedic religion did not relate itself to differing forms of 
religion. The antithesis is between more or less effective rites, or 
of old, superseded (utsanna) versus new rites, all of which are viewed 
within the framework of the same religion. Moreover, the ritual 
texts are concerned with orthopraxy, not with orthodoxy. Where 
an orthodoxy may open the possibility of conversion, orthopraxy, 
being indifferent to conversion, will stress purification (cf. also Re- 
nou 1955a, 439, note 3). 


Without the affiliation system of the Vedic schools, which is based upon 
birth, Vedic ritual and the Vedas themselves would not have survived over 
the millenia and in spite of all later developments. The ensuing restrictions, 
however, might also be responsible for the final disappearance of the ritual. 
The Vedic traditions of the Nambudiri brahmins, to which I shall return in 
Chapter 6, offer a case in point. The Nambudiri performance of Vedic rituals 
is on the verge of extinction primarily because of the increasing rarity of 
qualified Sāmavedins, due to the lack of interest of the younger generation. 
In a desperate effort to preserve the ritual, a few Rgvedins suggested some 
years ago that their sons and grandsons be trained in the difficult art of 


39 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


chanting the ritual chants of the Sāmaveda. Though similarly concerned, 
the Sāmavedins have been unwilling to teach them. One reason is that the 
Rgvedins, at the time of Upanayana, are not initiated in the same manner 
as the Samavedins. One characteristic of the Nambudiri Samaveda Upana- 
yana is that the initiated boy should wear the same cloth for the duration of 
one full year, washing and cleaning it over and over again. This is not re- 
quired in the Rgveda Upanayana, which therefore does not qualify a Rgveda 
boy to learn Sāmaveda. Such facts indicate that, for a brahmin, it is just as 
unthinkable to change his second birth as to change his first birth or his body. 


THE SRAUTA RITUALS 


THOUGH THE DETAILS vary, almost all parts of the Yajurvedic corpus 
presuppose a particular classification of šrauta rituals. This becomes 
explicit in the $rauta sūtras, in which the rituals are arranged in a sequence 
in which each ritual presupposes the previous one. Moreover, a later ritual 
in the hierarchy can only be performed by a person who has already per- 
formed the earlier ones. A list of the main érauta rituals is given in Table 2. 
This is not complete, and the following description is even less complete. 

The simplest $rauta ritual is the agnihotra. It consists of an oblation of 


THE SRAUTA RITUALS 


Agnyādheya (= Agnyādhāna) 
Agnihotra 
Dar$apürnamasa 
Cāturmāsya 


Pašubandha 


Agnistoma 
Ukthya 
Sodašin 
Atirātra 

Aptoryāma 

Atyagnistoma 
Vājapeya 


Agnicayana 
TABLE 2 


40 


i 
2. THE AGNICAYANA IN CLASSICAL VEDIC RITUAL 


milk, offered every evening 4nd morning. The rites are performed by the 
adhvaryu priest, who belongs to the Yajurveda, on behalf of a yajamana, 
“sacrificer” or “patron of the ritual," generally accompanied by his wife, 
the yajamānapatnī. The yajamana may also perform the ritual on his own 
behalf. Yajamāna and yajamānapatnī may belong to any of the three twice- 
born classes: brahmins, chieftains or soldiers (ksatriya), and tribesmen or 
farmers (vaisya). The adhvaryu, and all other priests who officiate in $rauta 
rituals, are brahmins. This accords with the fact that only brahmins have been 
trained in the Vedic recitations that accompany the rites. 

The Agnihotra is performed inside a ritual enclosure within the home of 
the yajamāna. Three fires are required: the gārhapatya, “belonging to the 
householder,” which I shall refer to as domestic fire;’ the @havaniya, "in 
which the oblations are offered," which I shall refer to as offering fire; and 
the daksinagni, “southern fire," which I shall refer to as such. The fires are 
installed on fireplaces or altars made of clay. The domestic altar is round 
and is located near the western end of the ritual enclosure, the offering altar 
is square and is located near its eastern end, and the southern altar is semi- 
circular and is located on its southern side. These positions are indicated 
in Figure 1, where the customary places of the yajamāna (Y) and his wife 
(P) are also marked. 

In all $rauta rituals there are three basic elements: dravyam, the sub- 
stance of the oblation; devatà, the deity to whom the oblation is offered; 
and tyāga, the formula pronounced by the yajamāna at the time of the obla- 
tion, by which he renounces the benefits or fruits of the ritual in favor of the 
deity (it can also refer to the oblation itself). The oblations are generally 
prepared on the domestic fire and are offered into the offering fire. In the 
case of the Agnihotra, the substance of the oblation is milk, but certain 
vegetable substances may be adopted as substitutes. In the evening Agni- 
hotra, a first oblation is offered to Agni and a second to Prajāpati. In the 
morning Agnihotra, the first oblation is for Sürya and the second again for 
Prajāpati. The tyāga formulas, uttered by the yajamāna, are of the form: 
“this is for Agni not for me" (agnaye idem na mama, and analogously for 
the other deities). Increasingly, tyāga is seen as the essence of ritual. The 
term was to have a great future in Hinduism. In the Bhagavad Gita, tyaga 
means abandoning and renouncing of the fruits of all activity, and is ad- 
vocated as the highest goal of life (see above, page 5). 

Though the Agnihotra is the simplest of the $rauta rituals, it comes 
after the Agnyādheya or Agnyadhana ritual, during which the three fires are 
installed, and which is therefore presupposed. Installing fire involves agni- 
manthana, “making fire by friction,” a method that is resorted to several 
times again in the course of subsequent rituals. There are different opinions 


s am not concerned here with the grhya fire, which has also been called “domestic”? 
те. 


41 


PLATE 1 


PLATE I 
Making Fire (Agnimanthana) 


С.У. Vasudevan Akkitiripad, the yajamāna”s eldest brother, on 
whose behalf the Atiratra-A gnicayana ritual was performed in 1955, 
pulls the strings that cause the churning stick (mantha, Malayalam: 
itattaņtū) to rotate in a hole in the lower kindling block (adhara- 
rani). The pratiprasthata pushes the stick down with the help of a 
half coconut shell. The upper kindling block (uttarāraņi) lies to the 
left of the lower one. During the 12-day Atirātra-Agnicayana, new 
fire has to be made seven times. The plate shows fire being made 
for the animal sacrifice for Vayu on the first day (Episode 2: below, 
page 303). 


42 


43 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


N 


EN 


Figure 1—The Ritual Enclosure 


garhapatya, domestic fire 

daksiņāgni, southern fire 

āhavanīya, offering fire 

vedi, receptacle for ritual implements and substances of oblations 
customary place of the Yajamāna 

customary place of the Yajamānapatnī 


Se Ыс 


with regard to the keeping of the fires. Either the three fires are kept alive in 
the house of the yajamāna throughout his life as a householder, or the do- 
mestic fire is kept alive, and the other two are lit from it at each Agnihotra 
performance. If the fires have not been kept or have gone out, they are re- 
installed during the Punarādheya ritual. A brahmin who keeps the three 
sacred fires is called ahitagni, “who has installed the fire,” or agnihotrin, 
“who performs Agnihotra.” 

The features of the Agnihotra so far mentioned are nothing but its skele- 
ton. The $rauta sūtras specify a great deal of additional detail: restrictions 
on eligibility of the participants, time, preparation of the altars, fires and 
oblations (e.g., the precise manner in which the Agnihotra cow is milked), 
implements used, movements gone through, options, and all the accompany- 
ing recitations. Instead of pursuing these specifications, and before reviewing 
other $rauta rituals, we may ask what reality has corresponded, and still 
corresponds, to such descriptions. There is a general answer that is appli- 
cable to all the ritual works. At the time of their composition, the descrip- 
tions of the $rauta sūtras reflected existing and earlier practice, but—once 
formulated—they determined later and future practice. The ritual literature, 
which was at least partly descriptive in origin, became in due course entirely 


44 


2. THE AGNICAYANA IN CLASSICAL VEDIC RITUAL 


prescriptive, and came to be regarded as the final codification of the ritual. 

At the present time, rituals are performed, theoretically, in accordance 
with the statements of the šrauta sūtras, which are interpreted as rules. It 
does not follow that brahmin ritualists consult the stitras and then act ac- 
cordingly. Srauta performances in recent times range from the academic 
and revivalistic to the traditional. While in and around academic circles, 
rites may be reconstructed from texts with or without the assistance of 
traditional practitioners, there are inaccessible places where rituals are still 
performed without scholarly aids and in accordance with a living tradition. 
Such a living tradition need not be entirely oral. It may involve the consul- 
tation of manuscripts, often of later date, and sometimes written in one of 
the modern Indian languages. Though such later works (which are generally 
unpublished) may be ultimately traced to the $rauta sūtras, a chain of inter- 
mediate works has intervened, the earlier ones in Sanskrit (like the Prayoga 
and Paddhati texts), and the later ones in modern languages. Since local 
traditions may have been incorporated, and other changes may have taken 
place, the original sūtras are in fact no longer authoritative: the living 
tradition prevails. Revivalistic performances are therefore more faithful to 
the manuals, whereas living traditions exhibit greater variety. 

It would be unwarranted to assume that, in the past, $rauta traditions 
were always handed down from father to son and from teacher to pupil 
without fresh consultation of the ancient manuals. Revivalistic performances 
are not confined to the present century, but have taken place several times in 
the past, when orthodox brahmins (for example, adherents of the philoso- 
phical system of the Mimàmsa) were concerned about the weakening of their 
Vedic heritage. In North India, during the Gupta dynasty, in the fourth and 
fifth century A.D., there was a large-scale revival of Vedic culture, and 
numerous šrauta performances took place. At Varanasi (Banaras), the origin 
of the Dasa$vamedha ghat, which marks the place where, according to tra- 
dition, ten ASvamedha rituals were performed, may be traced back to this 
period. In South India, the empires of Chola (IXth through XIIth centuries) 
and of Vijayanagara (XIVth through XVIth centuries) marked other revivals 
of Vedic culture, that included ritual performances and the composition of 
ritual works. 

How much šrauta culture survives in the present century can be seen 
from the number of āhitāgnis or agnihotrins. In 1958, Kashikar estimated, 
“There are about a hundred āhitāgnis in the whole of India, and one half of 
these are in Tanjore District (Madras) alone" (Kashikar 1958, 62). In an 
unpublished report of 1971, I ventured to guess that “there are some 50 
agnihotrins in Andhra, which is more than in Tamilnad and Kerala together" 
(Staal 1971, 12). These estimates are put in proper perspective by the results 
of the investigations by Parpola and Kashikar, published below in Part III, 
pages 193-251. From this we learn that “1п recent times" (i.e., during roughly 
the last hundred years) there have been and are almost 600 āhitāgnis in In- 


45 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


dia. Of these, 200 alone are in Andhra Pradesh, and approximately 125 each 
in Kerala and Tamil Nadu. Kashikar and Parpola also provide more specific 
information on recent performances of the rarer $rauta rituals. Nambudiri 
information supplements this in another section of Part III (pages 252-255). 

I shall now review some of the other Srauta rituals. There are three main 
categories. The first is called isti or haviryajfa, rituals in which the oblation is 
of rice or barley; the second are animal sacrifices; the third are Soma rituals. 
In the first category, we have already met with Agnyadheya, Punaradheya, and 
Agnihotra. Two others are Daršapūrņamāsaand Caturmasya. The Caturmasya, 
*four-monthly" or "seasonal" ceremonies, are an extension of the former. 

The Daršapūrņamāsa, the full- and new-moon ceremonies, incorporate 
recitations from two Vedas, Yajurveda and Rgveda, and require the services 
of four priests: the adhvaryu of the Yajurveda, the hota of the Rgveda, the 
brahman, and the agnidhra. The hota recites from the Rgveda. The brahman 
sits by the side of the yajamāna and supervises the rites, in general without 
participating. When mistakes have been made, he determines what should 
be done and prescribes, if necessary, expiation rites (prayascitta). In larger 
rituals he is attached to the Atharvaveda, but this is arbitrary. He need not 
belong to that Veda, and rarely does. He is said, in fact, to officiate “with 
the three Vedas,” viz., Rg-, Yajur-, and Sāmaveda (Aitareya Aranyaka 3.2. 
3.6; Šatapatha Brahmana 11.5.8.7; etc.). The àgnidhra (or agnidh), **kindler 
of fire," is attached to the Atharvaveda in a similarly arbitrary manner. 


Figure 2—Customary Positions of the Priests 


A: Adhvaryu of Yajurveda 
H: Hota of Rgveda 

B: Brahman 

Ag: Agnidhra 


46 


2. THE AGNICAYANA IN CLASSICAL VEDIC RITUAL 


His principal task is to shout: astu Srausat “Ве it so! May he hear!" in 
response to the adhvaryu's exclamation: o $ravaya “Make (him) hear!" 
These exclamations call the deities down to earth to be present at the 
ritual and partake of the oblations. The four officiating priests generally 
occupy the positions shown in Figure 2. 

The Darsapūrņamāsa ritual exhibits the basic pattern of the isti rites; 
it is their paradigm. These rites are characterized by a dialogue between the 
participating priests, which culminates in an offering. The scene is set as in 
Figure 2. First the adhvaryu tells the hotā to address the deity, e.g., Agni, 
by saying: agnaye nubrühi “Address Agni!" The hota recites verses from the 
Rgveda that sometimes extol, or at least refer to, qualities and virtues of the 
deity in question, viz., Agni. These verses lead up to the yājyā or “offering 
verse," and are called anuvākyā, “invitations,” puro nuvakya, or yajyanuvakya. 
Then the adhvaryu exclaims: o $ravaya, and the āgnīdhra shouts his 
answer: astu Srausat. The adhvaryu thereupon tells the hota to recite his main 
recitation, the yājyā. He says to the hota: agnim yaja “sacrifice to Agni” or 
“say the yājyā for Agni.” The hota begins by murmuring: bhür bhuvah) 
ye yajāmahe “Earth! Air! We who sacrifice...” or “We who say the 
yàjyà. . . ." The yājyā consists again of Rgvedic mantras and ends with 
the exclamation: vausat “тау (Agni) lead (the offerings to the gods)!” At 
the -sat of vausat, the adhvaryu makes the offering by throwing or pouring 
it into the offering fire. At the same time the yajamāna recites his tyāga: 
agnaye idam na mama “This is for Agni, not for me (cf. page xxviil)." 

I shall translate isti as “offering”. Even if it is for another deity (e.g., 
Prajāpati), the offering is almost always made into the fire, and it is Agni 
who is the implicit subject of the vausat call. Though Agni may also be the 
deity to whom the rites are addressed, as above, he is, in all cases, the in- 
termediary through whom the offerings are made. 

The isti offering is also called yajati, “е recites the yajya," which there- 
fore refers to the task of the hota. It is characterized by the vausat call and 
by the fact that the adhvaryu generally stands when making the offering. A 
second, similar ritual act is always distinguished from the isti offering. It is 
called ahuti which I shall translate as “oblation.” It is also called juhoti, “е 
makes an oblation" or “he pours.” This refers to the adhvaryu, generally 
seated during the oblation, at which time he calls: svaha! The adhvaryu 
stands, however, during the "Full Oblations" (pūrņāhuti), when a full ladle is 
entirely emptied. 

The principal offerings of the Dar$apürnamasa are introduced and 
followed by numerous other rites. An important preceding rite is the placing 
of sticks of firewood (samidh) on the altar by the adhvaryu, which act is 
accompanied by the recitation of samidheri verses (from the Rgveda) by the 
hota. This is followed by two āghāra oblations of butter, five prayaja or 
preliminary offerings, and two ājyabhāga butter offerings for Agni and Soma. 
Then come the principal offerings, followed by an offering for Agni Svi- 


47 


PLATE 2 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


stakrt, *Agni-to-whom-the-proper-offering-is-made," and Idahvana, “сай of 
Ida,” during which the adhvaryu puts rice cakes in the right hand of the 
hota and in the idā-receptable, which are subsequently touched by the yaja- 
тапа. This is followed by three anuyāja or after-offerings. The yajamāna's 
daksiņā is an offering presented to the priests, formerly taken to be merely 
a sacrificial fee. According to some, it is more than that: it strengthens the 
ritual and makes it complete “by integrating it into the cosmic circulation of 
wealth” (Heesterman 1959; Gonda 1965, 19-20; Malamoud 1976). At the 
Full- and New-Moon Ceremonies, the fee consists of anvaharya rice, rice 
left after preparing rice cakes for the offerings. It is cooked on the southern 
fire, which is therefore sometimes called anvaharya-pacana. 

The PaSubandha, paradigm for the animal sacrifice, modifies the pat- 
tern of the Full- and New-Moon ceremonies in several important respects. 
The services of a second priest from the Rgveda, the maitrāvaruņa, are re- 
quired. Holding a staff, he generally stands to the right (i.e., to the south) of 
the hota, who sits facing the offering fire. In the Pašubandha, as in all sub- 


Figure 3—Ritual Enclosure for the Animal Sacrifice 


OA: old āhavanīya (old offering altar) 
= NG: new garhapatya (new domestic altar) 
U: uttaravedi 
= NA: new ühavaniya (new offering altar) 
yūpa (sacrificial pole) 
Hota of Rgveda 
Maitrāvaruņa of Rgveda 
Yajamāna 
Brahman 


wx EES 


48 


2. THE AGNICAYANA IN CLASSICAL VEDIC RITUAL 


sequent $rauta rituals, there is a transformation of the offering fire, which 
has moved further east. A new ritual enclosure, the mahāvedi or Great Altar 
space, is constructed and consecrated to the east of the old offering en- 
closure with its three fire altars. At the eastern end of this new mahāvedi, 
a new offering altar, the uttaravedi, is constructed. The old offering altar 
becomes the new domestic altar and the fire is carried (Agnipranayana) 
from here to the new offering altar. The ritual is then performed around the 
two new fire altars, as in Figure 3. 

In the PaSubandha, the animal that is sacrificed, called pašu, is generally a 
goat. It is tied to a sacrificial post (vipa), which is erected immediately to the 
east of the uttaravedi, on the eastern boundary of the mahāvedi. The animal is 
killed by choking it to death. This task is performed by the Samita or “pacifier,” 
generally a nonbrahmin, and it takes place outside the enclosure and without 
being observed by the priests. The basic dialogues of the isti, which take place 
when parts of the animal are offered into the offering fire, are modified by the 
participation of the maitrāvaruņa priest. The adhvaryu starts by instructing 
the maitrāvaruņa to tell the hotā to address the deity. After the maitrāvaruņa 
has done this, the hota continues as before. The deities to whom the 
paradigm animal sacrifice is dedicated are Indra, Agni, Sūrya, or Prajāpati. 
The Pašubandha should be performed every year or every six months. 

We have now come to the Soma rituals, which presuppose and incor- 
porate all previous rituals, but add numerous and significant new features. 
As their name indicates, the Soma rituals incorporate the preparation and 
offering of the Soma juice, which is extracted from the Soma plant. In ad- 
dition, there are also two or more animal sacrifices, and numerous offerings 
and oblations of clarified butter, rice cakes, and other vegetable substances. 
The principal characteristic of the Soma rituals is a sequence of chants 
(stotra) from the Sāmaveda, sung by a chorus of three priests, and a corres- 
ponding sequence of recitations (Sastra) from the Rgveda, each rendered by 
a single priest. These chants and recitations are combined with Soma rites in 
sequences that I shall call Soma sequences, each consisting of a stotra chant, 
a astra recitation, Soma offering to the deities, and Soma drinking by the 
yajamāna and his main priests. 

The Soma ceremonies require more priests and several sacrificial 
enclosures. In these rituals, the following sixteen priests officiate: 


(Atharvaveda) 1. Brahman (also in Agnyādheya, Daršapūrņamā- 
sa, Pasubandha) 
2. Brāhmaņācchamsin 
3. Āgnīdhra or Agnīdh (also in Agnyādheya, 
Daršapūrņamāsa, Pašubandha) 
. Potā 
. Hota (also in Agnyādheya, Daršapūrņamāsa, 
Pašubandha) 


49 


л & 


(Rgveda) 


PLATE 2 
Idā 


After the hotā has invoked the goddess Īdā, the adhvaryu places 
pieces of sacrificial purodāša cakes, also called ida, in his right hand 
and in their wooden receptacle (idāpātram). They are touched by 
the yajamāna. This occurs in the middle of each isti offering. On the 
plate, the isti is the Introductory Offering (prayaniyesti) on the 
fourth day (Episode 8): the yajamāna wears the turban he has re- 
ceived during his consecration (Episode 4) and will discard during 
the purchase of Soma (Episode 8). 


50 


Part I THe AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


6. Maitrāvaruņa (also in Pašubandha) 
7. Acchāvāka 
8. Grāvastut 
(Sāmaveda) 9. Udgātā 
10. Prastotā 
11. Pratihartā 
12. Subrahmaņya 
(Yajurveda) 13. Adhvaryu (also in Agnihotra, Agnyādheya, 
Daršapūrņamāsa, PaSubandha) 
14. Pratiprasthātā 
15. Nestā 
16. Unnetā 


Finally there is one optional priest: 
17. Sadasya. 


I have added the names of the four Vedas between parentheses because the 
affiliation of the priests to them is somewhat artificial, as we have already seen 
in connection with the assignment of the brahman and the āgnīdhra to the 
Atharvaveda. In practice, there are two groups, the Sāmavedins and the others. 

In addition to the yajamāna, ten among these priests are called “cup- 
bearer" (camasin) because they have their own Soma cup (camasa). They are: 
hota, maitrāvaruņa, brāhmaņācchamsin, potā, nesta, acchāvāka, agnidhra, 
brahman, udgātā, and sadasya. Each of the cupbearers has an assistant 
(camasādhvaryu), who makes Soma oblations from the cupbearer’s cup. 
The šastra recitations are performed by the first three and the sixth cup- 
bearers, one at a time. Each of the $astra reciters has his own fire hearth, 
called dhisnya. When he recites, he sits to the west of it, facing east. The 
āgnīdhra also has a hearth, on the northern boundary of the Mahāvedi. The 
three stotra chanters have their designated places to the west of the šastra 
reciters. The three chanters face north, west, and south. 

In the Soma rituals, the ritual enclosure is extended by constructing 
inside the mahāvedi, between the new domestic altar and the new offering 
altar, two new enclosures, one for the chants and recitations, and one for the 
Soma. The first is the sadas or hall of recitation, in which all but one of the 
stotras are chanted, in which all the Sastras are recited, and where the Sastra 
reciters have their hearths. The second is the Aavirdhàna or havirdhānama- 
идара, a shed (mandapa) with two havirdhāna (“oblation-receptacle’’) or 
Soma carts, where the preparation of the Soma takes place. The ground plan 
of the resulting structure is given in Figure 4. 

There are several categories of Soma rituals, but we shall only be con- 
cerned with those that are called ekaha, ‘‘one-day.”’ They are characterized by 
the fact that the pressing or pounding of the Soma takes place three times in the 
course ofa single day. The three pressings are called morning pressing (pratah- 


52 


2. THE AGNICAYANA IN CLASSICAL VEDIC RITUAL 


N 


MAHAVEDI 


HAVIRDHANA| U=Nā(C]+e 


S 


Figure 4—Ritual Enclosures for the Soma Rituals 


OA: old āhavanīya (old offering altar) 
— NG: new gārhapatya (new domestic altar) 
U: uttaravedi 
= NA: new āhavanīya (new offering altar) 
Sadas: hall of recitation 
Havirdhāna: hall for preparation of Soma, or Soma hall 


savana), midday pressing (madhyandina-savana), and (not evening pressing 
but) third pressing (trtīya-savana). This terminology suggests what in practice 
is a fact, namely that the multitude of accompanying rites and ceremonies 
may prevent the three pressings from being completed within a single day. 

All Soma rituals, even those of the ekāha variety, last for several days 
because of numerous introductory, preparatory, and accompanying rites. 
The prototype and paradigm of these rites, the Agnistoma, lasts five days, 
the three pressings taking place on the last day or “pressing day” (sutyā). 
During this last day there is also an animal sacrifice. The rites that occur on 
earlier days include consecration (diksā) of the yajamāna, the ritual purchase 
of Soma stalks (somakrayana), the worship of Soma as a king, the consecra- 
tion of the mahāvedi and its various contents, the carrying forth of Agni 
(agnipranayana) from the old offering altar (= the new domestic altar) to 
the new offering altar, the carrying forth of Agni and Soma in similar fashion 
(agnisomapranayana); and many others. There are also optional rites. The 
most important among these is the Pravargya, a pastoral ceremony in 
which offerings of boiled goat’s and cow’s milk are made to the Ašvin twins, 
divine young men who ride the wind. When this option is selected, the 
Pravargya rite takes place in the morning and evening during the second, 


53 


Part I THe AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


third, and fourth day. It immediately precedes the Upasad rites, which take 
place at these times, and which are not optional. They are basically offerings 
and oblations of clarified butter. The Agnihotra, incidentally, should not be 
performed during these ceremonies. 

On the last day of the Agnistoma, there is a bath (avabhrtha) for the 
yajamāna, his wife, and the priests. An isti is performed in the water instead 
of in the fire. Finally the enclosure with most of its contents is set on fire and 
consumed by Agni. 

All these rites occur in all the Soma rituals. The Agnistoma is charac- 
terized by a particular distribution of Soma sequences: there are five during 
the morning service on the pressing day, five during the midday service, and 
two during the third service. The chant of the twelfth and last sequence is 
called Agnistoma, “praise of Agni,” from which the entire ceremony derives 
its name. 

There are six other ekaha Soma rituals. They can be briefly described 
as extensions of the Agnistoma. Confining myself to those differences that 
relate to Soma sequences, I shall very briefly characterize three of these 
rituals, Ukthya, Sodašin, and Atiratra (the names of the other three are given 
in Table 2). 

In the Ukthya ritual (from uktha, an old name for the Sastra recitation, 
in particular during the third service), three Soma sequences are added to 
the two Soma sequences of the third service of the Agnistoma, bringing the 
total to fifteen, equally distributed among the three services. 

In the Sodašin (“sixteenth”) ritual, which is dedicated to Indra, a six- 
teenth Soma sequence is added. It is shrouded in mystery and considered 
dangerous. 

In the Atirātra (“overnight”) ritual, three nightly rounds (rātriparyāya) 
are added, each consisting of four Soma sequences. This is followed by a 
final sequence, the twenty-ninth, which should be over before dawn. The 
last chant belonging to this sequence is called the sandhi-stotra “twilight 
chant.” The accompanying $astra, called a$vina-Sastra, is addressed to the 
Ašvin twins and consists of a thousand verses. 

We are now in a position to approach the Agnicayana. This ritual is 
always combined with a Soma ritual. In the Agnicayana, a special role is 
played by a ritual vessel, the ukhā pot, made from clay and subsequently 
fired. The main characteristic of the Agnicayana is that the offering altar 
of the uttaravedi is constructed by piling up (cayana) fired clay bricks. There 
are five layers (citi), and the resulting altar can have various shapes, the most 
well known being the shape of a bird of prey (Syena). The new domestic altar 
is square and is also made of five layers of fired bricks. The construction of 
these altars involves numerous other rites. 

When the Agnicayana is combined with the Atirātra Soma ritual, it is 
called Atirátra-Agnicayana or Sāgnicitya-Atirātra. This is the ritual that 
the Nambudiris celebrated in 1975. 


54 


Chapter 3. A BIRD'S-EYE VIEW 
OF THE AGNICAYANA 


THE BRICK OFFERING altar of the Agnicayana, often simply called “Agni,” 
assumes the function of the uttaravedi, and is therefore located inside the 
ritual enclosure, the bird facing east (see Figure 5). Since the enclosure has a 


S 


Figure 5—Ritual Enclosures for the Agnicayana 
(for details, compare Figures 1-4) 


roof that is about 15 feet high, and the span of the wings of the altar is about 
40 feet, it is difficult to obtain a bird's-eye view of the altar. This is never- 
theless what we shall try to do in the following pages. The description in this 
chapter will be based upon the classical manuals and not upon the 1975 
performance. However, when options are mentioned in the texts, I have se- 
lected the option that was adopted in 1975, or the one closest to Nambudiri 
practice. This applies in particular to the duration of the ritual and to the 
distribution of rites over particular days. In the classical manuals this dis- 
tribution is not always clear. The ceremonies described in the manuals some- 
times last much longer than in the Nambudiri tradition. Some rites may be 
extended over a year. The 1975 performance lasted for twelve days. 1 shall 
describe the ritual day by day and concentrate on the main ritual moments 
without specifying any of the recitations or innumerable subordinate rites. 


55 


Part I THe AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


FIRST DAY 


The yajamana and his priests enter the ritual enclosure, carrying the 
yajamana's three sacred fires in pots. The ukhā pot, main ritual vessel of the 
Agnicayana, is prepared from clay, along with the heads of a horse, a man, 
a bull, a ram, and a he-goat, as well as a few of the bricks that will be used 
for the piling of the altar. An animal sacrifice is performed for Vayu. The 
five chief priests (adhvaryu, brahman, hota, udgata, and sadasya) are offi- 
cially selected. Fire is produced by friction. An isti is performed for the 
consecration (diksaniyesti) and is followed by the consecration (dīksā) of the 
yajamāna. During this ceremony, the yajamāna crawls onto the skin of 
a black antelope, a turban is tied around his head, he is given a staff, and 
he closes his fists. From the consecration on the first day until the final bath 
on the twelfth day, the yajamāna should sit on the antelope skin and carry 
the staff. He should generally keep his fists closed and refrain from speaking 
(except for the prescribed recitations), from bathing, sexual intercourse, 
and certain kinds of food. The yajamāna picks up the ukhā pot, which is 
filled with fire, and takes three steps with it. He is protected by a golden 
breast plate. 


SECOND DAY 


The mahāvīra pot, main ritual vessel of the Pravargya, is prepared from 
clay. 


THIRD DAY 


A tree is cut and a sacrificial pole is made from it. To the east of the old 
enclosure, in which the three altars have already been made, the measure- 
ments of the mahāvedi and of the bird-shaped offering altar are laid out. 


FOURTH DAY 


In the place of the old offering altar, the new domestic altar is construct- 
ed from bricks. The adhvaryu consecrates each brick on behalf of the yaja- 
mana with mantras. The offering fire is installed on the domestic altar, and 
fire from the ukha pot is added to it. An introductory isti (prayaniyesti) is 
performed. Outside the enclosure, Soma stalks are purchased from a Soma 
merchant. They are measured, placed on a bullock skin, and transported 
on the Soma cart. King Soma is installed on a throne (āsandī) to the south of 
the new domestic = old offering altar, and a guest isti (ātithyesti) is perform- 
ed in his honor. All priests, excluding the chanters, and the yajamāna sprinkle 
the Soma. The subrahmanya priest recites for the first time his invitation to 
Indra, gods, and brahmins, urging them to attend the forthcoming Soma 
pressing on the sutya day. The first Pravargya and Upasad are performed. 


56 


3. A BIRD's-ĒYE VIEW OF THE AGNICAYANA 


Now the ground is prepared for constructing the offering altar. It is plowed 
and seeds are sown. Several items are buried in the ground, including a 
live tortoise, the ukhā pot, a golden image of a man (hiranmaya-purusa), 
and the five animal heads. The bricks, of various shapes and sizes, are placed 
on the ground in specific order, making up the first layer of the bird altar. A 
“naturally perforated” or “porous” brick or stone (svayamatrnna) is placed 
in the center. All bricks are consecrated by the adhvaryu on behalf of the 
yajamana. The Pravargya and Upasad follow. 


FIFTH DAY 


After the morning Pravargya and Upasad, the second layer is laid, 
followed by the evening Pravargya and Upasad. 


SIXTH DAY 


After the morning Pravargya and Upasad, the third layer is laid, with 
svayamātrņņa in the center, followed by the evening Pravargya and Upasad. 


SEVENTH DAY 


After the morning Pravargya and Upasad, the fourth layer is laid, 
followed by the evening Pravargya and Upasad. 


EIGHTH DAY 


After the morning Pravargya and Upasad, the fifth layer is laid, with 
svayamātrņnā in the center. The yajamāna wishes the bricks to turn into 
cows. A long continuous oblation of milk, sesame seed, and other sub- 
stances is made for Rudra and the Rudras on the westernmost brick of the 
northern wing of the bird. The udgata sings chants around the bird, and a 
strong man pours a continuous stream of water from a pitcher three times 
around the altar. The evening Pravargya and Upasad follow. 


NINTH DAY 


After morning and evening Pravargya and Upasad, the mahāvīra pot 
and other implements used in the Pravargya are put down on the new offering 
altar in the shape of a man. Agni is carried forth from the new domestic to 
the new offering altar and is installed in the center of the bird altar or “Agni.” 
A long, continuous oblation of clarified butter is made into the sacrificial 
fire through a large ladle (praseka). This oblation is called “flow of wealth” 
(vasor dhārā). It is followed by numerous other offerings and oblations. The 
sadas, the hall of recitation, is prepared along with its hearths. Now Agni 
and Soma are carried forth and the Agnisomiya animal sacrifice is performed. 
The subrahmanya priest, standing between the yajamāna and his wife, chants 
for the last time his invitation to the Soma pressing. 


57 


PART I THe AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


TENTH TO TWELFTH DAY 


The tenth day is the sutyā or pressing day, and from now on ceremonies 
will continue throughout the next two days and nights. After the hota’s 
morning recital (prātaranuvāka), which starts long before sunrise, the morn- 
ing pressing of Soma begins, and the first Soma oblations are offered. The 
prastotā and pratihartā chanters join adhvaryu, pratiprasthātā, udgata, 
brahman, and yajamāna, and all crawl in snakelike procession (sarpaņam) 
onto the altar, where they make an oblation into the offering fire. They then 
move to a place to the north of the altar, the āstāva, where the three chanters 
sing their first chant, “the outdoor chant for the purified Soma" (bahispa- 
vamāna-stotra). Numerous rites are performed, many simultaneously, 
overlapping and/or temporarily interrupted by others. Fires are installed on 
the hearths in the sadas. Eleven animals are sacrificed for Agni, Sarasvati, 
Soma, Pūsan, Brhaspati, the Visvedevas, Indra, the Maruts, Indra-Agni, 
Savitā, and Varuna. 

All priests, except the Acchāvāka, enter the sadas where the Soma juice 
is drunk. Soma offerings are made. The acchavaka priest enters, and the 
hota recites his first Sastra recitation. The first Soma sequence over, four 
others are executed, each consisting of a stotra chant, a Sastra recitation, 
Soma offering, and Soma drinking. From now on, all chants and recitations 
take place in the sadas. Soma offerings are made into the offering fire, and 
Soma is drunk in the sadas. 

At the midday pressing, the grāvastut priest enters and recites, blind- 
folded with cloth in which the Soma was wrapped, Rgveda verses in praise 
of the pressing stones (grāvan). Five Soma sequences are gone through. Then 
the priests are offered daksina, and the yajamāna is anointed (abhiseka) as 
in royal consecration. 

After the third pressing, the remaining fourteen Soma sequences of the 
Atiratra are gone through. This takes up all of the eleventh day and night 
and is completed by dawn on the twelfth day. On this last day, the unnetā 
priest makes two copious Soma offerings for Indra. Ancestral and expiation 
rites are performed. The yajamāna, his wife, and the priests take the ava- 
bhrtha bath, a concluding isti (udayaniyesti) is performed, and a final goat is 
sacrificed for Mitra-Varuņa. The yajamāna returns home with his wife and 
the three fires, and he installs the fires on his altars so as to perform the even- 
ing and morning Agnihotra for the rest of his life as a householder. 


58 


Chapter 4. TRADITIONAL INTERPRETATIONS 
OF THE AGNICAYANA 


A COMMON BUT naive assumption about ritual is that ritual activities 
are always symbolic activities that refer to something else. This assumption 
is born from the observation that ritual is not always clearly functional or, 
in simple terms, that it often does not seem to make any sense. The difference, 
for example, between putting on clothes and tying a dhoti or buttoning a 
waistcoat in a special manner is a difference between a clearly functional 
activity and more or less ritual activities. While the ritualistic and obsessive 
attention to clothes is secular, it acquires mysterious significance as soon as 
religious overtones are added. When the adhvaryu spins around once before 
making a certain oblation, this is expected to have special significance. Yet 
it may be meaningless on any particular occasion. Such meaninglessness does 
not imply that rites have never had any meaning, do not have a cause, or do 
not possess significance in a wider context. But the cause need no longer be 
operative when the ritual is performed, and the original significance may be 
lost. This situation is similar to that in the realm of the etymology of words. 
Every word has an etymology, but it does not follow that the etymology is 
part of the meaning or function of the word. Moreover, words are often used 
without conveying any meaning. 

The problem of the ritual act (karman) and its interpretation in terms 
of knowledge (jitāna, vidya) has a long history in Indian religion and phi- 
losophy. In the classical ideal of the ritual texts, the two are closely connected. 
Šatapatha Brāhmaņa 10.4.3.9, for example, says, with regard to the Agni- 
cayana, ““This fire altar is knowledge (vidya) and this fire altar is act (kar- 
man)” (cf., Heesterman 1964, 22, note 40). In the Upanisads, karman and 
vidya or jñāna are clearly distinguished. The main purport of the Upanisadic 
teachings is that karman by itself is ineffectual, and that jfiana or vidya is all 
that counts. Accordingly, the Brahmanas and Upanisads are contrasted as 
karmakanda, “the part of Sruti that relates to ritual," and jūānakāņda, “the 
part of &ruti that relates to knowledge," respectively. This contrast continues 
to play an important role in Indian philosophy. The Mīmāmsā, for example, 
emphasizes ritual activity in conformity with the Srauta Sütras (which de- 
scribe it) and the Brahmanas (which interpret it), just as the Vedanta em- 
phasizes knowledge in conformity with the Upanisads. 

In asking for interpretations of the Agnicayana, we should be clear about 
whose interpretations we are seeking. I shall distinguish between interpreta- 
tions by the present-day performers, traditional interpretations as offered in 
the classical texts, and modern interpretations by scholars who look for 
origins and significance in terms of history, society, religion, philosophy, or 
in similar perspectives. The present chapter deals with the first two kinds of 


59 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


interpretation, with special emphasis on the traditional interpretations found 
in the classical texts. The next chapter, Chapter 5, will be concerned with 
modern interpretations. 

The present-day performers, when engaged in ritual, are totally immersed 
in the proper execution of their complex tasks. They concentrate on correct- 
ness of recitation and of act. There are no symbolic meanings going through 
their minds when they are engaged in performing ritual. But even when not 
actually engaged in the performance of a ritual, they do not feel that the ritual 
stands in need of a special interpretation. Like the reciters of the Veda, they 
are not concerned with meaning. They are interested in ritual meaning, or 
viniyoga, viz., in knowing what recitations and what acts should be com- 
bined when and where. Beyond this, there is a sense of occasion that ex- 
presses the general social, religious, and cultural function of the performance, 
cements the community of performers more closely together, and confers a 
degree of status and prestige on its members. There is also awareness of the 
discharge of a responsibility to the ancestors, who have preserved the ritual 
through their past performance. For an eligible brahmin to break the chain 
of transmission would result in a feeling of failure if not of guilt. Further- 
more, there are, or rather there used to be, economic incentives (to which I 
shall return in Chapter 6, with special reference to the Nambudiri com- 
munity). In short, for the performers, the meaning of the ritual lies in its 
celebration, which strengthens the present position of the community, its 
ties with the past, and its promise for the future. Finally, there are those 
special ritual qualities that induce people all over the world to immerse 
themselves in the correct execution of ritual in the appropriate place and at 
the appropriate time, and in such a manner as to derive satisfaction from it. 
Like the child in its playpen, man feels secure and enjoys being in the separate 
world of his sacrificial enclosure. But this is not the place to elucidate these 
qualities, which await analysis in a general theory of ritual. 

Just as in the case of the Vedic recitations, there is a simple reason for 
treating rituals in modern times as almost meaningless: their original 
meaning has long been lost, and their religious, social, and economic func- 
tion in Hindu society is no longer what it used to be during the Vedic period. 
Moreover, an interpretation of Vedic ritual in terms of contemporary 
Hinduism is not easy. Though the performers are practicing Hindus, Vedic 
ritual has no close links with the Hinduism that developed in post-Vedic 
times, e.g., worship of images of deities, temples, pilgrimages, ascetic prac- 
tices. Present-day performances show at most that Hindu practices and the 
Vedic heritage can coexist (see the Preface to Volume II). Thus, during the 1975 
performance, some of the Nambudiri priests started their daily office with a 
simple act of worship in front of a lamp, placed inside the sacrificial enclo- 
sure. This is a prominent feature of Hinduism in Kerala. It is also Nam- 
budiri custom not to enter upon the performance of a Vedic ritual without 
first making offerings in temples to Hindu deities such as Daksiņāmūrti and 


60 


4. TRADITIONAL INTERPRETATIONS 


Ganapati. The Vedic brahmins in Tanjore District (Tamilnad) have gone one 
step further in regarding Vedic ritual as the worship of a deity called Yajüe- 
буага, “God of Ritual.” Before the performance of an Atyagnistoma (опе 
of the seven varieties of Soma rituals), which took place in Tanjore District 
in 1962, a printed announcement was distributed inviting the orthodox to 
witness the ritual and obtain the blessings (prasada) of Sri Yajūešvara. Thus 
the ritual is incorporated into the structure of Hinduism. Similarly, villagers 
who came to see the Nambudiri performance of 1975 wished to make a cir- 
cumambulation and offerings to receive the blessings and to obtain darsan, “а 
glimpse," of the presiding deity.! 

The aura of mystery. that pervades ritual is often due to the fact that its 
meaning is not known, or is no longer known. This leads in turn to postulat- 
ing a mystical knowledge that unravels the mystery by finding access to its 
essence. Such attitudes can be traced back at least as far as the Brahmanas, 
which frequently assert that he “who knows thus” (ya evam veda), or who, 
“knowing thus” (evam vidvan), performs rites, shall obtain results (cf. 
Edgerton 1929, 99). This suggests that there were brahmins who did not 
know thus. It also paved the way for the Upanisads, which sought to provide 
this special kind of secret knowledge. 

At least one ancient ritualist, Kautsa—first mentioned in the Nirukta (a 
work on etymology of approximately the sixth century B.C.)—took the bull 
by the horns and declared the mantras meaningless. This should not be inter- 
preted in terms of scepticism, positivism, or behaviorism. It is a purely ritu- 
alistic move that limits the function of mantras to their ritual use. In order 
to understand Kautsa’s position one should visualize an actual ritual per- 
formance. When the blindfolded gravastut priest recites his Rgveda verses at 
the midday pressing, he is, in fact—and as his name indicates—addressing 
the pressing stones. But how, asked Kautsa, can a person in his right mind 
address inanimate objects? In point of fact, mantras do not merely address 
stones and herbs; they also refer to things that do not exist (e.g., a being with 
four horns, three feet, two heads, and seven hands); they are redundant and 
self-contradictory (e.g., one mantra asserts: “There is only one Rudra, there 
never was a second”, and another refers to “the innumerable thousands of 
Rudras”); and lastly there is a tradition for mantras to be learned by heart, 
but there is no corresponding teaching of their meaning. 

Kautsa concluded from these observations that mantras are meaningless 
(anarthaka mantrah) and are only meant to be recited (see, e.g., Mimamsa 
Sūtra 1.2.4.34—38). Though Kautsa’s views were criticized in the Nirukta, in 
the philosophical system of the Mīmāmsā, and elsewhere, they are not so 
very different from the perspective of orthodox Hinduism. The philosopher 
Sankara, for example, approvingly quotes a Brahmana text that declares: 
"he who teaches a mantra or officiates at a ritual with mantras without 


1 A fact that was grossly misunderstood by an American anthropologist. See Paul 1978, 
Staal 1979b and Volume II, page 474. 


61 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


knowing the composer-seer (rsi), the meter, the deity, and the brahmana, 
will run his head against a pole or fall into a pit” (Vedanta Sūtra Bhasya 
1.3.30). It is to be noted that knowledge of meaning is not required here. 
All that is demanded are certain formal data that are transmitted together 
with the recitations. The brahmana itself, which provides the traditional 
interpretation and viniyoga, is merely another recited text. Kane, who quotes 
this passage from Sankara, arrives at a view that is not inconsistent with it: 

“It appears that from ancient times the Veda was only committed to memory 
and most men learned in the Veda never cared to know its meaning” (Kane 
1941, II, 358). 

The Vedic tradition is therefore, in theory and practice, consistent with 
the popular view that ritual is magic and that mantras are mysterious gib- 
berish: J/ s'est ainsi accrédité l'idée d'un lien entre le mantra védique et la 
magie, et dans l'usage populaire le mantra, quelle qu'en soit l'origine, est avant 
tout un abracadabra (Renou 1960, 21). It is useful to bear this in mind when 
engaging upon the study of mantras as aids to meditation (dhiyalamba), one 
of their primary functions in later times, e.g., in Tantrism (cf. Staal 1975, 
s.v. Manrta). 

While the idea that mantras and rituals are meaningless expresses an 
important feature of ritual, its explicit formulation has always been rare. 
This is as it should be, for it would be misleading to conclude that there is 
no point in performing ritual. Ritual has significance, but its significance is 
generally quite different from what it is said to be. This will become more 
apparent in the next chapter, but it is visible even in the ritual interpretations 
of the classical texts. The $rauta sütras are not part of this tradition. As we 
have seen, they do not interpret the ritual. They presuppose its interpretation 
and confine themselves to its description. In later times this trend continues 
in the Mīmāmsā, which is concerned with ritual primarily in terms of a sys- 
tem of duties (dharma), classified as obligatory and optional (see Subrahma- 
nya Sastri on Agnicayana in the Mimamsa, in Part III, pages 177-192). 

The Vedic works that are primarily concerned with ritual interpretation 
are the Brahmanas, the Aranyakas, and the early Upanisads. The authors of 
these works were probably more scholars than performers, though it is obvi- 
ous that, in most cases, they had a thorough knowledge of ritual practice. 
The rituals themselves had become increasingly complex. This kept the per- 
formers busy and provided plenty of material for ritualists with a speculative 
bent of mind. It led to a great variety of imaginative intrepretations, and it 
is not surprising that the Upanisads, the last link in this chain of interpreta- 
tion, are also the beginnings of Indian philosophy. 

The realm of ritual interpretation and speculation is a labyrinth, and if 
we do not want to get lost, we shall have to follow a thread. I shall therefore, 
from now on, become more specific and confine myself to interpretations 
of the Agnicayana. It will be helpful to review briefly the relevant texts. In 
the Rgveda, the Agnicayana is not mentioned. By the time of the Yajurveda, 


62 


4. TRADITIONAL INTERPRETATIONS 


at most a few centuries later, it has become the most inclusive of all rituals. 

The Taittiriya Samhita devotes approximately two of its seven kāņģas to it, 

and the Vajasaneyi Samhita eight adhyayas out of forty. The mantra section 
of the Taittiriya Samhita, which deals with the Agnicayana (kanda 4 and 
some sections of kanda 5), contains most of the mantras that are recited during 
its performance in the Taittiriya tradition. The corresponding brahmana 
sections (most of kāņda 5) offer observations on the meaning of the mantras 
and of ritual activities that accompany the mantras. Since these are the 
earliest traditional interpretations of episodes of the Agnicayana, I shall 
illustrate them with two simple examples. 

When the ukhā pot is made, it is addressed with the mantra: "You are 
the head of Makha" (Taittiriya Samhita 4.1.5. 31). The corresponding brah- 
mana explains this by informing us that Makha is the ritual, and the ukha 
pot its head (Taittiriya Samhita 5.1.6.10). Similarly, during the preparation 
of the ukhā pot, breast-shaped protuberances are made around its periphery. 
The brahmana (Taittiriya Samhita 5.1.6.17-19) explains their number: two 
breasts are to give milk to sky and earth; four breasts to give milk to cattle; 
and eight breasts to give milk to the meters (of which there are eight kinds). 

Most interpretations found in the brāhmaņa sections of the Taittiriya 
Samhita are of this kind. They are piecemeal, ad hoc, and not very illumi- 
nating. One looks in vain for an interpretation in a broader context or of 
larger units, or for an explanation of their structure and interrelationships. 
Such interpretations are sometimes given in the Brahmanas, and particularly 
in the Šatapatha Brahmana. This work is attributed to a sage, Yajfiavalkya, 
who is often mentioned in its first five kāņdas, and again in the later kāņdas. 
The intervening kāņdas—6 through 10, which seem to be of later date (see 
below, page 98), and which constitute more than one third of the work— 
are attributed to another sage, Sandilya. These kandas deal with the inter- 
pretation of the Agnicayana. The tenth kanda is called Agnirahasya, “the 
secret of Agni, ” i.e., the secret of the Agnicayana according to Sandilya. 
This has, in some respects, the character of an Upanisad, which is in turn 
consistent with the fact that a traditional interpretation of the term upanisad 
is rahasya, "secret (teaching).” 

The Satapatha Brahmana is of later date than the Taittiriya Samhita 
and belongs to a different branch of the Yajurveda. There is no guarantee, 
therefore, that its interpretation is also implicit in the Taittiriya Samhita. 
Keith (1914, cxxv-cxxxi) has attempted to distinguish between the Agni- 
cayana doctrines of the two texts, but such an attempt is bound to remain 
speculative because of their difference in character, and also because the 
Taittiriya Samhita does not offer any explicit doctrine. However, given the 
ready availability of Keith’s translation of the Taittiriya Samhita (first pub- 
lished in 1914 and reprinted in 1967) and the importance of this text for the 
Agnicayana, a word of caution is in order. 

In Keith's translation, many portions of the Taittiriya Samhita (mantra 


63 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


as well as brahmana sections) read like the babblings of a child or the ravings 
of a madman. This impression is strengthened by Keith’s treatment of the 
text as if it were precisely that. Keith’s introduction and notes, though 
exceedingly useful, also abound in remarks such as, “the aridity of constant 
quibbles and meaningless explanations is relieved only by occasional, and 
always very brief, references to real life" (clviii). One wonders why so much 
effort was spent on such a thankless task by the tireless Sanskritist and 
"eminent authority on the British Commonwealth and Indian constitutions” 
(as Nehru called Keith in Chapter VIII of The Discovery of India). 

In point of fact, the character of Keith’s translation is partly due not 
merely to peculiarities of his archaic style but also to mistakes. This was 
demonstrated by Caland in a review that appeared in 1924, and concluded: 
"From all that has been said it is clear that this translation of the Taittirīya 
Samhita can only be used with extreme criticism” (Aus all dem Gesagten geht 
hervor, dass diese Übersetzung der Taittirtyasamhita nur mit der schürfsten 
Kritik zu benutzen ist: Caland 1924, 31). I shall give five examples of Keith’s 
erroneous interpretations, translating from Caland’s German text. 

According to Keith, TS 2.6.2.4 means: “Тһе ox feeds with the first half, 
the cow feeds with the second half.” Caland translates: “Тһе use of the ox 
lies in its front half (which pulls carts), the use of the cow in its back half 
(which yields milk).” Similarly, TS 2.5.7.3: “Seed is deposited in front, 
offspring are born at the back” (Keith), versus ‘Seed is deposited in the 
forward direction, children are born in the reverse direction” (Caland). TS 
5.4.7.6: “From the half filled Prajāpati created the creatures" (Keith), vs. 
"from the empty (womb) Prajāpati created the creatures” (Caland). TS 
6.5.6.4: “Therefore the raw milks the cooked” (Keith), vs. ““Therefore the raw 
(material, viz., the cow) yields the matured (viz., milk)” (Caland). TS 6.5.6.5: 
"From that which is not depressed offspring are produced (Keith), vs. “From 
the erected (penis) children are born” (Caland). No wonder that Keith— 
deploring the absence of “‘references to real life," but himself unable to re- 
cognize even the basic facts of life—comes up with statements like: “Тһе 
Taittiriya cannot be credited with any intelligible theory of the nature of the 
supreme deity. . . . On the other hand the Satapatha shows a really deve- 
loped theory of the nature of mind. . . ." (Introduction cxxix). 

As a matter of fact, the intelligibility of the Satapatha Brahmana 
doctrine of the Agnicayana is largely due to Eggeling, who translated the 
text of this Bráhmana in the Sacred Books of the East Series (1882-1900, 
reprinted 1963, second edition 1966), and who summarized its interpretation 
of the Agnicayana in the Introduction to his fourth volume (1897, xiii-xxvii). 
Eggeling's outlook was hardly more favorable than Keith's. Speaking of the 
Brahmanas in general, he says: “For wearisome prolixity of exposition, 
characterized by dogmatic assertion and a flimsy symbolism rather than by 
serious reasoning, these works are perhaps not equalled anywhere" (I, ix). 
And yet, Eggeling made a lot of sense of it. Gonda (1960, 191, note 16 = 1965, 


64 


4. TRADITIONAL INTERPRETATIONS 


17-18, note 36) sums up a lengthy scholarly controversy by pointing out that 
Oldenberg’s criticism of Eggeling’s basically intelligible views has for a long 
time, and in spite of Keith, prevented an adequate interpretation of the 
Agnicayana. I shall be guided by Eggeling in the following sketch of Sa- 
ndilya’s interpretation of the Agnicayana. . 

According to Sandilya’s teaching in the Satapatha Brahmana, the con- 
struction of the Agnicayana altar is essentially the restoration of Prajapati, 
the creator god, who created the world through self-sacrifice, viz., through 
his own dismemberment. Since Prajāpati became the universe, his restoration 
is at the same time the restoration of the universe. Thus, piling up the altar 
means putting the world together again. Just as Prajāpati was the original 
sacrificer, Agni is the divine sacrificer, and the yajamāna is the human 
sacrificer. The designation of the fire altar as Agni indicates the identity of 
Agni and Prajāpati. Agni, Prajāpati, and the yajamāna are all identified with 
each other, with the offering altar, and with the fire installed on it. The ukha 
pot also represents the fire altar: it is made when the bricks are made, and fire 
is carried in it by the yajamāna, just as fire is installed on the offering altar. 

Prajāpati is also identified with the man (purusa) in the sun, which is 
also both the man in the (right) eye and the golden man (hiranmayapurusa) 
buried under the first layer, who represents Agni-Prajāpati and the yajamāna. 
Above this golden man are the “naturally perforated” (svayamātrņņā) 
pebbles, in the first, third, and fifth layers, which enable him to breathe, and 
which represent the three worlds (earth, air, and sky) through which he will 
have to pass on his way to the fourth, invisible world of immortality. All the 
bricks of the altar are animated by Prajāpati putting breath in them. Thus 
the bird comes to life, and with the restoration of Agni-Prajāpati, the yaja- 
mana gains immortality. 

The Brahmana proceeds with more identifications, following the doc- 
trines of Šāņdilya. Prajāpati is the sacrifice and food of the gods; Soma is the 
supreme oblation; hence Prajāpati is Soma. Soma was brought from heaven 
by a bird of prey ($yena). Accordingly, Prajāpati and Purusa, both generally 
conceived of in the shape of a man, also assume the shape of a bird. This 
is further explained by the doctrine of the original seven seers (rsi), identified 
with the “упа! airs" (prana), i.e., with life, each in the shape of a purusa. 
These seven purusas were combined into one Purusa, which is Prajāpati 
and has the shape of a bird. These seven-and-a-half constituents are clearly 
visible in one form of the fire altar (Figure 6, after Eggeling 1894, III, 419.)! 
Each of these seven areas is called purusa, a term that acquires geometrical 
meaning in the context of altar construction (see Seidenberg in Part П, pages 
95-126). The four squares in the middle are together called ātman, “Бойу” 


! The dotted lines in the wings and tail were probably put in by Eggeling, interpreting 
Satapatha Brāhmaņa 10.2.1.1-8. But this text might refer to the bend in the wings we 
find in the Sulva sütras (see, e.g., Figure 7; A. Seidenberg, personal communication). 


65 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


Left 
shoulder 


-------- S 


pe 


Us ые се сые еы ү 


Figure 6—Fire Altar of the Agnicayana 


The seven-and-a-half purusa squares 
according to the Satapatha Brahmana 
(after Eggeling) 


ENT VY 


m 
NV 
V 

ee 


2 


VA 
BN 


= 


Figure 7—Bird-Shaped Fire Altar of the Agnicayana 


The largest square within the altar 
is its ātman, “оду”, or “self.” 


66 


4. TRADITIONAL INTERPRETATIONS 


or “self.” The term also refers to the largest square within the bird-shaped 
form of the fire altar, the shaded area in Figure 7. 

The identifications that Šāņdilya presents to us may baffle us, but— 
pace Eggeling and Keith—they are not any more meaningless, dogmatic, 
or flimsy than the constructions found in other religious traditions that 
conceive of a deity in different forms. Moreover, these theological constructs 
are not entirely arbitrary. There are rules to the game, and their presumed 
neglect may lead to differences of opinion and interpretation. The Satapatha 
Brāhmaņa, for example, mentions ancient authorities who adhered to the 
view that the altar has the shape of a bird in order to carry the yajamāna to 
heaven. Sandilya disagreed with this and insisted on a more roundabout 
interpretation: the vital airs became Prajāpati by assuming the shape of a 
bird; by assuming that form, Prajapati created the gods; by assuming that 
form, the gods became immortal; “апа what thereby the vital airs, and 
Prajāpati, and the gods became, that indeed he (the yajamāna) thereby be- 
comes” (Satapatha Brahmana 6.1.2.36). 

Prajapati has many other forms. One of his animal manifestations is 
the tortoise, which represents juice (rasa; cf. below page 121). When the tor- 
toise is buried under the altar, juice is bestowed on Agni, and rain and 
fertility are induced. But Prajāpati also possesses abstract features. He is 
time, and is in particular identified with the year. Hence the Agnicayana 
takes a year to complete. After the yajamāna has generated Agni in the womb 
of the ukhā pot, he carries him around for a year before he is born on the 
sacrificial altar. The yajamāna himself is also in the womb (he closes his 
fists like an embryo), and the domestic altar is a womb. The sand strewn 
on it is the seed of Agni Vaišvānara, “Agni common to all men." When 
carrying Agni from the domestic to the offering altar, the yajamāna enters 
the world of the gods, is reborn in heaven, and gains immortality. 

These interpretations take us from the Agnicayana to the Soma rituals, 
and illustrate the embedding of the former in the latter. In the Soma rituals, 
the original enclosure with its three fires represents the world of men, and the 
mahāvedi, newly constructed to its east, is the world of the gods. All principal 
$rauta rituals are provided with such interpretations in the Satapatha Brah- 
mana and the other Brahmanas, though none with anything as sweeping as 
Sandilya’s metaphysics of the Agnicayana. It would take us too far to even 
sketch some of these intrepretations of other $rauta rituals. Let me only 
mention that the stotra chants and šastra recitations of the Soma rituals are 
regarded as the weapons of Prajāpati (the word $astra is a homonym which 
may be derived from Sams-, “recite” or from Sas-, “сш down”). According 
to the Jaiminiya Brahmana (2.69, quoted in Gonda 1960, 196) Prajapati 
himself became immortal only after he understood the mystical connection 
between the stotra chants and $astra recitations. 

Though many of the interpretations of the Agnicayana found in the 
Brahmanas, and especially in the Satapatha, are obvious rationalizations, 


67 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


they continue to inspire scholars (e.g., Silburn 1955, 64-71; Malamoud 
1975). In India, they were further developed in the Upanisads. As Ikari has 
shown, the five layers of the altar are connected with the five “‘sheaths” of 
the soul in the psychology of the Taittiriya Upanisad (Ikari, personal com- 
munication). Sandilya’s doctrines were destined to have a great future in the 
Upanisads and the Vedanta. The yajamana's identity with Prajāpati and with 
the fire altar, the center of which is called its “Роду” or “‘self”’ (ātman: see 
Figure 7), was generalized into the identity of ātman and brahman in every 
human being, which is one of the cornerstones of Indian philosophy. A sage 
called Sandilya, possibly the same Sandilya discussed above, makes a brief 
appearance in the Chandogya Upanisad (3.14) to proclaim the identity of 
atman and brahman, and to give a characterization of brahman in positive 
terms, which contrasts with its negative characterization by Yājiavalkya 
in other Upanisads. In these contexts there is no longer mention of the 
Agnicayana, but the Agnicayana is still the background against which 
Sandilya formulates his doctrine toward the end of the Agnirahasya (Sata- 
patha Brahmana 10.6.3.1—2, in Eggeling's translation): 


1. Let him meditate upon the ‘true Brahman.’ Now, man here, 
indeed, is possessed of understanding, and according to how great 
his understanding is when he departs this world, so does he, on 
passing away, enter yonder world. 

2. Let him meditate on the Self, which is made up of intelligence, 
and endowed with a body of spirit, with a form of light, and with an 
ethereal nature, which changes its shape at will, is swift as thought, 
of true resolve, and true purpose, which consists of all sweet odours 
and tastes, which holds sway over all the regions and pervades this 
whole universe, which is speechless and indifferent;—even as a 
grain of rice, or a grain of barley, or a grain of millet, or the smallest 
‘granule of millet, so is this golden Purusa in the heart; even as a 
smokeless light, it is greater than the sky, greater than the ether, 
greater than the earth, greater than all existing things;—that self of 
the spirit is my self: on passing away from hence I shall obtain that 
self. Verily, whosoever has this trust, for him there is no uncertainty. 
Thus spoke Sandilya, and so it is. 


Later Upanisads carry these ideas further, and the Agnicayana is still 
referred to occasionally. The Maitrayaniya Upanisad of the Black Yajurveda 
opens with the statement: “Тһе piling (of the fire altar) by the ancients is 
a brahman-ritual; therefore the yajamāna, having piled these fires, should 
contemplate the self (ātman)” (brahmayajfio và esa yat pürvesam cayanam 
tasmad yajamanaás citvaitan agnin ātmānam abhidhyāyet). Van Buitenen, who 
has provided an ingenious analysis of the composite character of this Upa- 
nisad, translates the first line as: “Тһе laying of the fire by the ancient (sic) 


68 


4. TRADITIONAL INTERPRETATIONS 


was a brahman-sacrifice" (Van Buitenen 1962, 37, 123). According to him 
(37; cf. 14, note 3), "the cayana is as the context in 6.33 ff. and the plural 
agnin etan (‘these fires’) show not the great Agnicayana ritual but the Agnya- 
dhana, to which much of the Agnicayana symbolism is transferred.” But 
cayana, “piling up,” in the context of altars, is always used for brick altars, 
and the term agni frequently refers to the fire altar of the Agnicayana and 
not to the Agnyādhāna or Agnyadheya. The plural agnin, “fires,” may denote 
many Agnicayanas, but it is also consistent with one Agnicayana, for, as 
we have seen, the ritual is always combined with a Soma ritual, and involves 
several altars, of which two are piled up from bricks. Moreover, if the reference 
were to anything else than the Agnicayana, it would be necessary to assume 
that not only the symbolism of the Agnicayana but also its bricks and many 
other specific characteristics were transferred. When substance and meaning 
are both transferred to something else, we had better abandon the hy- 
pothesis of transference itself and accept the fact that it is the Agnicayana that 
is referred to. The substance of the Agnicayana, in addition to its symbolism, 
is clearly referred to in Maitrāyaņīya Upanisad 6.33, which van Buitenen 
translates as follows: 


This fire, made of five bricks, is the Year. Its bricks are spring, 
summer, rains, autumn, winter. It has a head, two wings, a back and 
a tail: (thus) this fire is like a man. This earth is Prajapati’s first 
laying. Having thrown up the yajamāna with its hands, it proffered 
him to Wind. 

Wind equals Prana. This fire is prana. Its bricks are prana, vyāna, 
apāna, samāna, udāna. It has a head, two wings, a back and a tail. 
(Thus) this fire is like a man. The atmosphere is Prajapati's second 
laying. Having thrown up the yajamāna with its hands, it proferred 
him to Indra. 

Indra is yonder sun. This fire is the sun. Its bricks are Rc, Yajus, 
Sāman, the Atharvangirasas, the epic and purāņa. It has a head, two 
wings, a back and a tail. (Thus) this fire is like a man. This sky is 
Prajapati’s third laying. With its hands it makes an offering of the 
yajamāna to the ātman-knower. The ātman-knower, having thrown 
him up, proffered him to the Brahman. There he becomes blissful, 
joyful. 

(van Buitenen 1962, 148) 


This passage abounds in references to the Agnicayana that do not fit 
any other ritual. Agni “made of bricks" is not fire, but the fire altar. Apart 
from bricks (istakā), there is mention of citi, which means “‘layer,” not 
“laying.” The five bricks stand for the five layers of the altar, and the three 
citis of Prajapati are the first, the third, and the fifth layer, which are iden- 
tified with the three worlds. All the other identifications are well known 


69 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


correspondences with which we are familiar from the Satapatha Brahmana 
and elsewhere. If a single proof were needed that this Agni is the fire altar 
of the Agnicayana, the information that it has “а head, two wings, a back, 
and a tail” should be sufficient. The fire altar occurs also in other Upanisads 
of the Black Yajurveda. Harold Arnold has drawn my attention to the second 
valli of the Taittiriyopanisad, where we find a person (purusa) with two 
wings and a tail. 

According to Bodewitz (1973, 278-283, 322), Maitrayaniya Upanisad 
1.1 and 6.33 do not refer to the “actual” Agnicayana or Agnyādhāna but to 
the Prāņāgnihotra and/or to Agnicayana speculations, or the “mental” 
Agnicayana. I shall leave the Prāņāgnihotra aside. Since it is the special topic 
of the second part of Bodewitz’ book, the author is predisposed to see it 
everywhere. However, the reference to the Agnicayana is not very clear. 
According to Bodewitz (278), “the actual piling of the fire does not seem to 
form the aim of this upanisad. It was the symbolism of the fire altar and the 
speculations vaguely connected with it (as e.g., found in SB) which interested 
the author of the text." But this goes without saying. The actual performance 
of &rauta ritual is always dealt with only in the Srauta sütras. Interpretations 
and speculations are taken up in brahmanas and upanisads. This does not 
imply that such interpretations do not refer to "actual" ritual activities, 
but that they do so indirectly since they presuppose such activities. 

If it is true that in these passages of the Maitrayaniya Upanisad, Agni 
refers to the Agnicayana, this has further implications for the interpretation 
of this Upanisad, and casts doubt on some parts of van Buitenen's analysis. 
According to van Buitenen, Maitrayaniya Upanisad 1.2-5.2 existed originally 
as a separate text that was later incorporated into another text, the result 
being the Maitrayaniya Upanisad as we know it. The inserted portion con- 
sists essentially of two parts: the Brhadratha Instruction, which is “obviously 
Buddhistic in tone" (van Buitenen 1962, 78), and the Valakhilya Instruction, 
*of proto-Sàmkhyan provenance" (80). According to van Buitenen, neither 
of these fits naturally into the framework of what he has called the Vulgate. 

While this may be true of the Brhadratha Instruction, it is much less 
clear in the case of the Valakhilya Instruction. This portion of the text 
(2.3-3.2, omitting what van Buitenen regards as still later interpolations) 
starts with Prajāpati being asked to explain brahman-knowledge (brahma- 
vidya). More specifically, he is asked to explain why this body (Sarira), which 
is without intelligence, is furnished with a foundation (pratisthapita), acquires 
intelligence (cetanā), and finally, who sets it into motion (pracodayitā). Pra- 
jüpati's basic answer is that it is he, Prajāpati, seeing everything (visvaksa), 
who as Purusa enters into each body: “This intelligent being furnishes a 
foundation to the body, so that it has intelligence, and he sets the body in 
motion" (2.4) 

Next, Prajāpati's creation is described in more detail. Prajapati created 
many beings, but saw that they remained unconscious like stones and 


TO 


4. TRADITIONAL ĪNTERPRETATIONS 


without breath like tree trunks. Thereupon, having made himself as the 
wind, he entered them. He did not enter as one. He divided himself into five. 
These five are further specified in what van Buitenen regards as a later in- 
sertion: they are the five breaths, prāņa, apāna, samāna, udāna, and vyāna. 
Finally this Prajāpati, who has entered the body, is declared to be ātman, 
and when he is in the body, he is called bhatatman, “the incarnate self.” 

Though some of these formulations sound more recent, the doctrine of 
the Vālakhilya section taken as a whole is similar to traditional speculations 
about Prajāpati in the Agnicayana. Let me illustrate this with the help of 
references to the Satapatha Brahmana. Prajāpati is mortal and immortal: 
his body (Sarira) is mortal and his breaths (pranah) are immortal (10.1.4.1). 
His five breaths—prāņa, apāna, vyāna, udana, and samāna—are the five 
layers of the altar (10.1.4.2-6). Thereby these parts of him become immortal. 

Elsewhere it is said that the breaths departed from Prajāpati after he 
had created. Hence some of the bricks are called prāņabhrt, supporters of 
breath” (8.1.1.3). Specific bricks, thus animated, are further identified with 
the five breaths (8.1.3.6). When Prajāpati wants to become everything, he 
becomes breath, in particular that breath which blows here, viz., the wind, 
which manifests his sight (drsti) (11.1.6.17). The breath that went out of him 
is the wind (7.1.2.5; similarly 6.2.2.11, 8.3.4.11 and 15), In 6.3.1.12, Prajāpati 
is supplied as the subject for the Vajasaneyi Samhita 11.1: “Harnessing first 
the mind (manas)." Prajapati is also the meter of the mind (8.5.2.3). Without 
Prajāpati there is no firm foundation; he is the foundation (pratisthā) (7.1.2.1- 
2). Lastly, for the connections with ātman and brahman and their intelligence 
aspects, I need merely refer to 10.6.3.1-2 from the Agnirahasya, already 
quoted (above, page 68). 

Some of these similarities are not literal and verbal, which might dis- 
please a philologist. However, notwithstanding the demands of lower and 
higher textual criticism (van Buitenen, 14), one should be allowed to do some 
thinking. I am not interested in trying to show that any parts of the Satapatha 
Brahmana are also constituents of the text of the Maitrayaniya Upanisad. 
What is clear from these similarities, however, is that the Valakhilya Instruc- 
tion, in spite of apparent proto-Sāmkhyan features, fits quite naturally in a 
treatise on the brahman-ritual of the Agnicayana. Just as Maitrayaniya 
Upanisad 1.1 and 6.33, the Valakhilya Instruction exhibits features that 
belong to the complex of traditional interpretations of the Agnicayana. 
Therefore, different parts of the Maitrayaniya Upanisad fit together much 
better than van Buitenen has made us believe. And finally, the plurality of 
animated bricks is just as undeniable as the plurality of animated bodies, 
so why could the pluralistic philosophy of the Samkhya not be directly 
grafted upon the bricks of the fire altar? 

If van Buitenen has gone too far in his dissecting activity, the blame 
should not primarily go to him but to his uncritical acceptance of philology, 
and to philology itself. He unhesitatingly accepts its credo: “From the point 


71 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


of view of style and composition the Valakhilya Story constitutes a separate 
and independent text. It is prima facie evident that whenever two instructions 
by different persons in different circumstances are found together in one text, 
at least one of them, and probably both, existed independently before it, or 
they were combined; we cannot assume that SM (the Southern Maitrayani) 
as one author who wrote up the entire text as an original composition" 

This looks straightforward, but only at first sight. After a little reflection 
it becomes absurd. Homer has told the stories of many heroes, each of them 
given to a great deal of speech-making. Does this imply that we should postu- 
late the prior existence of independent Achilles and Hector Instructions? 
And should we assume that there were originally separate texts dealing with 
Alyosha, Father Zossima, Albertine, and Baron de Charlus that Dostoyevsky 
and Proust have put together? 

The famous German phenomenologist of religion, Rudolf Otto, has 
attempted to give more credence to his phenomenology by erecting it on the 
solid foundation of the science of philology. With such scholarly aids he has 
attempted to show that the Bhagavad Gītā was derived from an original 
Ur-Gītā, to which materials from eight different lost treatises were subse- 
quently added. But even philologists cannot all be deceived. Emile Senart 
noted in the introduction to his translation of the Gita: “Efforts have been 
made to distinguish pieces of different origin; attempts that are ephemeral 
as well as arbitrary." I have elsewhere drawn attention to the absurdities 
that have resulted from the uncritical application of these allegedly scientific 
methods to the text of the Yogasūtra (Staal 1975, 86-91). The moral is simple. 
Philology has to be used, but with caution. 


72 


ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 
OF THE AGNICAYANA 


Chapter 5. 


IN THIS CHAPTER I shall be concerned with what are regarded as indis- 
putable facts on the one hand, and with speculative and sometimes contro- 
versial theories on the other. “Апа perhaps by looking at the two side by 
side, and rubbing them against each other, we may cause justice to blaze out 
as from the two kindling sticks" (ёк xvpeiwv: Plato, Republic A 435 a 1-6). 


AGNI 


In order to understand the Agnicayana it is first of all necessary to 
gain some insight into Agni.! About 200 of the 1,028 hymns of the Rgveda 
are addressed to Agni, who in this respect comes second only to Indra. Agni’s 
name is clearly Indo-European: compare Latin ignis, Russian ogon’, Lithu- 
anian ugnis, etc. Though considered a god, he is never disconnected from his 
element, fire, until later Hindu mythology, where he appears in more anthro- 
pomorphic terms. In the Rgveda, Agni is brilliant, golden, has flaming hair 
and beard, three or seven tongues, his face is light, his eyes shine, he has sharp 
teeth, he makes a cracking noise, and leaves a black trail behind. He is fond 
of clarified butter (ghrta, or ājya when used as an oblation), but he also eats 
wood and devours the forest. In fact, he eats everything (visva-ad). He is in 
particular a destroyer of demons and a slayer of enemies. 

Though old, Agni is also ageless and permanently young. Himself fertile, 
he is the son and manifestation of victorious strength (sahas; Gonda 1957). 
He gives long life. He is born from the kindling blocks (arani), from heaven 
(where he is lightning and the sun), and from earth, where he resides in 
plants and woods. He is also born from water, celestial as well as terrestrial. 
This at first surprising origin is connected with clouds and with the firewood 
that comes from plants and trees, themselves born from water. It reflects the 
image of the sun rising out of the eastern ocean and setting in the western 
ocean; and it also indicates that Agni, as generative power, is the male prin- 
ciple, which enters the female waters as it enters the earth. 

Agni is intimately connected with the home, the clan, the tribe, and with 
rituals. He is installed in the home as the domestic fire; he guards and lights 
the home; he is a guest, a friend, chief of the clan or tribe (e.g., of the Angira- 
ses or the Bharatas). But he is also the domestic priest, the hotà or adhvaryu 
priest, and the sacrificer of the gods. He has a triple seat (the three altars). 
* For this section I have made use of Geldner (1957) 3-34; Gonda (1959) 79-96, (1960) 


үр ent (1927) I. 71-193; Keith (1925) 154-162; Renou and Filliozat (1947) 


73 


i: 
| 


| 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


to partake of them. He is the messenger between gods and men. He is com- 
mon to all men (vaisvanara). This appellation is traditionally taken to refer 


“to the sun, to the sacrificial fire, and—in later times tö the "fire of diges- 


“tion” (but see below, pages I:161—162). There are also suggestions that Agni 


as Jātavedas is identified with the domestic fire, and as Narašamsa or Tanū- 
napāt, with the southern fire (Findly, unpublished). Agni also has close re- 
lations with several other deities. His ritual function becomes increasingly 
important in the Yajurveda and in the Brāhmanas. 

Here is a typical hymn addressed to Agni (Rgveda 5.11): 


. ~ 1 Рт 1 
1. Guardian of the people, the vigilant, the clever; HAM TA ЧЕ smafa- 
Agni was born for new prosperity. Face touched gūt: gau: gta азаб! 
with butter, he shines bright with great sky-touch- PRECII ggat Бетті 


ing flame for all the Bharatas. 

2. On the triple altar men have kindled Agni, banner 
of the sacrifice, first domestic priest. Let him ride 
the chariot with Indra and the gods; let him be 
seated on the sacred grass for the sacrifice as a 


gag fa tē ийт: a 
aed з eut gāfta- 
ийй taras TAR | 
zem 89: Geet а «(Ч 


skilful hota. 


. Impure, you are born of your parents; bright, you 


came up as the joy-bringing seer of Vivasvant. 
With butter they made you strong, Agni, to whom 
the offering is made. 


. Agni . . . may he come at once to the sacrifice; 


Agni, whom men carry in every house; Agni 
became the messenger, the bringer of offerings; 
Agni they are choosing, choosing one with a 
seer's power. 


. For you, Agni, these sweetest words; for you may 


this prayer be a blessing to the heart. You are the 
one these songs fill with power, as the great 
rivers fill the Indus, you are the one they make 
strong. 


. The Аћрігаѕеѕ found you in a secret place, Agni, 


resting in every wood. So are you born, when 
stirred up with great force; you are the one they 
call “Son of Strength," O Angiras. 


«х ай aata arī: u 
sed таа ей: 900. 
йел: Же Ваа: | 
чач сатат атса 
qned uper fif ra: n 
oil азга а emat 
5@ att f siet TEA 1 
чч заетата. 
sfü gerat dvi жая u 
quaqua quus ач. 

«quil ач gated st 881 
саї бте: fed Вата. 
a gale adder adda = | 
атай street yet Їїч- 
sea fea feo бат aa | 
a su wem: SED 
кайи: якин: Т 


It is not possible to understand Agni’s role in the Rgveda except in ге- 


lation to other gods, powers, and ideas: Let me merely mention that Agni 


"isrelose to Indra; though lüdra is a warrior god and hero, whereas Agni 


always stays close to fire. In other respects, Agni complements Soma who is 
a god, a plant, and the juice extracted from that plant, and is therefore simi- 


74 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


larly devoid of anthropomorphic traits. Agni and Soma, though both gods, 
do not merely reside in heaven or in the sky, from where they have to be 
brought or called down to earth. They also are already here, concrete, visible, 
amenable to touch and taste, and present in the hands of men. According to 
Renou; following Bergaigne, the entire" Vedic iüytliology was reshaped, or 


i 


at any rate reorientated, as a setting for Agni and Soma, and all the other | 


divinities became counterparts or reflections of them (Renou 1953, 14). Agni | 


and Soma, the sacred fire and the sacred drink, are in any case the main dei- 
ties of the Vedic ritual. While all the deities of the Vedic pantheon are addres- 
sed and invoked in the course of ritual performances, and heaven is men- 
tioned as the fruit of rituals, the ritual itself creates a sacred world within 
the sacrificial enclosure by means of priestly activities that take place here 
and now. Here lies the most probable explanation for the fact, stressed by 
Renou (1953, 16), that the most important episodes of Vedic mythology, 
which reflect cosmogonic events, are not reflected or used in the ritual. All 
features of Vedic religion find expression in ritual, but generally through the 
mediation of Agni and Soma. 

In later Hinduism, Agni’s character changes. Though a few temples 
have been dedicated to his worship, Agni becomes a minor deity and a 
mythical figure. His change in position is already indicated in the Kena Upani- 
sad, where the gods, puzzled by Brahman (“What sort of specter can this 
be?"), send Agni to find out. On Agni’s arrival, Brahman asked him: ““Who 
are you?” Agni replied: “I am Agni.” “If that is what you are, what is your 
power?” “I can burn everything on earth.” Then Brahman put a blade of 
grass before him: “Burn that.” Agni came at it with all his force, but he could 
not burn it. 

In the epic and the Puranas, Agni is an unscrupulous seducer of women 
and an adulterer, qualities that cause him to be identified with Siva” 
(O'Flaherty 1973, 91, in the chapter entitled Agni, the Erotic Fire). In later 
mythology, it is Siva who gives the gods a blade of grass that they are unable 
to burn up. Apart from sexual fire, Agni is also the fire of tapas, “ascetic 
heat," another link with Siva. In a legend that is found in many versions, 


“Agni falls in lové with the wives of the seven sages. The story offers also an 


explanation of Agni’s association with the ritual call svāhā (above, page 
АТ). As told in the Mahabharata and summarized by O'Flaherty, the legend 
deserves to be quoted: 


Once when Agni saw the beautiful wives of the great sages sleep- 
ing in their hermitage, he was overcome by desire for them. But he 
reflected, “It is not proper for me to be full of lust for the chaste 
wives of the Brahmins, who are not in love with me." Then he 
entered the household fire so that he could touch them, as it were, 
with his flames, but after a long time his desire became still greater, 
and he went into the forest, resolved to abandon his corporeal form. 


15 


1 


PRENNE 


х 


Part I THe AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


Then Svāhā, the daughter of Daksa, fell in love with him and watch- 
ed him for a long time, seeking some weak point, but in vain. When 
she knew that he had gone into the forest full of desire, the amorous 
goddess decided to take the forms of the wives of the Seven Sages 
and to seduce Agni; thus both of them would obtain their desire. 
Assuming the form of each of the wives in turn, she made love with 
Agni, but she could not take the form of Arundhati, the wife of Va- 
sistha, because Arundhati had such great powers of chastity. Taking 
Agni’s seed in her hand each time, she reflected, ““Anyone who 
chances to see me in this form in the forest will falsely accuse the 
sages’ wives of committing adultery with Agni," and so to avoid 
this she took the form of the Gārudī bird and left the forest. She 
threw the seed into a golden lake on the peak of the white mountain 
guarded by Rudra’s hosts. The seed generated a son, Skanda, and 
some time later the six sages’ wives came to Skanda and told him 
that their husbands, thinking that Skanda had been born of them, 
had abandoned them. They begged Skanda to let them dwell for 
ever in heaven, and by his grace they became the constellation of 
the Krttikās, considered the mothers of Skanda. Then Svāhā mar- 
ried Agni (O’Flaherty 1973, 94-5). 


| Agni’s intermediary position is retained in another legend, which sheds 
light on the psychology of libations. Though Parvati is Siva’s spouse, she is 
unable to bear the fiery energy of Siva’s seed. Agni cooperates by drinking 
the seed, sprinkling the Ganges with it (or with his own seed), after which 
Parvati drinks it, receives the seed thus suitably diluted, and gives birth 
| шн (O’Flaherty 1973, 103-107; Plate 9; see also O’Flaherty 1975, 
The sexual symbolism of fire is also connected with the analogy between 
the action of the two kindling woods and the sexual act, an association which 
is found all over the world. Rgveda 3.29.1-3 compares manthana, “kindling 
of fire by friction,” to procreation: Agni is hidden in the kindling blocks 
(arani) as the seed (garbha) is well kept inside pregnant women (garbhin). 
“Put it down into the supinely stretched, you attentive (priest). When im- 
pregnated she gave birth to the male (Agni).” 
In Brhad Aranyaka Upanisad 6.4.21—a section sometimes left without 
translation, which incorporates verses from Rgveda 10.184 and Atharvaveda 
5.25—the association is reversed: 


He spreads her thighs. Let heaven and earth be spread! Uniting 
with her, placing his mouth upon hers, stroking her three times in 
the direction in which the hair grows, he says: 


Let Visnu prepare the womb, 
Let Tvastr shape the forms, 
Let Prajapati discharge, 


16 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


Let Dhātr place the seed in you. 

Place the seed, Sinivali, 

Place the seed, goddess with flowing hair! 
Let the Ašvin twins place the seed in you, 
The two lotus-garlanded gods. 

Golden are the kindling woods 

Which the Ašvins use to make fire. 

We invoke that seed for you 

To bring forth in the tenth month. 

As earth is pregnant with Agni, 

As heaven is expecting Indra, 

As wind is the seed of the skies, 

I place the seed in you. 


In later Hinduism, Agni remains closely connected with the burning of 
forests. In the Mahabharata, Krsna and Arjuna have a picnic on the banks 
of the Yamuni river. Their girl friends dance, sing, quarrel, and drink wine. 
“The epic will present us with few if any moments more suitable for a scene 
of ease and pleasure” (Hiltebeitel 1976, 209). But now there appears “a 
strange looking brahmin of gold complexion, yellowish brown beard, radiant 
and splendid. . . . It is Agni in disguise. Thus begins one of the oddest and 
most grisly segments of the epic, the burning of the Khāņdava forest.” In 
this story, Agni, for reasons that need not detain us, has come to consume 
the forest with all its creatures. He proceeds to do so. The noise is deafening, 
the water from Indra’s clouds cannot reach the ground because of the heat, 
and only six people survive. Hiltebeitel ends his study of the mythological 
significance of this conflagration with the remark “that the story itself can 
begin to make sense as a story, whether or not it also makes sense as history” 
(ibid., 224). In what follows I shall be primarily concerned with the opposite: 
Agni, Soma, Indra, Visnu, and many elements of the Vedic ritual have 
mythological and spiritual significance, but they also make sense as history 


and prehistory. 


FIRE 


IN ORDER TO gain a better understanding of Agni we have to go far 
beyond the Rgveda, in fact, back to the earliest history of man.! This early 
history accounts for many features of Agni and of fire rituals such as Agni- 
hotra, Agnistoma, and Agnicayana. 

Though the use of fire has been attributed to a subhuman man-ape 
(Australopithecus prometheus), prevailing scholarly opinion ascribes it only 


1 For this section I have made use of Eiseley (1954); Fewkes (1920); Forbes (1958); 
Frazer (1958); Gilbert (1947); Harrison (1954); Heizer (1963); Hough (1926, 1928); 
Lippert (1931); MacLeod (1925); Oakley (1955, 1956, 1958, 1961); Peake (1933); Sauer 
(1961); and Wilbert (1967). 


TI 


Part I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


to men. With the exception of some insects, birds, and the Philippine tarsier 
(a nocturnal animal that picks up hot embers from campfire sites), most ani- 
mals have a strong dislike of fire. Man took a long time to overcome his fear 
of fire, but he eventually tamed and then domesticated it. Four stages can be 
distinguished in this evolution: (1) a fireless age, evinced by an early man or 
hominid, Zinjanthropus, of the Olduwan culture in East Africa, some 
| 1,750,000 years ago; (2) an age during which fire was used, i.e., collected, as 
| exemplified by the hearths of Peking man, at least 250,000 years ago; (3) an 
; age during which fire was produced and kindled, as exemplified by the 
| Neanderthal about 50,000 years ago, and by Homo sapiens during the last 
| 20,000 to 15,000 years; (4) an age during which fire was domesticated, roughly 
overlapping with the Neolithic age, beginning in different regions at different 
times within the last 10,000 years. 

Several conclusions can be drawn from these time scales. For most of 
his history, man kept out of the way of fire and watched it from a distance. 
Finally he started to collect it carefully from fires that resulted from natural 
conflagrations. Sauer believes that the volcanically active lake country in the 
mountainous interior of East Africa may have provided man with his first 
fire, though fire could have been obtained from lightning as well as from 
spontaneous combustion, e.g., through contact between air and certain kinds 
of coal (such coals were located not far from the Choukoutien area where 

! Peking man was found). Throughout the hundreds of thousands of years 
during which fire was collected but could not yet be made, man was continu- 
ously concerned with its safe and proper preservation, for it was not known 
| how long it would take before fresh fire could be obtained again. It is not 
| farfetched to suppose that man’s sense of continuity was inspired by his 
| experience with fire. 

Fire was carried over long distances, enabling man to move into the 
colder regions of northern Europe and Asia, and therefore much ingeniuty 
must have been expended on the development of reliable methods for its 
preservation and transportation. And now we observe a remarkable fact. 
When man at last discovered how to make fire himself, he continued to take 
extreme precautions to preserve and transport it, and kindled fresh fire only 
rarely. This tendency can only partly be explained by the fact that it might 
save fuel and labor, be necessary in a wet climate, keep the carrier somewhat 

| warm, or be useful during hunts when fire must be at hand. The universality 
| of the practice of keeping fire suggests that it is largely a custom that survived 
| from the earlier fire-collecting age. Since ritual activities are activities that are 

performed even though they are not, or are no longer, necessary or even 
functional, the custom of preserving and carrying fire became one of the 
| earliest ritual activities that we know of. It led man to think of himself as in- 
separable from his fire, and vulnerable without it. It is not surprising that 
| fire and life were connected at an early stage, and that the preservation of fire 
| came to be regarded as the preservation of life. Thus arose the idea that a 


78 


ы. 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


long-lasting fire gives a long life. Its counterpart is the custom of extinguish- 
ing the fires when somebody has died. The fear of losing fire and the custom 
of preserving it prevail to the present day among a variety of people all over 
the world. Though most contemporary nomads and seminomads, for 
example, can produce fire in less than a minute, they take fire with them on 
most of their trips or hunts that cover long stretches of time. 

Hearths developed during the period in which fire was collected. Ori- 
ginally they were shallow depressions lined with stones or clay. Burnt-clay 
fireplaces have been found in many different regions. Many are circular, pos- 
sibly because of the placement of fuel around the fire. Hearths were also made 
from stone or sand. A later invention was to raise the fuel above the fire- 
bed, to promote combustion by increasing draught. This could be effected 
by piling the fuel on a few large stones, a method that eventually developed 
into stone altars and into the earliest stoves. Even among contemporary 
tribes there are some who do not use such methods. Among the Warao of for- 
mer British Guiana, for example, the hearth is simply “a big lump of clay, 
about one meter in diameter and about 30 cm. thick, which is packed by 
women onto the manaca beams of the kitchen house" (Wilbert 1967, 9). 

The earliest fuel was most probably wood, and the combustible qualities 
of different kinds of wood were learned early. Other early kinds of fuel are 


charcoal, dung, bones, and fat. The constant search for fuel, a very time- | 


consuming activity, led to deforestation in many areas (and continues to do 
so), and has been related to various features of social organization, including 
slavery. Settlements and villages had to move when the supply of firewood 
was used up. The New England Indians assumed that the English appeared 
on their shores because the firewood supply in their own land had been 
exhausted. Ritual elements entered into the gathering of fuel. Among the nor- 
thern Paiute, girls undergoing puberty rites had to collect five piles of fire- 
wood each day. The Vestal Virgins of Classical Antiquity were given similar 
tasks. 

The transportation of fire over short distances could be effected with the 
help of a smoldering or flaming brand, or a few hot embers, carried on a 
flat or hollow stone. For long journeys use had to be made of the smoldering 
properties of substances when deprived of a free supply of air: e.g., decaying 
wood, bark, and fungus. Fire was transported (and is still transported by 
the Tierra del Fuegians) on clay spread on the floor of canoes. With the 
development of ceramics, clay pots became the preferred containers for the 
safe transportation of fire over long distances. A vivid description occurs in 
Xenophon's account of one of the expeditions of Agesilaos, king of Sparta 
(401-360 B.c.): 


It was then that Agesilaos won credit by a trifling but timely ex- 
pedient. For since no one among those who carried provisions 
for the regiment had brought fire, and it was cold, not only because 


79 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


they were at a high altitude, but also because there had been rain 
and hail towards evening—and besides, they had gone up in light 
clothing suitable to the summer season—and they were shivering 
and, in the darkness, had no heart for their dinner, Agesilaos sent 
up not less than ten men carrying fire in earthen pots (ybtpat). 
And when these men had climbed up by one way and another, and 
many large fires had been made, since there was a great deal of fuel 
at hand, all the soldiers rubbed oil on themselves and many of them 
only then began their dinner (Hellenica IV.v.4; translation by C. L. 
Brownson, with one modification). 


When fire is transported over long periods, it has to be installed on a 
temporary hearth for the night, or whenever a stop is made. Special pre- 
cautions have to be taken that it will not go out. This is referred to, for 
example, by Homer who describes the falling of night after Odysseus had 
been washed on the shores of the island of Ogygia: 


Like a man who hides a brand in the black embers on a distant 
isolated farm, saving the seed of fire so that he will not have to seek 
elsewhere, so did Odysseus cover himself with leaves (Odyssey 
V. 488-91). 


All over the world, when the fire goes out in a village house, it is borrow- 
ed from a neighbor, often by carrying a few embers on a potsherd. Later this 
responsibility was taken on by the state. Charlemagne ordered a fire to be 
kept burning in each inhabited house. Up to the eighteenth century in 
Europe, bells were rung when the evening fell. This was called cur-few (“cov- 
er-fire," French: couvre-feu, Italian: copri-fuoco). Originally the term cur- 
few referred to a brass implement, like a candle extinguisher but larger, with 
a handle and perforations, which was put over the coals and embers in the 
fireplace to keep them alive throughout the night. 

The tending of fire required careful planning, and it has been suggested 
that it developed man’s sense of the future and of time in general—a sug- 
gestion that seems to underrate man’s sensitivity to the passage of day and 
night and of the seasons. Whereas collecting firewood, and later kindling 
fire, were by and large male occupations, tending the fire was mostly done by 
women. Most archaeologists and anthropologists agree that the first homes 
developed around hearths, and that family life was greatly influenced by the 
. tending of fire. Even at present, when large groups of people live together 
in communal huts or houses, each family keeps its own fire. The earlier so- 
ciologists described this domestic association in colorful terms, as, e.g., 
Lippert in 1887: 


Tending the fire is a woman’s affair. It formed the center of the 


80 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


sphere of life which woman dominated. It made the woman’s do- 
mestic establishment more stable and to some extent more onerous 
than it had formerly been, but it likewise made it much more per- 
manently attractive to the men than when her intermittent sexual 
charm had been the sole allurement. Those who had previously 
sought the company of women only for limited periods were now 
bound permanently to her hearth, and soon no longer as mere 
guests but by ties of reciprocal duties and obligations. About the 
hearth there arose the home in every sense of the word (Lippert 
1931, 131). 


Several of the important uses of fire are touched upon in Xenophon’s 
account: warmth, cooking, and light are among the most basic. Much older 
is the use of fire that made cave dwelling possible by keeping dangerous 
animals out. At a very early period, spear points were hardened in fire. After 
the Stone Age, the blacksmith became one of the earliest specialists. Fire 
drives were used to stampede game, and the resulting conflagrations ex- 
panded grasslands (e.g., in America). Fires led to new vegetation and a new 
fauna. Manmade fires for stampeding game may have contributed to the 
extinction of large animals such as the mammoth. In much later periods, 
such new pastures were used for grazing herds, and the ashes for fertilizer. 
Forest clearing by fire is an important step toward agriculture. In all these 
respects fire is like man: a ruthless force that disturbs and transforms the 
ecology. 

Cooking may have originated relatively late, possibly not long before 
Neanderthal man. Eiseley has an elogent, though specifically American, 
eulogy on meat: 


Meat, more precious than the gold for which men later struggled, 
supplied the energy that carried man across the world. Had it not 
been for fire, however, all that enormous source of life would have 
been denied to him: he would have gone on drinking the blood from 
small kills, chewing wearily at uncooked bone ends or masticating 
the crackling bodies of grasshoppers (Eiseley 1954, 55). 


Another early use of fire was in connection with the dead: the counter- | 


part, as we saw, of its connection with life. Fires were lit over the bodies of 
the dead Neanderthal. Excavations in the ancient Pueblo cemeteries still 
show masses of charcoal and ashes appearing as a layer in the earth above 
the skeletons. Cremation was common in the Bronze and Iron ages, and re- 
mained widespread throughout the world. The exceptions appear very much 
later, especially in Judaism and Christianity, and culminated in a decree 
of Charlemagne of 785, which made cremation a capital offense. 


6I 


I 
i 


Part I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


The invention of means for making fire remains shrouded in mystery. 
It may have taken place more than once. Among our contemporaries, only 
the Andaman islanders are presumably ignorant of the art. Even if this is 
true, it is more likely that they forgot it than that they had never known it 
in the past. The two oldest methods for fire making are percussion and fric- 
tion; it is not known which one came first. Percussion or strike-a-light 
methods are mainly achieved with the help of pyrites and flint. The oldest use 
of pyrites has been documented for the Neolithic and Bronze ages, and is 
referred to in the old Testament. This method continues to be used in various 
parts of the world, especially in northern Asia. A unique method, confined 
to southeast Asia, is the production of sparks by striking bamboo with a piece 
of porcelain. The percussion methods of producing fire have led to at least 
one imaginative etymology: 


The Eskimo, who still in Greenland use the flint-and-pyrites method 
of kindling, call fire ignek. Among the Western Eskimo, who live 
in and near Alaska, the word is knik, knok, knákhk, k'nūk, kanuk 
or ik’nuk. This represents very clearly the sound of flint striking a 
lump of pyrites. . . . These words for fire among the Eskimo re- 
mind us of the series of Aryan words . . . agni, ogni, ugnis and 
ignis. Is it possible that these, too, indicate the sound of the flint and 
pyrites nodule (Peake 1933, 54-5; quoted approvingly by Oakley 
1955, 44). 


Even if this improbable etymology is to be taken seriously, the difficulty 
remains that the Indians did not use the percussion method. 

The other ancient method for making fire is through friction of wood. 
There are several types, including the fire-saw, fire-drill, pump-drill, and 
fire-plow. The fire-drill is probably the most universal, Polynesia being the 
only region from which it is absent. In Europe, it probably dates from Neo- 
lithic times; in Asia, it is older and not yet obsolete. As in all methods that 
use friction, there are two pieces of wood, the lower of which rests on the 
ground, and is called the “hearth.” In the fire-drill, a cylindrical or tapered 
drill held vertically is rotated between the two hands, which, at the same 
time, press the stick downwards into a shallow pit in the hearth. The fire is 
caught in a small heap of tinder, consisting, e.g., of fungus or dead leaves. 
The process takes generally less than a minute. The vertical and horizontal 
parts are often called active and passive, or male and female, respectively, 
as we have already seen in the previous section. 

A special kind of fire-drill is the thong-drill, in which the vertical cylin- 
der is rotated by a cord passed round in a loop. The thong is pulled in such 
a way that the rotation changes its orientation repeatedly. The pole is pres- 
sed down with the help of another piece of wood, bone, stone or a coconut 
shell. At present, this method is found among the Eskimos, in northern 


82 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


Asia, India, and Indonesia. It has led to another colorful, if improbable, 
etymology: 


It has been suggested that the Greek word for fire, zip, represents 
the sound of the whirring of the fire-drill (and similarly for English 
fire, German Feuer, French feu, etc.: Peake 1933, 54). 


Whatever the merits of this etymology, it is a fact that English “pure” is 
related to Greek лбр. Mene rom, 

The making of fire is often accompanied by rites and songs. In an Irish 
saga: 


Fionn took from his tunic the two sacred fire-sticks that he carried, 
and turned them one upon another while Usheen sang the fire- 
chant: 


Golden Bird 

Hawk of the Sun 
Shake loose a feather, 
A feather of flame. 


Fire leaped between the sticks, and soon the hearth was blazing. 
(Young 1929, 133). 


It is likely that both methods, percussion and friction, were accidental- 
ly discovered when men worked with tools. Sawing and drilling are them- 
selves not attested before the Upper Palaeolithic. Lucretius explained that 
kindling by friction originated when people observed the branches of a tree 
lashed against each other by the wind until they caught fire. Though this 
hypothesis was adopted by several historians, it refers to a rather uncommon 
event, and the hypothesis that the fire drill was discovered when drills were 
being used, and mutatis mutandis for the other techniques, is more plausi- 
ble. Whatever their origin, these practices readily explain the belief that 
fire resides in wood, just as the actual collection of fire from lightning con- 
firms the belief that fire comes from heaven. Underlying these notions is the 
general idea that fire is not made, but is rather extracted or released. Lu- 
cretius still expresses what must have puzzled man for thousands of years: 
“If in logs flame lurks hidden, and smoke and ash, it must need be that the 
logs are composed of things alien in kind, of alien things that rise up out of 
the logs" (De Rerum Natura 1.871-872). The Warao Indians similarly deny 
that fire is made. It existed from time immemorial, and elaborate mytho- 
logies explain that some trees contain fire and others do not (Wilbert 1967, 
21). 

In the domain of religious speculation, the most basic ritual distinction 
is between two kinds of fire, perpetual fire" and new fire.” These two kinds 


83 


1 
i 
| 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


represent the two main periods in the history of fire, the early age of fire col- 
lecting and the later age of fire production. As we have seen, the carrying 
around of fire became a ritual activity as soon as it was no longer necessary, 
viz., as soon as methods for kindling fire had been discovered. The perma- 
nent installation of fire on hearths and altars, in homes and temples, took on 

similarly ritualistic overtones at the same time and for the same reason. 
This ritualization also explains why the “perpetual fire" is generally con- 

| sidered more pure than the ‘“‘new fire,” which is nothing but an upstart in the 
evolution of man. Thus “риге” fire has often to be obtained from a sacred 
place where it has been kept since time immemorial. 

The distinction between different kinds of fire is no longer sensed by 
modern man. We feel that fire is fire, and if we prefer a hearth fire to central 
heating, we attribute our preference to such things as the bright motion of 
flames or the smell of burnt wood. During most of the existence of our spe- 
cies, however, when the day was over and it began to be cold and dark, we 
were eager to welcome our own fire as a dear friend upon whom we could 
count. To ancient man, fires had the same individualities we reserve for some 
people and animals. We do not easily understand ritual fires made on dif- 
ferent occasions and obtained from different places, kept separate or mixed 
carefully. We ourselves do not feel that if we expect our friend, anybody else 
would do just as well. The ancients and several contemporary tribes treat 
fires with the same kinds of consideration. 

Fire, especially perpetual fire, was jealously guarded and surrounded 
with extreme concerns for its purity. In the Roman temples of Vesta, fire had 
to be tended by virgins (if it went out, the Vestal maidens were flogged by 
the Pontifex Maximus). The Jews prohibited “foreign fire," and Siberian 
tribes on the Amur river were reported unwilling to part with any of the fire 
in their huts. When new fire was made, the event was surrounded with awe. 
Generally, all existing fires had to be put out first. Ritual fire making was 
sometimes done by means of the strike-and-light method (the altar fires 
referred to in the Old Testament were installed in this way). The most com- 
mon method for ritual fire making, however, is the method of kindling by 
friction. Sir J. G. Frazer has reported it for all of Europe, and W. H. Gil- 
bert for the Americas. 

| Most myths about fire attribute its origin to heaven, which would seem 

| to support the view that fire was originally obtained from lightning. Many 

| ancient myths relate that fire was brought from heaven by a bird. This bird 

| was often considered a thief, and the legend of a human fire thief is also 

widespread. Its prototype in Western culture is the myth of Prometheus, 
who stole fire from heaven and gave it to mankind. Zeus punished him by 
chaining him to the Caucasus mountains, where an eagle picked out his con- 
stantly growing liver. Prometheus is regarded as the inventor of human ci- 
vilization, the emblem of rebellion against tyranny, and in the final resort 
the symbol of mankind itself. In Aeschylus’ Prometheus Bound" (436- 
471, 467—506) Prometheus boasts of his inventions: 


84 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


I found men witless and gave them the use of their wits and made 
them masters of their minds. . . . They did not know of building 
houses with bricks to face the sun; they did not know how to work 
in wood. They lived like swarming ants in holes in the ground, in the 
sunless caves of the earth. . . . It was I who first yoked beasts for 
them in the yokes and made of those beasts the slaves of trace chain 
and pack saddle that they might be man’s substitute in the hardest 
tasks; and I harnessed to the carriage, so that they loved the rein, 
horses, the crowning pride of the rich man’s luxury. It was I and 
none other who discovered ships, the sail-driven wagons that the 
sea buffets. . . . Beneath the earth, man’s hidden blessing, copper, 
iron, silver, and gold—will anyone claim to have discovered these 
before I did? No one, I am very sure, who wants to speak truly and 
to the purpose. One brief word will tell the whole story: all arts 
that mortals have come from Prometheus (translation David Grene 
1959, 327-329). 


The Greek name zpop9ebs is generally interpreted as “prudent, with 
foresight,” related to the verb npouņ9čouai, “foresee.” Mayrhofer's Ety- 
mological Dictionary relates it to Sanskrit pra-math from math, “steal, rob, 


H 
ļ 


ў 


take away.” In Rgveda 3.38.5, vastra-mathi is used in connection with a , 
thief who steals clothes (vastram), and in 8.66.8 urā-mathi is applied to a wolf 


who takes away sheep (urā). The last term occurs once more, in Vadhula 
Šrauta Sūtra 28a, where it is applied to the seasons who take away ritual. 

Since ancient times the verb math has been confounded with manth, 
“stir, churn,” to which it may not be etymologically related. This term is 
used in the Hindu myth of the churning of the world ocean. The churning 
activities of gods and demons resulted in the salty water yielding milk, butter, 
wine, poison, and finally Soma, elixir of immortality (see, e.g., Gonda 1954, 
128-129; O’Flaherty 1975, 273-280; etc.). The noun manthana is used not 
only to refer to churning, but is also the general term for kindling fire by 
friction. In a commentary on the Kātyayāna Saruta Sūtra, its derivative pra- 
manthana is defined as “‘the piece of wood that comes forth from the upper 
kindling block (uttararani), with which the fire is churned.” In his book on 
the descent of fire and the divine beverage (Die Herabkunft des Feuers und 
des Gēttertranks: 1859, 15-18), Adalbert Kuhn has connected pramanthana 


with the name Prometheus, thus regarding Prometheus not only as repre- | 


senting the theft of fire from heaven (which corresponds to the age of col- 
lection), but also the kindling of fire by friction (the age of production). 
Unfortunately, this.etymology is hard to maintain. The proper connection is 
with mathnati, steals," as Johanna Narten (1960) has shown. 

While fire marks the origin of civilization, and ritual fire the beginnings 
of religion, ritual fire is also connected with athletics. After the battle of 
Plataea (479 B.C.), when the Greeks defeated the Persians, Apollo ordered 
the consecration of a fire altar for Zeus, the Deliverer. As Plutarch tells us 


85 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


| in his Life of Aristides (ch. xx), all existing fires had been polluted by the 
; Persian barbarians and had therefore to be extinguished. A fresh and pure 

fire had to be obtained from the sanctuary of Apollo at Delphi, at a dis- 
. tance of more than 60 miles. A young athlete, Euchidas, volunteered to go. 

He left at dawn, ran, naked, to the altar of Apollo at Delphi, where he 
| “purified himself by sprinkling himself with holy water and crowned him- 
! self with laurel." He took the sacred fire on a torch, ran back and arrived at 
| Plataea before sunset. There he handed the sacred fire to his countrymen, 
| collapsed from exhaustion, and died (cf. Séchan 1951, 2-3). 

While the torch race (Aaunadyo po uia), often run in relays, became a pro- 
minent feature of the Greek games, it also acquired symbolic significance. 
| Plato (Laws 776 b) says that parents procreate and feed children, “handing 
| over life like a torch” (xaddnep Lapndda tov [йоу ларадідбутас). In ancient 
India, similar practice must be assumed to account for similar metaphors. 

/ At the core of Buddhism is the doctrine that there is rebirth and transmigra- 
. tion without anything transmigrating. In the second century B.C., the 
Greek king Menander (Pali: Milinda) carried on the Greek dominion in 
Bactria founded by Alexander the Great. Puzzled by the Buddhist doctrine, 
he posed the question to the sage-monk Nāgasena, and asked him to give 
some illustrations. Nagasena began his answer by saying that rebirth takes 
| place without anything transmigrating in exactly the same way in which a 
| flame is lit from another flame without any fire being transmitted (Milin- 
dapafiha 71.16). 

As we shall see in the section on Soma (page 111), the Vedic Indians 
believed that fire was brought from heaven by a bird of prey ($yena), who also 
brought Soma, the elixir of immortality, down to earth. Connections between 
fire, a bird, and immortality are found all over the world, but they take 
very different forms. The Egyptian sun bird benu and the phoenix of western 
classical antiquity, subsequently adopted in Christianity, represent a dis- 
tinct type, in which death and rebirth are at the core of the myth. Both birds 
are connected with life after death. In classical sources, emphasis was laid 
on the spontaneous generation of the bird. In Christianity, the phoenix be- 
came a symbol of resurrection. The connection with fire is not known from 
Egypt, but developed in the west. According to this tradition, the phoenix 
| bird, knowing that the time of its death is approaching, burns together with 

its nest, ignited by the heat of the sun. From its ashes a new phoenix arises 
(Van den Broek 1972, chapter vr). 

The Chinese feng [@, or feng huang ]& E has been called a phoenix, but 
has almost nothing in common with its western counterpart. It does not cre- 
mate itself, and no new bird arises out of the ashes of the old. In very early 
times, feng was a wind bird, and its name is related to the Chinese word for 
“wind,” feng Jf. Later it became a bird of good omen, subsequently identi- 
fied with the symbolic “‘red bird" of the south. Finally, it turned into the 
fantastic bird of art and decoration (Edward Schafer, personal communi- 


86 


ezis 


Rss a Amm 


RE, 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


cation; cf. Sowerby 1940, 21, 101). 

None of these birds seems closely connected with the Sanskrit šyena, 
Avestan saēna, or other Indo-European relatives. It is possible, however, 
that there are historical connections with the shamanistic cult of the eagle, 
which is quite common in central and northern Asia. Among several Siberian 
peoples, the eagle is regarded as the master of fire, who gave fire to man. 
The eagle is also the founder of civilization (er ist vorherrschend Kulturbring- 
er: Findeisen 1956, 79). The eagle is a totemistic bird, from which several 
tribes derive their origin (e.g., the Yakuts). It is regarded as the first shaman 
by the Buriats and the Yenisei Ostyaks. Only a person who is a descendant 
of an eagle may perform certain fire rituals. Similar ideas are found in the 
Americas, e.g., in Peru (Sternberg 1930, 192, 132-133, 142-143; Findeisen 
1956, 74-80; Anisimov 1963, 191). 

As totem, the eagle is inviolable. To kill an eagle is a capital sin (Stern- 
berg 1930, 132). This is reminiscent of the vow (vrata) that has to be observed 
by any performer of the Agnicayana, Taittiriya Samhita 5.7 .6.1 states: 
“Tf the piler of the fire (agnicit) were to eat of a bird, he would be eating 
fire and go to ruin. He should observe this vow for a year, for no vow goes 
beyond a year.” Satapatha Brāhmaņa 10.1.4.13 is more lenient: 


They say: *He who has built the fire altar must not eat of any bird, 
for he who builds the altar of fire assumes a bird’s form. He might 
become ill. Therefore the agnicit should not eat of any bird.” 
Nevertheless, one who knows this may safely eat. For he who builds 
an altar assumes Agni’s form, and all food here belongs to Agni. 
One who knows this will know that all food belongs to him. 


Some mention should be made of early imitations of birds, which have 
a technical as well as a religious aspect. I am not referring to aeroplanes, but 
to the art of kite flying. It has often been stated that the kite was invented 
by the Greek philosopher Archytas of Tarentum, but this is an old error 
(see Chadwick 1931, 487, note 4). Kites were probably invented in China. 
Though there may be earlier references there, the first unambiguous men- 
tion of kite flying is of the second century B.C. In China, kites were used 
for signalling and to test the behavior of winds (Needham 1959 III, 477; 
LV. 2, 576—579). At an early period, kite flying became a sport. Often tabooed 
to women, it continues to be practised not only by children but also by 
adults, e.g., in Central Asia: “Тһе shopkeepers of Yarkand are said to be 
fond of flying kites as they sit outside their shops” (Chadwick 1931, 483, 
after E. Breck). Kite flying is common in China, Korea, Japan, Southeast 
Asia, Melanesia, and Polynesia. In Polynesia, the religious functions of 
the kite are combined with its uses in meteorology and navigation. The kite 
represents the soul of the kite flier. Kites were sent to heaven as a religious 
rite, to the accompaniment of kite songs. In New Zealand, members of the 


87 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


important Tawhaki family are described as ascending heaven on kites. Re- 
hua, god of the highest heaven, is referred to as a sacred bird and ancestor of 
the kite. Throughout the Pacific, birds are regarded as means of communi- 
cation between gods and men. Kite flying is a form of religion that enables 
man to gain access to heaven (Chadwick 1931). 

In India, kite flying is still practised by people of all ages. The season 
begins in the latter half of November and continues up to the middle of 
January. Many kinds of kites are mentioned by Mujumdar (1950, 71-77). 

Against such a varied, worldwide background, it is not surprising that 
the Agnicayana altar was constructed in the shape of a bird of prey (Syena). 
Yet, as we shall see (page 124), the altar represents a cosmic man, and might 
therefore be expected to be built in the shape of a man. There are traces of 
this in descriptions of the altar that mix features of a bird with those of a man 
(cf. Satapatha Brahmana 10.4.5.2; Van Buitenen 1962, 30; Dumont 1951). 

The dictionaries give a variety of translations for Sanskrit $yena and 
the related Avestan saena. Mayrhofer, for example, lists: “bird of prey, 
eagle, falcon, hawk." In most of this book I have retained the translation 
"eagle" or “bird of prey." It seems likely that the Vedic Indians had a more 
specific bird in mind. The one scholar who has given serious attention to the 
identification of Syena is Schneider (1971, 31-37). Basing himself upon the 
Reveda, especially 4.26-27 (see below pages 111-113), he feels that the 
bird was characterized in the first place by speed, because it came toward the 

| Soma in a rapid descent. It also knew fear (4.26.5; cf. 1.32.14), and it prob- 

| ably drank the blood of its prey, since it nibbled at the Soma stalk and drank 

| some of its juice. In the Rgveda, moreover, it is never called strong or large 
and so could not have been either of these (Sicher kann man daraus den 
Schluss ex silentio ziehen": page 33). Schneider has concluded from these 
observations that Syena could not have been a “miraculous bird” (Wunder- 
vogel) or eagle, but was probably a falcon. He ends his analysis with a refer- 
ence to falconry, which was very probably known in India at a very early 
period. The expressions isitah "discharged" (Rgveda 9.77.2 and 10.11.4) and 
asarji “shot forth” (4.26.5) are reminiscent of a falcon let loose. 

I think these observations are excellent, yet the conclusion need not 
follow, and other evidence points in another direction. Why not make the 
assumption that the shape of the bird-shaped altar of the Agnicayana pre- 
serves some features of the shape of the original bird? It at least provides a 
picture, which is more than can be said of any text. Looked upon as a sche- 
matized representation of a real bird, the diagram of the altar (Figure 7, page 
66) has three characteristics: the tail is small, the wings are large, and the 
wings are as broad at the tip as they are at the base. 

Now let us take a look at birds of prey, or Falconiformes (if we exclude 
owls). These include buzzards, eagles, falcons, harriers, hawks, and vultures 
(Lloyd 1971, 4). Confining attention to wings and tails, we find that eagles 
and falcons have long tails and either narrow wings or tapered, narrow-tip- 


88 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


ped wings. Long, narrow-tipped wings enable them to fly very quickly in pur- 
suit of prey; long tails enable them to turn quickly. The only birds character- 
ized as a group by short tails and long, broad, untapered wings are vultures. 
They cannot turn quickly, but “soar easily and then glide for great distances 
with very little flapping” (Lloyd, 23). The reason is that they may fly more 
than two hundred miles a day in search of dead animals, and they need not 
pursue fast-moving prey. They are equipped for long-distance flights, not for 
short-distance pursuits. 

In Rgveda 4.26-27, the Soma had to be captured quickly, but, being a 
plant, it did not have to be followed in rapid pursuit. A vulture is eminently 
equipped for such a task. It has the properties that Schneider has enumerated, 
which are in fact common among Falconiformes: speed, and the capacity 
for fear and for drinking the blood of its prey. Finally, some are large and 
some are small. But unlike Schneider, I don't think the argumentum ex silentio 
proves anything. Moreover, the Iranian saēna was definitely large (Martin 
Schwartz, personal communication). 

To narrow down the possibilities, we have to take geography into ac- 
count. The Department of Ornithology at Berkeley has provided me with a 
list of fifty-five species of Falconiformes, now living in or near northwest India 
or Central Asia. According to Mercedes S. Foster and Steve Bailey, members 
of the staff of the Berkeley Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, it is impossible 
to make an accurate determination of the species involved from the diagram 
of the Agnicayana altar of Figure 7. There are six species, however, that they 
consider the most likely candidates: 


Gyps bengalensis Indian White-backed Vulture 
Gyps indicus Indian Griffon 

Gyps himalayensis Himalayan Griffon 

Gyps fulvus Griffon Vulture 


Indian Black Vulture 


Sarcogyps calvus 
European Black Vulture. 


Aegypius monachus 


Though we are dealing only with probabilities, it is possible to reduce 
this list further. The Syena brought fire and Soma down from heaven, and 
should therefore be expected to move long distances and live at high altitudes. 
These requirements are met by griffons, which are “large vultures that live 
in colonies in mountainous country." Among the four griffons on the above 
list, the fulvus occurs from Spain to northern India, while bengalensis and 
indicus live mostly in India, Burma, and Malaysia. The visually outstanding 
species is the himalayensis. It is native to Asia and is the second-largest bird 
of prey in the Old World. Like other large vultures, its life span may extend 
to sixty years. These birds outdo human nomads by far in the distances over 
which they migrate. Many birds of prey migrate yearly from northern Asia 
to India and Southeast Asia. They cross the Himalayas in autumn and return 
in spring (Lloyd 1971, 8, 18, 87-88). 


89 


—_— 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


The Himalayan Griffon is *a huge brownish-white bird with a wing 
span of about nine feet” (Lloyd 1971, 22, 87). To see such a bird fly across 
Himalayan skies must be an awe-inspiring sight. It is likely that the Harap- 
pans saw it, and possible that their sign 4, with its broad wings and 
short tail, refers to it (cf. Parpola, c.s., 1970, 29). It is even more likely that 
the Vedic nomads saw it, when they crossed the western Himalayas. Until 
` better evidence is forthcoming, I would be inclined to believe that the Vedic 

$yena was originally Gyps himalayensis. 


VEDIC NOMADS 


THE DISCOVERY THAT many of the languages of India (including Vedic 
and Sanskrit) are related to most of the languages of Europe (including 
Greek, Latin and its Romance derivatives, Germanic, and Slavic) has led to 
the establishment of a family of languages, the Indo-European family. The 
languages of this group have become more widely diffused than those of any 
other linguistic family. Before 2,000 в.с., Indo-European languages were 
spoken by seminomadic people who wandered the steppes that stretch from 
Poland to Central Asia. These nomads had tamed the horse, which they har- 
nessed to light chariots with spoked wheels. Around the end of the third 
millenium, they began to move west, south, and east, and entered parts of 
Asia and Europe closer to the river deltas and oceans. Some of these areas, 
in particular in the Middle East, were inhabited by sedentary people who had 
evolved a much more advanced level of civilization. The Indo-European lan- 
guages were established and came to flourish in Europe, Iran, and India. An 
Indo-European language, Tocharian, was preserved in Chinese Turkestan 
until the eighth century A.D., when it was finally replaced by Turkic lan- 
guages. (See map A.) 

I shall use the term “Vedic nomads” to refer to people who spoke an 
Indo-European language, who came from Inner Asia, and who entered the 
Indian subcontinent around 1,500 B.c. We have no unambiguous material 
evidence that such an invasion actually occurred, and there may have been 
more than one wave. But the Vedic language of the Rgveda, which was com- 
posed around 1,200 B.c. in the northwest of the Indian subcontinent (pos- 
sibly as far west as what is now Afghanistan), is clearly Indo-European, and 
this fact by itself constitutes sufficient proof for the view that such a migra- 
tion took place. Though Vedic is related to the other languages of the Indo- 
European family, it is sepecially close to Avestan, which was spoken in 
Eastern Iran during the period between 1,000 and 500 B.c., and to Old Per- 
sian, the language of the cuneiform inscriptions of the Achaemenid kings (ca. 
500-330 B.c.). Apart from these linguistic facts, we know little about the 
anthropology and identity of the people who spoke Vedic. We don’t know 
exactly where they came from, nor whether they came in loosely related 


90 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


3 Present distribution of 
. Indo-European languages 
E Early distribution of 
Indo-European languages 
is 50° 


SRSERSRE 


iC 
n 
`, 


Башын Distribution of Shamanism ` 


0 
кызта 
Н 


DOTEE ATT ле. 


Map A 


groups during a relatively short period, or separately and repeatedly during 
different periods. Correlations between linguistic and archaeological data 
are only beginning to be traced (see Parpola and Thapar in the beginning 
sections of Part III). 

The culture of the Rgveda shares features with other Indo-European 
cultures, but it also possesses features in common only with the Iranians, 
and other features not found elsewhere in the Indo-European family. It has 
been customary to refer to these last features as "Indian," and there is no 
harm in doing so, provided this does not evoke the wrong associations (as it 
often does). The vision of tall, blond, blue-eyed Aryans, importing their 
culture into a backward area inhabited by dark and snub-nosed natives, com- 
forting as it has been to some Western scholars, has been largely reversed. 
We now know, especially after the excavation of Harappa, Mohenjo-daro, 
and numerous other sites, that long before 1,500 в.с. a highly evolved city 
culture flourished in the northwestern part of the subcontinent, as it did in 


OI 


Part I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


the Middle East. Although the larger cities and towns of this Indus civiliza- 
tion may have disappeared before the advent of the Vedic nomads—probably 
as a result of natural calamities—it is therefore more accurate to say that the 
Indo-Europeans, though they imported their language, met with remnants 
of a civilization in many respects superior to their own. 

That the semibarbaric nomads imported their language is not surprising, 
but the impact of this importation is nothing if not astounding. While Vedic 
was spoken only in the northwest for a few centuries, Sanskrit was adopted 
all over the subcontinent. Codified by the grammarian Panini around 500 
B.C., it established itself as the language of civilization for the next 2,500 
years. The languages that subsequently arose in northern India (Middle- 
Indic Prakrits as well as modern Hindi, Panjabi, Gujarati, Marathi, Bengali, 
Oriya, etc.) are all Indo-European. It is not easy to explain this extraordinary 
development. No doubt, the nomadic invaders were good fighters. The 
strength of the Indus civilization was already broken, and “the peaceful and 
conservative cities of the Indus Valley could neither withstand nor absorb 
the invaders" (Basham 1954, 29). It is equally relevant to take into account 
that the Vedic nomads, in spite of the relatively low level of their material 
culture, possessed very advanced poetic techniques and had an extraordinary 
devotion to language and the power of language, which they called bráhman. 
Their superiority was accepted at least in part because it was believed that 
they were influential with the gods, which in turn was attributed to the power 
of their Vedic mantras. This belief in language is found among other people 
, who speak an Indo-European language. In fact, all the higher civilizations of 
mankind are characterized by an exaggerated faith in the power of language. 
In Vedic culture, there seems to have been no limit to this faith. It is possible 
that the cult of language comes from Central Asia. The magical power of 
songs is still very pronounced in Shamanism (see, e.g., Eliade 1964, 201). 
Whatever its origin, subsequent developments strengthened the belief in the 
supernatural qualities of Vedic and Sanskrit and in their superiority over 
other languages. This conviction is retained in Hinduism, which is pervaded 
by the belief in the efficacy of mantras, often allegedly Vedic. It also played 
a role in the spread of Hinduism throughout the Indian subcontinent. This 
has been noted not only by scholars, who are already professionally obsessed 
by language, but also by British civil servants. Logan, Collector of Malabar, 
for example, speculated in his Malabar Manual of 1887 about the advent of 
the Nambudiri brahmins in the following terms: 


They posed before the rude chieftains with whom they came in 
contact as God-compellers." Their sonorous mantrams and spells 
could compel the gods to take the wandering ghosts of even the 
worst of men directly to heaven (quoted in Padmanabha Menon 
1924, I, 51-52). 


92 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


The close connections between the Vedic Indians and their contempo- 
raries in Iran provides justification for setting up an Indo-Iranian subgroup 
within Indo-European. The existence of this group is primarily demonstrated 
by close linguistic similarities (in phonology, syntax, vocabulary, and style) 
between Vedic, Sanskrit, Avestan, Old Persian, and several later languages, 
without there being counterparts in other Indo-European languages. The 
existence of Indo-Iranian also rests on shared features of religion and civili- 
zation. In the area of vocabulary, we have, for example, Avestan airya, 
haoma, and zaota corresponding to Vedic arya, soma, and hota, respectively. 
Going beyond the correspondence of words, we find the Iranians refer to 
themselves as airya, **of noble birth" (from which “гап” is derived), in the- 
same manner in which the Vedic Indians refer to themselves as Arya (whence 
* Aryan”). The haoma belief and cult in the Avesta are in most respects simi- 
lar to the corresponding Vedic concepts and ritual. The zaota is the chief 
priest at the haoma ritual. Though the hot, in the classical $rauta ritual, is 
almost entirely concerned with recitation, and not with the performance of 
ritual acts, which is the province of the adhvaryu, this may have been dif- 
ferent originally. The term hota is derived from a verb hu-, “to make an obla- 
tion," not from hū-, “to invoke" (Renou 1947, 8-9; 1958, 59-60; cf. Minard 
1949, 123, n. 346a). The same is true of zaota. It is possible that, at an early 
stage of development of the fire ritual, the hota made the oblation into the 
fire that Agni transmitted to the gods. At a later stage of development, Agni 
became the messenger who brought the gods down to earth. The hota there- 
fore acted as invoker (Schneider 1971, 73). 

The Iranian fire ritual is in many respects similar to the Vedic. Fires 
are installed on three altars. The domestic altar is circular, the offering altar, 
square. On the Iranian side there seems to be better evidence than in the 
Vedas for Dumézil's view that the three fires are connected with the three 
main subdivisions of society: farmers being represented by the domestic fire, 
priests by the offering fire, and soldiers by the third, which wards off evil 
influences. We are not surprised at this statement, for Dumézil often over- 
shoots the mark (for a recent critique, see Gonda 1974). In Iran, fires were 
also transported. For example, in front of the army of the last Darius, in 331 
B.C., embers were carried from a Varathragna fire (Boyce 1975, 459; Voro- 
thragna corresponds to Vedic vrtrahan, “slayer of the demon Vrtra," i.e., 
Indra). 

Some of these structures are not only Indo-Iranian, but Indo-European. 
The Romans had a circular domestic altar for Vesta (aedes rotunda), and also 
templa quadrata. In Latin, focus or foculus (unlike ara) refers to an optionally 
movable fireplace. In Umbrian, the word for “movable fireplace" is ahti 
(Nagy 1974, 89-92). 

In Iran, many features of the fire cult survived in later times, which is 
largely due to the fact that Zarathustra (around 600 B.c.?) retained and de- 
veloped them. This contrasts to some extent with the Indian development, 


93 


——s 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


for remnants of the Vedic fire cult are confined to the homes of Brahmin 
ahitagnis in relative isolation from the development of Hinduism. Even out- 
side the brahminical tradition, however, oblations into the fire (oma) have 
remained common in India. In Iran there has been a tendency to identify each 
pre-Islamic temple as a fire temple. In point of fact, fire temples do not seem 
to be earlier than the fourth century B.c., and may have been built as a reac- 
tion against the temple worship of other deities represented by icons (Boyce 
1975). Only much later, in the Sassanid period (226-650 A.D.), did fire temples 
become the main religious centers. They were square, with a dome-shaped 
roof, and made of stone. There were also movable altars. The king took his 
personal fire with him on such an altar when he went ona campaign (Widen- 
gren 1965, 273). 

Throughout the development of the fire cult in Iran, fire was referred to 
as ātur. The agnidhra, kindling priest of the Vedic ritual, has for his Iranian 
counterpart the ātravaxš priest. The term agni may be present in Old Iranian 
in the personal name Ag-nu-par-nu (found in a letter addressed to Assurbani- 
pal between 650 and 640 n.c.), and once again in Avestan dāštayni, of uncer- 
tain meaning, and therefore uncertain as a testimony (Wikander 1946, 35, 
102—103). 

The Iranian and Vedic fire rituals reflect the nomadic character of the 
Indo-Iranians. In contrast with the temples of later Hinduism and of the 
earlier Indus civilization (Wheeler 1968, 52-53; cf. Parpola, c.s., 1969, 5), 
there are no temples in the Vedic ritual. Vedic rites are performed inside 
temporary structures, constructed and consecrated at the beginning of the 
ritual, and burnt at its completion. Ritual implements are made of perishable 
materials such as wood and clay. These implements are also afterwards 
burnt, or else submerged in water. Caland observed that “the ritual was often 
metaphorically assimilated to a march, a voyage, an expedition, and involved 
in fact a large number of procession-like movements” (Caland and Henry 
1906, 450; quoted by Wasson 1972, 14, who compares it to а “trip”). The 
name of the chief priest of the ritual, the adhvaryu, is also reminiscent of this 
nomadic background: it is related to adhvan, “way, road, course.” The re- 
lated word adhvara, “ritual,” may originally have meant “ceremonial trip” 


. (Mayrhofer: feierlicher Gang). These survivals of the nomadic way in India 


parallel the way of Taoism in China, which similarly incorporates remnants 
of the nomadic culture of Inner Asia (cf. Staal 1975, 204). 

Like the nomadic invaders of Europe and the Near East, the Vedic 
nomads imported their horses and chariots as well as tools and weapons that 
were superior to those used in the sedentary civilizations they encountered. 
Whether they carried fire across the mountains of the Hindukush and the 
Western Himalayas is an open question to which archaeology has yet to pro- 
vide an answer. Basham (1954, 27) has observed that: 


At Chanhu Daro, on the lower Indus, the Harappā people were 
94 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


replaced by sguatters, living in small huts with fireplaces, an 
innovation which suggests that they came from a colder climate. 


While the indebtedness of the Vedic nomads to the culture of their 
Indo-European ancestors is well-known, their links with cultural trends in 
Central Asia remain relatively unexplored. In the area of language there is 
evidence of contact between Indo-European and Finno-Ugrian, but its inter- 
pretation is controversial. In later times, Finno-Ugrian has borrowed a con- 
siderable number of words from Indo-Iranian (Burrow 1973, 24). As a glance 
at Map A shows, the present distribution of Shamanism (after Findeisen 
1957) covers much of the same area where once Indo-European languages 
were spoken. It is not surprising to find links between Shamanism and the 


culture of the Vedic nomads. In the area of religion, several features of Vedic j 


| 


ritual have been characterized as shamanistic. Eliade (1964, 403ff.) has | 


pointed out similarities in what he has called ‘‘ascensional rites.” To reach 
heaven and the gods, the yajamāna climbs a ladder set against the yūpa, or 
sacrificial pole cut from a tree. When he reaches the top of the ladder, he 
spreads his arms as a bird spreads its wings. The Siberian shamans also climb 
trees and dispatch sacrifices by putting a tree or pole through the spoke hole 
of their huts. They are also compared to birds, in particular eagles. In either 
case, the pole represents the axis mundi. Though Eliade regards these rites 
as characteristic of Vedic ritual in general, they occur only in the Vajapeya 
ritual (and can be seen on van Buitenen's film of its 1955 performance), which 
does not, however, diminish the significance of the parellelism. The ecstatic 
flight occurs, furthermore, in Rgveda 10.136 (see Staal 1975, 197-198, 204— 
208), which has other shamanistic overtones. 

Apart from the importance of the bird of prey for shamanistic and Vedic 
culture, the shamans also performed a horse sacrifice that may be related to 
the A$vamedha or Vedic horse sacrifice (Eliade 1964, 199). Finally, there is 
an analogy in the function of some shamans and of one of the Vedic priests. 
The Ugrian shaman takes part in sacrifices only indirectly: “Не confines 
himself to praying and guiding the victims’ souls to the respective divinities. 
. . . Even when he takes part in sacrifices, the shaman plays more of a 
'spiritual role" (Eliade 183). This is reminiscent, as Eliade has observed, of 
the role of the Brahman priest in Vedic rituals (see above, page 46). 

The similarities between Shamanism and Buddhism are more striking. 
I shall revert to them in the next section. The word shaman itself has been 


derived from a Prakrit derivative of Sanskrit Sramana, a term that denotes | 
(non-Vedic) ascetics and monks, in particular Buddhist monks. This etymo- | 


| 
Í 
| 


logy remains controversial. There are also similarities between Shamanism | 
and Yoga (see, e.g., Ruben 1940; cf. also Nélle 1953). It seems likely that | 


many of these similarities can be explained in historical terms. However, for 
the time being, details of historical connections are lacking because most of 
the data on Shamanism are relatively recent. 


95 


4 


PART I THe AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


Let us return to the Vedic nomads and their adventures in South Asia. 
On Indian soil, the invaders continued their course in an eastern direction. 
During the later Vedic period, the predominant migration is from west to 
east: "From the west people go to the east, conquering lands” (Kathaka Sam- 
hitā 26.2, quoted in Rau 1957, 13). This eastward move remained confined 
to the plains north of the Ganges, which was crossed only much later. To the 
present day, only the left bank of the Ganges is considered pure and holy. 
Every visitor to Varanasi (Banaras) will recall that across from the city, on 
the opposite shore of the river, there is an uninhabited wasteland. Not every 
tourist knows that, in the early morning, the orthodox cross the river in small 
boats to empty their bowels on this inauspicious side. Thus a gigantic public 
toilet commemorates the non-Aryanized lands of the past. 

That the southward movement started only much later is consistent 
with the general inauspiciousness of the south, referred to in many Vedic 
sources. The south is the region of death and of the ancestors. The head of a 
corpse should generally point to the south (Caland 1896, 16, 39). Nirrti, 
Goddess of Disaster, is propitiated to the south of the Old Hall (below, page 
343). The havis offering may not be moved to the south (Taittiriya Brahmana 
2.1.3.4, quoted in Mylius 1972, 370). This orientation remains a characteristic 
of Hinduism and survives to the present day. Siva as the divine preceptor 
(daksiņāmūrti) faces south because the traditional teachings come from the 
north (Staal 1975, 145). In some nonbrahmin temples in south India, vege- 
tarian deities and rites, which come from the north, are on the northern side, 
os nonvegetarian deities and rites are on the southern side (Dumont 1953, 

с Moving to the east and then to the south is also moving with the sun. 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


cabulary borrowings (see e.g., Burrow 1973, 24). Whether its origin is Turkic 
or Indo-Iranian, the Vedic nomads must have found that this orientation was 
in accordance with the direction of their migrations in the Indian subconti- 
nent. 

The eastward marches of the Vedic nomads were accompanied by bat- 
tles, cattle raids, and the burning of forests. According to Kosambi, it would 
not have been possible to clear the land near the Ganges by burning: the 
riparian jungle was still too thick for agrarian settlement. ““The main Aryan 
settlements therefore extended eastwards in a chain, a thin line along the 
Himalayan foothills to southern Nepal." The original expansion was limited 
to the foothills west of the Gandak river (Kosambi 1972, 90). 

In the northern plain of the Ganges, the rivers flow roughly from north 
to south. This interrupted the burning of the forests by Agni. These events 
are referred to in a famous passage of the Satapatha Brahmana (1.4.1.14-17), 
in which the Sadānīrā is probably the same as the modern river Gandak: 


14. Videgha Māthava was at that time on the river Sarasvatī. 
From there, he (Agni) went burning along this land, towards 
the east. Gotama Rāhūgaņa and Videgha Mathava followed 
him as he burned. He scorched all these rivers. The Sadanira, 
which flows from the northern mountain, that one he never 
burned. Of old, Brahmins never crossed it, thinking, “It was 
not burned by Agni Vaisvānara.” 

15. But now, there are many Brahmins to the east of it. Then the 
(land) was wild, and swampy, untasted by Agni Vaisvanara. 

16. Now, it is cultivated, for Brahmins made Agni taste it through 


| This is widely believed to lead to victory and all things auspicious. It is re- the rituals. But even in late summer, the river nearly rages, so 
| flected in the clockwise circumambulation (pradaksina) of a sacred area or cold it is, never burned by Agni Vaišsvānara. 
( object, which is kept to the right (daksina) side of the wanderer. The term 17. Videgha Māthava then said (to Agni), “Where am I to live?" 


pradaksina occurs for the first time in the sütra literature, and remains the 
predominant auspicious movement of Indian religion, Hindu, Buddhist, and 
Jaina (in contradistinction to the Tibetan Bón religion, where the auspicious 
circumambulation is counterclockwise). This clockwise movement has 
spread all over Asia and is also found elsewhere (see, e.g., Seidenberg forth- 
coming). 

Ideally, man faces east. Hence Sanskrit daksina, "south," means also 
“right”; uttara, “north,” means also “ей”; and pratyafic, west," means 
also "behind." Ruben (1939, 288) has drawn attention to parallels from Cen- 
tral Asia. According to Thomsen (1924, 134), among the Turkic peoples, the 
principal direction is the east. Hence east is called “іп front"; west, **be- 
hind"; south, "right"; and north, “‘left.” This testimony from Turkic in- 
scriptions in stone, found in Mongolia, is relatively late (8th century А.р.), 
and it is possible that it is a borrowing from the Indo-Iranians, like other vo- 


96 


“Your home is to the east," he answered. Even now this river 
is the boundary of the Kosalas and the Videghas, for these are 
the descendents of Māthava. 


Weber, who was the first to draw attention to this passage (1850, 170— 
172), has also argued that Sandilya, author of the Agnirahasya, "Secret 
of the Fire Altar" (Satapatha Brahmana book, x), belonged to the north- 
west. One reason he adduced is that books vi-x refer only as to the peoples 
of the northwest. Mylius (1972, 373) has confirmed this by drawing attention 
to Šatapatha Brāhmana 9.1.2.26, which describes the climate as “‘freezing 
cold" (prašīta), a condition more easily applicable to the Panjab than to 
whatis now called Uttar Pradesh. According to Weber, preoccupation with 
a fire cult is also more intelligible in the northwest, because of the relative 
proximity of the Iranians. In support of this view he referred to a term for 


97 


PLATE 3 


PART Ī THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


measurement, vitasti, which is found in the Avesta and in book X of the 
Satapatha Brahmana (Weber 1873, 266-267). This view may need qualification 
because of the subsequent excavations. The northwest was also the strong- 
hold of the Indus civilization, and it is very likely that there was an indig- 
enous fire cult there. Books VI to X of the Satapatha Brahmana are later 
than the other books (as shown by Minard 1936, 96, 104, extending earlier 
investigations by Brunnhofer). It would seem likely that this interpretation 
of the Agnicayana, composed in the northwest, was a response to an in- 
digenous fire cult, with which it was partly integrated. We shall find detailed 
evidence in support of such a view (below pages 154-162). There is a further 
characteristic of the northwesterners to which Weber has drawn attention. 
When the nomadic tribes went further east, the caste system began to become 
more ramified. Later, the northwesterners were looked down upon precisely 
ae they lacked the niceties of a sophisticated caste system (Weber 1850, 
One should not visualize these movements exclusively in terms of a large- 
scale invasion. There were frequent raids, which are reflected in the rituals, 
as Heesterman has shown. The rites of the “yoking offerings" (prayujam 
havimsi), for example, refer to the Kuru-Paiicāla people, known for their 
ritualistic zeal. They marched east during the cold season, seized the barley 
crop, fed their men and animals, and returned before the rains (cf. Rau 1957, 
15; Heesterman 1957,.211; 1962, 15). It may be noted here that there is no 
reason to assume that the climate was very different from what it is now- 
adays (cf. Raikes and Dyson 1962 for the western region; Mylius 1972, 373- 
374 for the upper and middle Ganges plain). 
| Similar expeditions are reflected in the Yātsattras, Soma rituals that re- 
quire the participants to move each day a šamyā throw (the šamyā is a 
wooden peg, used to fasten a yoke). Thus the invaders moved along the 
rivers Sarasvati and Drsadvati, each time performing a ritual (Heesterman 
1962, 34-35). They moved in a northeastern direction (Jaiminiya Brahmana 
2.297) and therefore upstream (Paūcavimša Brahmana 25.10.12), since the 
Sarasvati flows to the southwest. The havirdhāna and sadas sheds were moved 
on wheels. Since the term havirdhāna refers primarily to the Soma cart, 
and secondarily to the shed in which two Soma carts are installed (later more 
explicitly called: havirdhāna-maņdapa), this suggests that during these ex- 
peditions, Soma was generally transported on a cart. The Soma cart of the 
ritual is not a chariot with spoked wheels, but has solid wheels. Though the 
Vedic nomads knew spoked wheels, they adopted the best means of 
transport of the Indus civilization and of contemporary Sumer: a cart with 
solid wheels (Basham 1954, 29). 
All nomads engage in raids, especially cattle raids. There is evidence for 
neolithic cattle raids in South India, and the stealing of cattle remained one 
of the great themes of the earliest Tamil literature (Allchin 1963, 172). That 


98 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


the Vedic nomads engaged in such raids is not surprising. What is interesting 
is that these raids, like the eastward movement of Agni, were reflected and 
preserved in the Vedic ritual. 

A passage of the Jaiminiya Brahmana (2.299) shows that the nomads 
were not always victorious: during a Yātsattra, the leader was killed by hunt- 
resses (vyüdhini) of the Trikartas or the Salvas (tribes which lived in the 
region around what is now Lucknow). When members of the expedition 
lost heart, one of the priests admonished them: “Those who were killed went 
to heaven (for it was a sacrifice), and those who survived are now the most 
praiseworthy, for they had all been a wretched lot to begin with." As in later 
times and other lands, religion was at hand where worldly objectives failed. 

The burning of forests creates pastures and paves the way for agriculture. 
The Vedas swarm with cattle and often mentiori agriculture (krsi; for details, 
see Rau 1957, 25-26). The ritual also abounds in references to cattle: they 
constitute the best daksina, and the bricks of the fire altar are expected to 
turn into cows. Agriculture is reflected in numerous rites, e.g., those which 
involve a plough (sira). The field for Agni i is ploughed before the altar is 
constructed. The ploughing rites are rich in symbolism that relates to agri- 


“culture; fertility, and sexuality (see e.g., Dange 1970, 73-74; 1971, ch.V, 


dealing with Rgveda 10.101). Just as fire can be installed after ploughing is 
over, there are many festivals where a bonfire is made after ploughing (for 
‘south India, see Allchin 1963, 133-135). Since the burning of forests leads to 
new pastures and agriculture, fire festivals are generally connected with cat- 
tle and'fertility (for Europe and Iran, see Allchin 1963, 136-142; for Greece, 
Nilsson 1923). 

Throughout the ritual we find expressions of the desire for space and the 
concern with lebensraum: In the Soma rituals, when Agni and Soma are car- 


“ried forthiinaneasterly direction to the new offering altar, the adhvaryu recites: 


“This Agni must create space for me, he must go in front destroying the 
enemies; hotly roused he should conquer the enemies, at the booty winning 
he should conquer booty “‘(Taittiriya Samhita 1.3.4.1 c, quoted by Heester- 
man 1962, 35). During this fire transportation (agnipranayana) other deities 
are also invoked. When the adhvaryu arrives at the offering fire, he offers 
a spoonful of clarified butter and recites: “Visnu, make a wide step. Make 
wide space for us to live" (Taittirtya Samhita 1.3.4.1 d). The same mantra 
is recited during the animal sacrifice when an offering is made for the sacri- 
ficial pole. The animal sacrifice itself is characterized in the following terms: 
“Those who perform the animal sacrifice, conquer all the worlds” (Apastamba 
Srauta Sūtra 7.1.1.). The terms for “wide” (uru) and “world” (Joka) are 
often combined, from the Rgveda onward. The expression urum lokam 
kr- means: “to make wide space, room" (Gonda 1966, 23). 

The term loka is Indo-European, the reconstructed original “Jouko re- | 


ferring to а “тоге or less open space to which the light of day has access” | 


99 


PLATE 3 
The Soma Cart 
Soma is transported on a cart after it has been purchased and before 
it is installed on a throne and worshipped as King Soma. Though 


the Vedic nomads knew chariots with spoked wheels, the Soma 
cart has solid wheels. 


IOO 


NA RT A I 


IOI 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


(Gonda 1966, 9). In Latin, such a clearing was called /ucus, which later came 
to mean “grove.” The Romans and Umbrians placed fire in such a grove 
(Nagy 1974, 91). These terms are related to Latin /ux, English “light,” etc. 
According to Gonda, an intermediary in meaning may be Vedic roka, which 
means “‘light, lustre, brightness,” and is also an attribute of Agni. May we 
go a step further and assume that it is Agni who was responsible for these 
clearings in the forest? Gonda does refer, in an accompanying footnote, to 
the making of clearings in the forest by burning, but this should presumably 
be read in conjunction with the solemn warning he had sounded a few 
pages earlier: 


At this point the question arises as to how far the importance of the 
Vedic loka-concept can be seen as a universalization of concrete 
social, economic, political and psychological situations in which 
either peaceful pastoral and cattle-breeding populations were threat- 
ened by inroads of nomadic tribes and deprived of their dwelling 
places, or nomads did not in endless jungles, forests and mountains 
succeed in finding sufficient Lebensraum for their increasing 
numbers. Although it may be readily conceded that the incessant 
struggle for means of subsistence, and especially for a sufficiency of 
fields and pastures can hardly fail to leave its imprint on the view of 
life of a community, one should guard against any exaggeration. 


So far much of what I have said is summed up in the words of the Rgve- 
da (1.93.6): “Agni and Soma! Strengthened by brahman, you have made 
ample space for the ritual.” Geldner comments on this passage by saying that 
it reflects the spread of the Aryan cult (das heisst sie haben den arischen Kult 
ausgebreitet). Similar words are addressed to Indra and Visnu (Rgveda 
7.99.4). Gonda interprets these passages in a wider sense, stressing the 
general implication that the ritual should be successful (Gonda 1966, 21). 
This is no doubt the sense they acquired in the context of the ritual, which 
could not possibly have survived if it had only been a celebration of battles 
and raids. What we witness here, however, is a significant transition that is 
characteristic of ritual in general. We met with this transition in this book for 
the first time when we observed that the transportation of fire became ritual 
when it was no longer functional, because the art of making fire had been dis- 
covered. Similarly, there certainly was a time when the Vedic nomads went 
on expeditions that were accompanied by battles, cattle raids, forest burning, 
songs and recitations, ritual transportation of fire, and ritual celebrations of 
Soma. But when the nomads began to settle in the subcontinent and estab- 
lished lasting relationships with the indigenous inhabitants, the expeditions 
receded to the background and the accompanying activities lost their ac- 
companying function. When the Soma also became increasingly rare (see 


102 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


next section), the ritual character of all these activities became predominant, 
and the success of the ritual itself became the primary concern of the parti- 
cipants. Thus ritual was the sole survivor and all other activities were ritualiz- 
ed. 

Rituals tend to absorb everything that has gone before and has lost its 
original function. Earlier gods are also incorporated. The term uru, “уйе,” 
is found in frequent association with the all-pervading activities of Visnu 
(Gonda 1954, 68-71). Visnu has also been connected with a surveyor; and his 
three steps can be read into a Harappan inscription (Parpola 1976, 147-148). 
In the Rgveda, Visnu is described as taking three steps, which may indicate 
that he was originally an independent third, and the connecting link between 
gods and demons and between heaven and earth (Kuiper 1962). Though he 
lost this function, the three steps survived in the ritual, where the yajamana 
takes three steps at the end of his consecration. During the Vedic marriage 
ceremonies, the number is increased: bride and bridegroom take seven steps 
toward the northeast. The Buddha also took seven steps (immediately after 
he was born), and so do the shamans of Inner Asia (Eliade 1964, 405-406). 

Soma is called urugavyūti, “with wide pasture" (Rgveda 9.90.4). But 
the god who is most closely connected with battle is Indra, the leading di- 
vinity of the Rgveda. With Visnu, Indra shares the characteristic of “making 
room" (Gonda 1966, 21). Like Agni, he is aggressive and victorious. In the 
Soma ritual, before Agni and Soma are jointly carried forth (agnisomaprana- 
yana), Agni is carried forth by himself (agnipranayana), as in the animal 
sacrifice. During this procession the adhvaryu recites mantras for Agni, 
Indra, and other deities, asking strength and wealth for the yajamāna and 
expressing the hope that his enemies will be slain (T aittiriya Samhita 4.6.3). 
If the Soma ritual includes an Agnicayana, another recitation is added during 
the carrying forth of Agni: the “second hota” (one of the other priests: see 
Caland’s note to Apastamba Srauta Sūtra 17.14.7) recites a long hymn to 
Indra, the Apratiratha or “Song to the irresistible warrior” (Taittiriya Sam- 
hitā 4.6.4). The verses of this Taittirīya recitation correspond to a large 
extent to a late hymn of the Rgveda (10.103), attributed to Indra's son 
Apratiratha,” which is, in Geldner's words, “а vigorous battle song ad- 
dressed to soldiers leaving on a campaign" (ein urwüchsiges . . . Schlacht- 
lied, das den ausziehenden Soldaten nachgesungen wird). The remainder of 
Taittirīya Samhita 4.6.4 is made up of verse from another Rgvedic hymn 
(6.75) that glorifies battle. In the Apratiratha recitation, the background of 
the agnipranayana ceremony becomes explicit. Indra is invoked as a vic- 
torious warrior or hero, “fond of slaughter, disturber of people," who— 
with the help of his arrows, chariots, and troups—destroys the enemies. 
When the second hota recites: “Comrades, follow in Indra's footsteps!" he 
sounds less like an officiating priest than like a gang leader or commander- 
in-chief. This hymn of battle refers in passing to daksina, sacrifice, and Soma, 


103 


Part I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


which were clearly associated with the expedition, side by side with cattle 
raids, the killing of enemies, and the provision of lebensraum (“Yours will 
be space wider than wide !"). 

If it is true that there was an earlier stage of development, during which 
battles and victories were real, and a later stage, by which time they had 
become ritual, it should be possible to determine—if not in absolute terms, 
at least with reference to our texts—when the first stage was completed and 
the second began. It would seem probable, for example, that the earlier 
Samhita literature reflected real battles, which, by the time of the ritual 
sütras, had become fully ritualized. However, this is not the case. What we 
find instead is an inextricable mixture. In the Samhità we meet with phrases 
that in spite of their military bearing, are already ritualized. In the $rauta 
sütras there are, side by side with ritual descriptions, passages that can only 
make sense in a warlike context. 

An example of the former is the mantra of Taittiriya Samhita 1.3.1.1 
c: *He who hates us and whom we hate, here I cut off his neck." This is com- 
mented upon in several bráhmanas (Taittiriya Samhita 6.1.8.4; cf. 6.2.10.2; 
6.3.9.2), e.g.: “There are two persons: one whom he hates, and one who 
hates him. Surely, he should cut off the necks of both, successively." This 
mantra, which is frequently recited, has a purely ritual use: it is recited when 
the soil is prepared for sacrificial use with the help of a ritual implement, the 
Wooden knife (sphya). This rite is put in perspective by another brahmana 
(Taittiriya Samhita 2.6.4.3), which explains that the enemy has to be excluded 
from the altar, adding that the making of an altar is a cruel act. 

Though the description of the Srauta sütras is concerned with ritual, 
there are occasional references to enemies of flesh and blood. When the clay 
for the ukhà pot is being collected, the adhvaryu should recite, among 
others, a very innocent sounding mantra: “In the way of the Angirases, we 
are going to fetch Agni hidden in the mud" (Taittiriya Samhita 4.1.2.2 g). 
When should this mantra be recited? When an enemy (dvesya) is met on the 
way (Apastamba Srauta Sütra 16.2.6, with Caland's note; cf. Heesterman 
1967, 37 : Keith 1914, 290, note 5). Similarly, when the ground for the fire 
altar is being prepared, the adhvaryu casts lumps of clay around, turning 
clockwise, and taking the last lump from the direction of his enemy (Apas- 
tamba Srauta Sutra 16.20.6; cf. Keith 1914, 318 note 9). Here the correspond- 
ing brāhmaņa (Taittiriya Samhita 5.2.5.6) merely states that the person who 
is in that quarter is hungry. Such references to enemies in the $rauta sütras 
are not to ritual enemies or demons, as students of religion may be predis- 
posed to expect. These enemies are real people, belonging to the original 
population. Heesterman has established the significance of several such pas- 
sages, to which I shall return in a later section. 

Rau (1957, 31) has some worthwhile things to say about many wide-. 
spread prejudices with regard to the Vedic Indians. Life in those days was not 


104 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


easy, neither for the Vedic nomads nor for the people they encountered. The 
Vedic texts repeatedly assert that the greatest enemy of man is hunger. The 
struggle for land and lebensraum was a struggle for survival. Rau concluded 
that there is no evidence in support of the view that the Vedic Indians “lived 
in a land of plenty, and had nothing better to do than lie under trees in lovely 
natural settings, meditate on questions of metaphysics and kneel before lotus 
flowers as gentle and beautiful people" (lebten . . . in einem Schlaraffenland 
and hatten nichts anders zu tun, als in landschaftlich lieblichen Gegenden, 
unter Baumen gelagert, den Problemen der Metaphysik nachzusinnen oder 
als schēne, stille Menschen vor Lotusblumen zu knien). 

It is not surprising that the ritual is not merely compared to a chariot, 
but that the ritual implements are considered weapons (Heesterman 1962, 
35). As we have already seen, the ritual recitations from the Rgveda were 
called šastra, a term derived from the verbal šams-, “recite,” which is homo- 
nymous with šastra, “sword,” from $as-, “cut down.” The Vedic nomads 
fought battles on many levels. 


SOMA 


So FAR WE have met with Soma in a variety of contexts. We have seen 
that the Vedic Indians evolved a hierarchy of Soma rituals. In each of these, 
Agni and Soma are the chief dramatis personae. They also occur among the 
ancient Iranians. In India, an Agnicayana may be optionally built in the 
place of the offering altar for the āhavanīya fire of a Soma ritual. In this 
book, the Agnicayana will receive more attention than the Soma rituals, 
partly because of limitations of space, and partly because the prototype of 
the Soma rituals, the Agnistoma, has been fully described by Caland and 
Henry. However, one cannot but agree with Wasson that “it cannot be 
gainsaid that Vedic culture with Soma unidentified is the play of Hamlet 
with Hamlet left out" (Wasson 1968, 7). 

We have seen that Soma is a god, a plant, and the liquid extracted from 
that plant. From the Brahmanas onwards, the ritualists made use of substi- 
tutes for the original Soma. These include Ephedra, Sarcostemma, and other 
creepers and plants without particularly remarkable properties. There are 
now two serious theories regarding the identity of the original Soma: Was- 
son’s theory that it was the hallucinogenic mushroom Amanita muscaria, or 
fly agaric (Wasson 1968), and Flattery's theory that it was the hallucinogenic 
plant Peganum harmala, or wild rue (Flattery, forthcoming). Wasson's 
book is widely available, and Mr. Flattery has given me access to the manu- 
script of his book prior to its publication. This is not the place to adjudicate 
between the two theories, which are both presented and argued with great 
skill and with considerable amounts of evidence (mostly Indian in the case 


105 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


of Wasson, and Iranian in the case of Flattery). Although Flattery’s work 
may not be published before the present work appears, Wasson's has already 
been widely discussed. Wasson’s identification has been accepted or regarded 
as probable by some Sanskrit scholars (Kuiper 1970, Ingalls 1971), and rejected 
by at least one other (Brough 1971), and he has replied to his critics (Was- 
son 1970, 1972). Wasson’s thesis implies, but is not implied by, a weaker 
thesis, namely that the original Vedic Soma was a hallucinogenic plant. I 
regard this as the most important part of Wasson’s hypothesis, the part, 
moreover, that has not to my knowledge been seriously challenged. It is 
certainly accepted by Flattery. I think, in fact, that the validity of this weaker 
thesis can be taken as established. 

One of Wasson’s arguments in support of the view that Soma was the 
fly agaric is the shamanistic use of the fly agaric as a hallucinogen in different 
parts of Siberia. Though Brough has ruled out the probative value of such 
parallels (Brough 1971, 332), it cannot be denied that circumstantial evidence 
of this type is obviously evidence too (as Brough accepts at least in practice). 
Moreover, in the domain of a historical hypothesis, we cannot expect any- 
thing like a final proof; we are dealing with degrees of probability. Flattery, 
too, has referred to parallels, without even ascribing possible historical con- 
nections. The chief active drug in Peganum harmala is harmine, which is also 
the main active ingredient in Banisteriopsis, the yajé of the upper Amazon 
(Flattery, $$ 36-38). The connections between the beliefs of the Vedic nomads 
and shamanistic beliefs, to which I have referred several times, add to the 
plausibility of Wasson’s hypothesis, but they also support Flattery’s theory: 
Peganum harmala is available, in fact conspicuous, throughout the “Greater 
Iranian area,” viz., "west of China, north of India, east of the civilizations 
of Mesopotamia . . . , and south of the subarctic forests of Siberia” (Flat- 
tery, 88 28, 42-45). 

Like the use and worship of fire, the use and worship of hallucinogens 
takes us back to the prehistory and early history of mankind. Though 
archaelogical evidence for the use of hallucinogens is scarce, historical 
evidence from various areas is available, and anthropological evidence is 
plentiful. The sum of evidence points to a human experience almost as 
ancient and widespread as the experience of fire. That this has been dis- 
covered only recently is due to recent fashions, but also to the scarcity of 
material evidence in combination with the bias of our own culture, which 
regards material evidence as more patently obvious than psychological 
evidence. 

The use of mushrooms is attested for the Neolithic (Boletes in the Swiss 
lake-dwelling cultures). We have already noted the ancient uses of fungi as 
tinder in the process of fire making. “Mushroom stones” from the Mayas, 
in what are now Mexico and Guatemala, constitute the oldest evidence for 
the cult of a hallucinogenic mushroom. The earliest of these stones date 
from the thirteenth to the tenth century B.C., the latest from 800-900 А.р. 


106 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


The Mayan mushroom stones generally represent a mushroom on top of an 
animal and are 20 to 35 centimeters high (Heim 1963, 206). | 

The idea of a herb of immortality, most probably a hallucinogen, 1s at 
least as old as the Sumerian Gilgamesh epic, which takes us back to about 
2,000 в.с. Wasson has suggested that the Taoist belief in “magic mushrooms’ 
constitutes evidence of systematic ritual use of hallucinogenic substances, 
and Needham has endorsed this view (Needham 1974, V, 121). Needham 
also suggests that the Taoists generated hallucinogenic smokes in their 
incense burners (ibid., 150-154). In recent times, the use of hallucinogens of 
plant origin has been found in all parts of the world, especially in the Атеп- 
cas (for а survey see Schultes 1969). Apart from mushrooms (see especially 
Heim 1963), these include cacti, shrubs, various leguminous trees, and 
seeds that are eaten, drunk, smoked, or sniffed. Many of these plants are 
considered sacred. The Mexican Indians regarded them as mediators with 
the gods. The Chontal Indians of Oaxaca call their hallucinogenic shrub 
“leaf of god,” and the Aztecs refer to the sacred mushroom as “‘god’s flesh 
(Schultes 1969, 254; Wasson 1972, 47). In a characteristic reversal, the Chris- 
tian invaders of Mexico called the Aztec ololiuqui (Morning Glory) a **dia- 
bolic seed" (Schultes 252). | 

One of the best arguments for the hallucinogenic character of Soma 1s 
the Vedic distinction between the effects of Soma and the effects of sură, 
a fermented drink. While Soma leads to “ecstasy,” “happiness,” or “rapture 
(mada, sumada), sura produces “evil intoxication” (durmada). O'Flaherty 
refers in this connection to Satapatha Brahmana 5.1.2.10: “Soma is truth, 
prosperity, light; and sura untruth, misery, darkness” (Wasson 1968, 95, 
137, еїс.). The surā beverage is used in some of the classical Vedic rituals, 
e.g., in the Vājapeya and in the Sautramani. 

In the Vedic rituals, Soma is introduced into the sacrificial enclosure 
at the ceremony of somakraya, “purchase of Soma.” The Soma merchant and 
the adhvaryu (on behalf of the yajamāna) engage in ritual haggling about the 
price, but in the end the Soma stalks are taken away by force and the mer- 
chant is beaten with a stick and driven away. According to Renou, these 
ceremonies show that the traffic in Soma may at one time have been illegal. 
At the same time we are reminded of the fact that Soma, like Agni, was 
considered stolen from heaven, and again stolen back frora the demons 
(O’Flaherty 1976, 99-104). 

According to the Rgveda, Soma is the elixir of life, indispensable for 
both men and gods. It is amrtam, the draught of immortality. This term 15 
Indo-European: amrtam (English *immortality") corresponds, for example, 
to the Greek &ußpocia (for the development of these and related words in 
Sanskrit and Greek, see Thieme 1952, 15-34). Indra is especially fond of 
Soma. Soma and Agni are in many ways connected, as we have seen. Soma 
has various properties in common with other Vedic gods. He is treated as 
a king and invoked as a fighting god, a valiant commander, a hero, and a 


107 


———À 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


destroyer of enemies (Gonda 1965, 52). Soma, in this respect again similar 
to Agni, was brought down from heaven by a bird of prey (Syena). 

The Iranian evidence seems to suggest that the haoma was fairly com- 
mon. According to the Rgveda, the Soma plant grew in the mountains, and 
the best Soma came from Mount Mūjavant (which probably corresponds 
to the Mufijavant of the later epic). The mountains referred to are presum- 
ably those of the Western Himalayas and the Hindukush. That Soma, ac- 
cording to the Rgveda, grew in the mountains is consistent with Wasson's 
hypothesis. Though the fly agaric grows at sea level in northern Eurasia, 
it is found south of the Oxus and in India only at a great height, around 8,000 
to 16,000 feet (Wasson 1968, 23, referring to birches and conifers, with which 
the fly agaric grows in mycorrhizal relation). If we had some means of iden- 
tifying the routes that the Indo-Iranians travelled, it would be worthwhile 
to look there, even at present, for Amanita muscaria and other hallucinogenic 
plants. Actually, we do have some evidence, provided we assume that the 
Indo-Europeans followed some of the same ancient trade routes that Bud- 
dhism travelled two millenia later in the opposite direction. 

The relative ease with which Buddhism entered Central Asia and was 
accepted there may make us pause and reflect on the significance of these 
mountainous areas where the Soma grew. Vedic culture is generally ap- 
proached from two perspectives: a linguistic perspective that stresses the 
Indo-European background, and a religious perspective that stresses the 
Hindu sequel. The history of India and Central Asia taken together shows 
that such labels are misleading and that the Buddhist migrations are part of 
the story. Not only Central-Asian Buddhism, but Buddhism in general, 
contains many elements that are shamanistic. It is becoming increasingly 
clear that the Vedic nomads introduced shamanistic elements into India. 
Though Buddhism is generally characterized as a reaction against the Vedic 
religion, this is a rather sweeping generalization. Closer inspection of the 
facts would show that there has been at least as much continuity as there has 
been opposition. The myths of Indra and the legends of the Buddha, for 
example, have many features in common. The techniques of immortality, 
which evolved in the Upanisads from a ritual background, are similar to 
Yoga and to Buddhist techniques. Many of these notions contain shamanis- 
tic elements that the Vedic nomads took from Central Asia to India, and 
that the Buddhists took back 2,000 years later. From the perspective of 
Central Asia, these shamanistic ideas and practices, which continued to exist 
in their original homeland, merely returned after a long holiday in India. 
The labels we attach to the major civilizations and religions of the area 
obscure the fact that the underlying reality is probably better described 
as a continuous exchange of people, goods, and ideas between India and 
Central Asia. 

India is often pictured as an isolated country, separated from the rest 
of the world by a formidable barrier of mountains. Though this often leads 


108 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


to the unnecessary assumption that India is a land of mystery, there is some 
truth in the geographical observation. At the same time, it should not be 
exaggerated. The western route linking the Indus and the Oxus, passing 
through northeast Afghanistan, though long, is not very arduous. Further 
east, the valley of the upper Indus in what is now Ladakh (northwest India) 
and the Tarim basin in what is now Sinkiang (western China) are separated 
by about 250 miles of mountainous tracks. Even with a pass of 18,000 
feet on the way, such a distance can be covered on foot in less than a 
month, at least during the summer. 

Now let us follow the story of Soma after it entered the Indian subcon- 
tinent. The original Soma was soon lost. From the period of the Brahmanas, 
it was replaced by substitutes, because the Vedic nomads had left the moun- 
tains (Wasson), or at any rate the “Greater Iranian area” (Flattery), and 
Soma did not grow in the Indian plains. It is significant that with the gradual 
disappearance of the original Soma the rituals became increasingly complex. 
Similar circumstances prevail elsewhere. The best Peyote comes from the Rio 
Grande Valley, where it also grows most abundanily. The Indians of the 
southern tribes go on ceremonial collection trips to get it. But the Indians of 
the northern tribes are further away, have to secure their supply through the 
mail, and incorporate less Peyote in their ceremonies. At the same time, 
they begin their ceremonies with purification by means of purges, sweat 
baths, and fasting. Fischer (1958, 401) has suggested that these additional 
ceremonies, together with the more limited quantities of Peyote, serve the 
purpose of producing an experience of similar intensity as that evoked 
solely by larger doses of Peyote. Heim (1963, 21 1) reports that the Mexicans 
perform two kinds of rituals in connection with their hallucinogenic mush- 
rooms: in one, only mushrooms are consumed; in the other, mushrooms are 
consumed, but there is also a distribution of grains of maize. This second 
variety is imprégné de processus magique. Closer to home, announcements 
of rock concerts boast that the audience will get high without the use of 
drugs. In all these cases, ritual takes over where the hallucinogen itself is 1n 
limited supply or is altogether absent. Rgveda 7.26.1 asserts that the effects 
of Soma do not depend on mere ingestion: “Soma unpressed has never ine- 
briated Indra, nor the pressed juice unaccompanied by sacred hymns.” 
It seems likely, therefore, that the increasing complexity of the Soma rituals 
is a direct consequence of the decreasing availability of the original Soma 
(cf. Staal 1975, 182-183). Again we witness a development similar to what 
we found before. This time a substance that is no longer available is preserved, 
but only ritually. 

A simple example of such ritualization is the Apyayana rite. From the 
time Soma is purchased and enthroned south of the (old) offering altar until 
the Soma-pressing day, this rite is performed twice daily, in the morning 
and in the evening preceding the Pravargya. First the agnidh boils water. 
All the priests, except the Sāmavedins, wash their hands in that water. Then, 


109 


PLATES 38D, F; 


55 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


one by one, standing to the west of the Soma bundle, they touch King Soma 
and recite: “Stem for stem, O god Soma, swell for Indra who gains his share 
of wealth. Let Indra swell for you, and you swell for Indra” (Taittirtya Sam- 
hitā 1.2.11.1 a). The yajamāna adds: “Маке your friends swell with booty 
and skill; may I successfully accomplish your pressing, O god Soma” (ibid. 
b). From the first time this rite is performed until the time when Soma and 
Agni are carried forth to the new offering altar, the priests should wash 
their hands only in boiled water. 

The texts mention an alternative to the mere recitation of these mantras: 
the recitations may be accompanied by sprinkling the Soma bundle with the 
same warm water that had been boiled. Here lies the origin of the rite. The 
Soma plants were dried at the time they were acquired and had to swell by 
gradually absorbing water. In the course of the process of ritualization, Soma 
is no longer sprinkled with water but it is sprinkled with mantras. This is 
characteristic of Vedic ritual and reflects the Vedic belief in the power of 
language. For most ritual purposes, performing an act in words is as good 
as acting. In later times, rites are entirely replaced by recitations and, in the 
final resort, by inaudible meditations. 

The Āpyāyana rite supports Wasson’s hypothesis in a direct way. Two 
of the psychotropically active ingredients of Amanita muscaria are ibotenic 
acid and muscimol: 


When the fly agaric dries, the ibotenic acid steadily disintegrates and 
disappears. It is replaced by muscimol, which is at least five times 
more powerful. Thus we have the unique situation where a psycho- 
tomimetic agent converts itself through simple drying into another 
active agent that is more potent by far and more stable (Wasson 
1972, 12). 


The quantity of muscimol which has thus been reached remains constant 
when the substance is again mixed with water, milk, curds, or other liquids. 

It is likely that the precise treatment that the Soma substitutes receive 
in the ritual process leading up to the extraction of the juice will throw 
additional light on the identity of the original Soma. Such manipulations 
would have been preserved in ritual even if they were no longer functional, 
for as we have seen many times, preservation of features that have ceased 
to be functional is one of the chief characteristics of ritual. The exact quanti- 
ties and proportions used in mixtures are, moreover, important in determin- 
ing the psychotropic properties of hallucinogens (Waser 1967, 435, for ex- 
ample, reports considerable differences when the effects of 10 mg. muscimol 
are compared with those of 15 mg.). It is therefore relevant to determine 
how the Soma was measured and mixed with other substances. 

While the geographical origin of Soma lies in the high mountains of 
the western Himalayas, its mythical origin lies in heaven. This belief expresses 


IIO 


~ 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


the divine character of Soma and links it directly to Agni. Here the back- 
ground is not only shamanistic (as Wasson has shown) but also Indo-Euro- 
pean, the two probably being related (cf. Map A). In his famous book on 
the descent of fire and the divine beverage (1859, already, quoted), Adalbert 
Kuhn has shown that in all the major Indo-European languages—among 
the Indians, Greeks, Romans, and Germans—similar ideas are found about 
the celestial origin of fire and of the draught of immortality. Both originate 
primarily i in clouds, from which lightning and rain come down. The celestial 
fire is also related to the sun and is conceived in terms of kindling by friction. 

The kindling stick is the thunderbolt, which is known by various names: 


“vajra among "the Indians, KE paves among “the Greeks, cuneus among the 
Romans, and Donnerkeil among the "Germans. The ‘phallic character of 
these objects, though not emphasized by Kuhn, springs to mind. 


"The drink of immortality (amrta, &uppocia) descends from heaven in 
a similar manner. The Indian myths of the churning of the ocean show that 


brings the mE and fire down to earth, is ascacinted with a celestial tree 
in which he has his nest and whose branches provide the torch in which fire 
is transported. In Europe the celestial tree is often an ash. As we'hāve seen, 
the theft of fire and Soma is generally attributed’ to a bird, but may also be 
attributed to a personage such as Prometheus, whose name Kuhn related to 
the kindling stick (pramanthana). 

The Rgveda relates how the bird brought Soma down to earth from a 
mountain. Since Soma is a person, this act has the character of an abduc- 
tion, as Schneider (1971) has stressed. The bird helped Indra to obtain Soma, 
and both boasted of their prowess, as did Prometheus (above pages 84— 
85). In general, such legends are interwoven with references to numerous 
other stories. Some of these are no longer understood, and I shall not try to 
make them intelligible. In the following two hymns from the Rgveda, a 
demon, Sambara, is mentioned, who was also interested in Soma and tried 


to keep the bird from getting it. The chief enemy of Sambara was Divodasa | 


Atithigva- Puramdhi, possibly "giving fullness,” refers to the bird. 
Reveda 4.26 is spoken by Indra (the translation mostly follows Schnei- 
der 1971): 
1. I became Manu and Sirya; I am Kaksivat, мё agoi uar 
the wise seer; I invited Kutsa, the son of si gadi RARA Гїл: 1 
Arjuna; I am the inspired Ušanas—look эт FATT Sus 
at me! sé alte vadat ат 0 
2. I gave the earth to the Āryas; I gave rain мё qfar- 
to the mortal who offers sacrifice. I brought sé айй aga medi | 
the thundering waters; the gods follow my —— 


purpose. aa ard этя dumm N 
| III 


Part I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


. Ecstatic with Soma, I shattered the ninety- 
nine fortresses of Sambara all at once, and 
finally his citadel as the hundredth, helping 
Divodāsa Atithigva. 

. O Maruts, let the bird with lovely wings be 
above all birds, the swift-flying griffon 
above all griffons, since—by his own driving 
power that needs no chariot wheels—he 
brought Manu the oblation offered to the 
gods. 

. Trembling, whether he could bring it down, 
the bird swift as thought shot forth on the 
wide path; swiftly the griffon came with 
the Soma honey and won fame for that. 

. Stretching out in flight, holding the sprout, 
the griffon brought the inebriating and 
gladdening drink; the bird, companion of 
the gods, held the Soma tight as he took it 
from that higher heaven. 

. When the griffon had taken the Soma, he 
brought it, a thousand and ten thousand 
sacrificial draughts at once; Puramdhi left 
the enemies behind ; ecstatic with Soma, the 
wise one left the fools. 


мё чё неет eH 

«ad ur adn AAT | 
тая az ачап 
бетача araa ii 
я g q еї аса ater 
п зда: Bat emqweat 1 
srt sr erani sei 
gai wed dass N 


azz aff бєйт dure 
qgan діаг этїї | 
ай waren dāt 
a за! fafaz stat at ou 
ЙЧ AA TATA stat 
qrad: MHA APT ZH 
ФЯ эте aeg 891949; 
frat engen wea i 


arent saat stage, at 
AEA Tal AZT A ATT | 
erat glfrargratidi- 

аз aaa AT AAT | 


The next hymn, Rgveda 4.27, is spoken by Soma: 


. While still in the womb of my mother. Ī 
knew all the successive generations of the 
gods. A hundred iron fortresses guarded 
me, but the griffon and I swiftly flew away. 
. He did not drag me out against my will, for 
I surpassed him in energy and strength. In 
a flash, Puramdhi left the enemies behind, 
as he outran the winds, swollen (with 
Soma). 

. As the griffon came shrieking down from 
heaven, or from here, they carried Puram- 
dhi. As the archer Kréanu, with swift 
thought, slackened his bowstring and shot 
at him. 

. The griffon, stretching out in swift flight, 
brought Soma down from the great heights 
to Indra's camp, as the Ašvins brought 


II2 


if g gadu, 

ag Затаї атт feat | 
ard Hr gx STRA 

ad gt waar ĒRA, ll 
а at а wu sd atm 
siata raga dēlu | 
gat giaet- 

ga arti HATTA: N 


ҹа 49391 sedza eit 
fà яң uf art sg: gia | 
gag ялт aa g чта 
GTA AAA JAT, N 


[ы 


mfra gata я ped 
AA аит Feat ALA ow: | 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


Bhujyu out of the sea; inside fella wing F7 Чач, garda qu 
feather from the bird as he kept the course яя «ifa macer az a і 
of his flight. a 

5. The white goblet overflowing with Soma яч šā met MATE 
mixed with cow's milk, the clear juice afari naat spened: | 
offered by the adhvaryus, the finest honey— wer: add яз sm 
now let the generous Indra raise it to drink f agja Я gar бад 
until ecstatic with Soma; let the hero raise ait нач aft aa fadt н 
it to drink until ecstatic with Soma. 


The basic conviction underlying the Soma rituals is the belief that 
drinking Soma yields immortality. This belief is still alive. In the course of 
an interview on the significance of the ritual, Cherumukku Vaidikan, chief 
organizer of the 1975 performance, recited the relevant verse from the 
Rgveda (8.48.3; cf. below, page 617): 


We have drunk Soma, we have become immortal, 
We have come to the light, we have found the gods. 
What can the enmity, what can the intrigue 

of any mortal do to us now, o immortal one? 


THE COSMIC MAN 


EGGELING (1897, IV, xiv-xv) WAS PROBABLY the first to suggest that 
the Agnicayana is connected with a late hymn of the Rgveda, the Purusa- 
sūkta or “Hymn of the Cosmic Man" (Rgveda 10.90). This hymn is rela- 
tively recent because it occurs in the tenth and most recent book of the 
Rgveda, and because it refers by name to the three Vedas (rk, sāman, and 
yajus) and (for the first and only time in the Rgveda) to the four classes 
(brahmana, rājanya, vaisya, and šūdra). The Purusasükta is attributed to a 
seer called Narayana, and consists of sixteen verses: 


1. Purusa has a thousand heads, a thousand 
eyes, a thousand feet. He pervades the 
earth everywhere and extends beyond for 
ten fingers’ breadth. 

2. Purusa himself is all this, whatever has 
been, and whatever is to be. He is the lord 
of immortality and also lord of that which 
grows on food. 

3. Such is his greatness, and Purusa is yet 
greater than this. All creatures make up a saaa afšaisdi FIFA eT —— 
quarter of him; three quarters are the wets frat anit arai ffr u 
immortal in heaven. б k 


qudd чч: META: MEANT | 
я aft Radi qeaseifieeaigea t 


Get ча5 qu яше ga WEAR | 


pagans чазаа u 


113 


10. 


11. 


12; 


13; 


14. 


PARTI THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


. With three quarters Purusa has risen 


above, and one quarter of him still re- 
mains here, whence he spread out every- 
where, pervading that which eats and that 
which does not eat. 


. From him Virāj was born, and from Virāj 


came Purusa, who, having been born, 
ranged beyond the earth in the west and 
in the east. 


. When the gods performed the sacrifice, 


using Purusa as the offering, spring was 
the clarified butter, summer the fuel, au- 
tumn the oblation. 


. They sprinkled Purusa, the sacrifice, born 


at the beginning, upon the sacred grass. 
With him the gods, Sādhyas, and sages 
sacrificed. 


. From that sacrifice in which everything 


was offered the clarified butter was ob- 
tained, and they made it into those beasts 


(rare vua чач: urgisdišutaa, gar | 
чаї face emere, aerate APT |! 


аж тйзпє Pratt A чя: | 
= aay заба warf qe N 


яа, gium Еі war чагаа | 
aged stares ster gta ETA 1 


at ast afēfā Peay Get Sum | 
1 


dd Заг asea AEA RIAA À N 


qua Håga: UAA TAZISTA | 
qqa «iat amaia ARAA dl 


who live in the air, in the forest, and in 


villages. 


. From that sacrifice in which everything 


was offered the verses and chants were 
born, the meters were born, and the for- 
mulas were born. 

From it horses were born, and those other 
animals that have a double set of incisors; 
cows were born from it, and goats and 
sheep were born from it. 

When they divided Purusa, into how many 
parts did they disperse him? What became 
of his mouth, what of his arms, what were 
his two thighs and his two feet called? 

His mouth was the brahmin, his arms 
were made into the chieftains, his two 
thighs were the tribesmen, and from his 
feet the servants were born. 

The moon was born from his mind; the 
sun was born from his eye. From his 
mouth came Indra and Agni, and from his 
breath the Wind was born. 

From his navel the atmosphere was born; 
from his head the heaven appeared. From 


114 


ахат, diga «Ka: та TART | 
gedifr okt TETEE 1! 


аена aaa À È аяте: | 
- = | : 
TST TAR аита, AIS TAI SGT: di 


пт, чач еда: mar SARETA | 
де fader ar ag gr KS ЧЇ SU di 


AUST FARMS viste: BA: | 
me aitu Чї: TRA TET sse N 


~ vel 
azat MAG AMAR’ GA AAT | 
цатто ята N 


aral пега ft dt: «ааа | 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


his two feet came the earth, and the re- «zat зт: vitam, gut wat Яаа Ц 


gions of the sky from his ear. Thus they 
fashioned the worlds. 
15. There were seven enclosing fire sticks for 


sarete, Raae: aT ARA: at: | 


him, and thrice seven fire sticks when the at «est drarar хая. get ЧУҢ, (| 


gods, performing the sacrifice, bound 
down Purusa as the sacrificial victim. 

16. With this sacrifice the gods sacrificed; sid asttasiet łan- 
these were the first dharmas. And these ‘ia чай дешен. | 
powers reached the dome of heaven where à = ate nèn: uer 
dwell the ancient Sādhyas and gods. эт dá are: Aiea amo 


In other cultures, similar primeval giants are regarded as the origin and 
material cause of the universe. Within the Indo-European family, such a 
giant occurs in Norse mythology, where he is called Ymir, and in Iran, 
where he is called Gayomart. Саубтагі was the first man, and in some 
respects quite different from Purusa. As for the mythical similarities between 
Gayēmart and Purusa, *'there seems to be every reason to believe that this 
is a case of Indian influence on Iranian thought" (Zaehner 1955, 137). Ac- 
cording to Norman Brown (1931), the Purusa of Rgveda 10.90 does not 
draw his importance, either genetically or ideologically, from any connection 
with such Indo-European relatives. Brown (1931, 114) has argued that 
Purusa is “most significantly a secondary derivation from notions established 
antecedently in the Rgveda." In particular, Purusa is a combination of 
characteristics derived from Agni, Sürya (the Sun), and Visnu. For a detailed 
demonstration of this view, as well as detailed comments on individual 
verses of the Purusa hymn, the reader is referred to Brown's study. 

The idea of a cosmic sacrifice, in which a primeval person creates the 
world through his own sacrifice and dismemberment, is the basic theory 
of ritual adopted in the Brāhmaņas. Here Prajapati takes the place of 
Purusa. We have already seen how Sandilya expressed these ideas with 
special reference to the Agnicayana (above pages 65, 67). Several specific 
features of the Agnicayana refer to Purusa. The most important is the golden 
Purusa (hiranmayapurusa), who i is buried under the first layer. When he is 


Aranya гуарана section of the Sāmaveda (consisting of “songs to be sung 


in the forest”), and consists almost entirely of stobhas (meaningless syl- 
*thousand,” occurs in it and reminds us of the 


lables); the*word sahasra, ‘ 
Purusa hymn. When the altar is completed and the yajamāna is about to 
wish that the bricks turn into cows, the adhvaryu puts a thousand pieces of 
gold on the altar with the recitation of Taittiriya Samhita 4.4.11.30: “You 
are the measure of a thousand, you are the image of a thousand, you are the 
size of a thousand, you are the replica of a thousand, you are of a thousand, 


you for a thousand!” This is also reminiscent of Rgveda 10.90. Furthermore, 


II5 


Part I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


at the sacrifice of the he-goat for Prajapati in the Agnicayana, the number 
of firewood sticks prescribed is twenty-one or twenty-four, which is in ac- 
cordance with verse 15 of the Purusa hymn (see Taittirlya Samhita 5.1.8.5; 
the number of beans put in the openings of the human head is also twenty- 
one). A 

The term Purusa occurs in four other hymns of the Rgveda, once in a 
general sense and three times in an Agni context (Brown 1931, 108—109). 
Prajāpati, “lord of creatures” (originally “lord of offspring”? Oldenberg 


1919, 27) also appears four times in the Rgveda, all occurrences in the 


tenth book. One passage may have been added later as an answer to the 
preceding part of the hymn with its repeated refrain: “Who is the god we 
shall worship with oblations?" The answer is: Prajāpati (Rgveda 10.121.10). 


The Purusa hymn occurs in the Atharvaveda (Renou 1955a, 436-438) and 


elsewhere in Vedic literature. Purusa is later identified with Visņu and 
Nārāyaņa (Shende 1965). i 

ü *"Prajāpati as the creator god incorporates earlier ideas of creation in the 
Rgveda. The mythology of Yama, “Death,” is replete with notions of crea- 
tion and self-immolation (Dandekar 1945). The complex of Rgvedic myths 


"that describe the fight between Indra and the demon Vrtra, can be inter- 


preted in terms of (Indo-European) creation myths (e.g., Brown 1942). 
But this mythology also admits a more specific interpretation. In a note to a 
passage where Indra is described as freeing rivers for man (Rgveda 1.165.8), 
Geldner referred to the Aryan invasion: Kosambi (1956, 70-71), following 
Renou and Benveniste's analysis of the meaning of vrtra as “obstacle,” 
“barrage,” or “bloquage,” interpreted the slaying of Vrtra as the breaking 
up of dams. According to Kosambi, the fight is not with demons, but shows 


thatthe Aryans destroyed the system of dams upon which the indigenous 


— 


irrigation and agriculture depended. Indra, in that case, is not creator of the 
universe but creator of lebensraum for the Vedic nomads. 

In the Yajurveda, Atharvaveda (cf. Renou 1955, 31-48), and in many 
Brahmanas, Prajāpati has become creator god, god of sacrifice, and sacrifice 
itself. After procreating the beings that make up this world, he is spent and 
empty, and has to be strengthened again through ritual. This is elaborated 
in various myths, on which Keith comments with characteristic charity: 
*the details of these stupid myths are wholly unimportant" (Keith 1925, 
442). 

Sylvain Lévi noted that Prajāpati's creative activity is generally expressed 
by the verb srj/sarj, “emit, discharge," and often by nir-ma, “mete out, 
measure, build" (1898 — 1966, 18; for the following see Lévi 1898, 13-35, 
and Oldenberg 1919, 26-32). We have already seen that there may be a 
reference to the surveying of land. The same terms are used in any case when 
the adhvaryu measures the mahāvedi. There are other accounts of Prajapati's 
dismemberment and of his parts becoming parts of the universe. Elsewhere, 
his creative activity is described in sexual terms. As he is the father, this 


116 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


involves incest, in particular with his daughter. He also unites with Vac, | 


“speech, language,” for the act of creation is as inseparable from creative 
language as ritual act is from mantra. 

Prajapati created the gods, who subsequently put him together again 
throügh sacrifice. Agni is born first, from Prajapati's mouth. But since Agni 


“isthe eater of food, viz., the devourer of everything, Prajapati reflected: 


“there is no other food here but myself—but surely he would never eat me." 
But Agni, the ungrateful child, turned to him with wide open mouth and 
Prajapati, terrified, could only save himself by reproducing himself. Sata- 
patha Brahmana 2.2.4 relates this when commenting upon the Agnihotra 
ritual: whoever performs the Agnihotra, knowing this, “reproduces himself 
by offspring just as Prajāpati reproduced himself; and saves himself from 
Agni, Death, about to devour him" (Šatapatha Brāhmāja 2.2.4.7). Because 
of this, rebirth and regeneration are cyclical, and Prajāpati is identified with 
the year, or with time. He is also “definite and indefinite," or only "in- 
definite”; and “limited and unlimited,” or only “unlimited.” 
' "Despite vague similarities with the Greek Kronos and the Iranian 
Zurvan, both connected with time, it seems fair to say that Prajāpati, even 
if consistent with other Rgvedic notions, has no clear Indo-European or 
even Indo-Iranian counterparts. He is rather loosely connected with the 
Soma ritual: *He plays only a very unimportant role in the sequence of 
Soma rituals, which have been relatively well fixed from early times on. 
Undoubtedly, the references to him have superficially been inserted after- 
wards” (In dem von altersher vergleichweise fest geordneten Somaopfer spielt 
er nur eine ganz nebensüchliche Rolle. Unzweifelhaft sind die Beziehungen 
auf ihn da nur nachtrüglich und oberflüchlich eingefügt: Oldenberg 1919, 31). 
The idea of a god sacrificing himself is preserved in the ritual: the 
sacrificer, or yajamāna, is sometimes identified with the sacrificial victim. 


"Coomaraswamy (1942) has collected some of the relevant passages (providing 


them with interpretations which Gonda (1960, 193 note 24), calls **confused 
and debatable in their details" : verworren und in Einzelheiten anfechtbar). The 
idea of self-sacrifice is basic to the Prajāpati cosmology and to the cyclical 
conquest of death through rebirth, which characterize the $rauta ritual in 
general and the Agnicayana in particular. 

When humans talk of self-sacrifice, there is an implied reference to 
human sacrifice. According to Eggeling (commenting upon Satapatha 
Brāhmaņa 1.2.3.5), animal sacrifices replaced human sacrifices, just as 
vegetable oblations (in particular purodasa cakes) replace or stand for animal 
sacrifices. Earlier, Weber had devoted a special study to human sacrifices in 
the Vedic period (Weber 1864, 262-287 — 1868, 54-89), in which he showed 
that there are unmistakable echoes of human sacrifice in the ritual literature, 
but that the classical ritualists often obliterated them. Weber's observations 
were developed and modified in several later publications, e.g., Rónnow 
(1929), Mus (1935), and Heesterman (1967). I shall survey some of these 


117 


^ 


sd, Y 


PART Í THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


observations with special reference to the Agnicayana. It will be useful, 
though, to keep in mind a just remark of Macdonald (1952, 337 — 1975, 
8): 


It is because of preconceived ideas about the practice and develop- 
ment of the idea of the substitute-sacrifice that researchers have a 
tendency to trace every sacrifice back to a human sacrifice. 


Weber began his study with a quote from the Satapatha Brahmana, 
following the passage that led to Eggeling's remark quoted above: 


At first the gods offered a man as victim. When he was offered, the 
sacrificial juice went out of him. It entered the horse. They offered 
the horse. When it was offered, the sacrificial juice went out of it. 
It entered the ox. They offered the ox. When it was offered, the 
sacrificial juice went out of it. It entered the sheep. They offered the 
sheep. When it was offered, the sacrificial juice went out of it. It 
entered the goat. They offered the goat. When it was offered, the 
sacrificial juice went out of it (Satapatha Brahmana 1.2.3.6). 


The five heads buried under the Agnicayana altar are of a man, a horse, 
a bull, a ram, and a he-goat. The human head, which can be obtained in 
various ways, must be of a vaišya (“tribesman”), or rājanya (‘‘chieftain’’). 
Weber concluded that a human sacrifice was part of the Agnicayana. He 
arrived at similar conclusions with regard to the Rājasūya (“royal con- 
secration") and the Ašvamedha (“horse sacrifice"), and lastly described the 
one šrauta ritual which is explicitly called Purusamedha, * human sacrifice." 
In this ritual, the human victim, a brahmana or ksatriya, is treated well for 
the duration of.one full year, like the horse of the A$vamedha. When this 
is over, he is adorned, decorated, and killed. The principal wife of the yaja- 


| māna lies down under the corpse. This is followed by obscene exchanges 


and riddles, as in the A$vamedha. When the victim is killed, the udgata 
priest chants a sāman for Yama, and the hota recites the Purusa hymn from 


| the Rgveda. 


The fact that this Purusamedha is described in only a few of the ritual 
sūtras has led to the view that it is a late and purely theoretical extension of 
the horse sacrifice. Keith (1925, 347-348) denied the existence of human 
sacrifice in Vedic India. Gonda (1960, 187, note 25) is “unconvinced” by 
Karmarkar (1942, 91-93), according to whom the Purusa hymn itself referred 
to human sacrifice. In Thite’s view, the Brahmanas know the rites that ac- 
companied the killing of human victims, but do not prescribe the actual 


; killing (Thite 1975, 27). There is no scholarly consensus whether the Puru- 


samedha is an imitation (''upgrading”: Puhvel 1970, 163) of the horse sacri- 
fice, or vice versa, in which case it might be an ancient survival (a view de- 


118 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


fended in Kirfel 1951), or whether both sacrifices existed together from the | 
beginning. / 

Rónnow (1929) has tried to show that human sacrifice prevailed in a 
pre-Vedic, *Asuric" religion, of which traces survive in the Pravargya, 
Agnicayana, and Sautrámani rituals. The human victim is represented by 
the demon Makha, who is subsequently identified with the sacrifice itself. 
The Pravargya is called the head of the sacrifice, without which it is incom- | 
plete, just as the mahāvīra vessel is regarded as the head of Makha. The same | 
holds, mutatis mutandis, for the ukhà pot of the Agnicayana. While the - 
ukhā pot, with the human head inside, is buried under the Agnicayana altar, 
the Pravargya implements, including the mahāvīra pots, are placed on the 
altar in a special configuration resembling the shape of a man. That the | 
purodāša cakes, which are substitutes for animal victims, are in fact con- ` 
nected with human sacrifice, is according to Rónnow shown by the fact that 
they are offered on “‘potsherds” (kapāla). The term kapāla means also 
(according to Rónnow, originally) “skull bones." The later Kāpālika asce- 
tics, who carry a skull, are named after it (cf. Lorenzen 1972). The connec- 
tion is made in the Satapatha Brahmana (1.2.1.2): “Тһе purodāša cake is 
the head of the sacrifice: for those potsherds (kapālāni) are what the skull 
bones ($šīrsņah kapālāni) are, and the ground rice is nothing but the brain" 
(cf. Eggeling, 1885, xxviii). When the human victim is killed, its juice (rasa) 
flows into the earth, which grows the rice out of which the purodāša cakes 
are prepared. In the White Yajurveda, the heads of the five victims of the 
Agnicayana are kept in the sacrifice, but the bodies are thrown into water 
that is mixed with the clay from which some of the bricks for the altar are 
made. 

Rónnow's thesis, that these sacrifices reflect an “Asuric” religion, de- 
rives mainly from texts of the Bráhmana period. In the classical $rauta ritual, 
there is a prohibition against using certain parts of the animal victim, such 
as the head. This is explained by Satapatha Brāhmaņa 3.8.3.29: “Тһе Asuras 
made portions of the head, the shoulders, the neck, and the hind legs; 
therefore let him not make portions of these." According to Rónnow, 
beheading the victim was the typical form of sacrifice among the pre-Vedic, 
"Asuric” natives. These practices were brought in line with Brahmanic cus- 
tom when they were incorporated into the classical ritual. In the Pravargya 
and in the Agnicayana there survives a tendency to preserve the body of the 
victira, so that the sacrificer can absorb its powerful rasa juice. This liquid 
is subsequently related to and identified with sacrificial beverages such as 
soma and gharma, the boiled milk of the Pravargya. 

Extending these ideas to the Sautramani ritual, Rónnow arrived at the 
conclusion that three stages can be distinguished in the development of 
early Indian ritual. The first two of these are pre-Vedic: (1) a ritual relating 
to Namuci (according to the Rgveda, a demon slain by Indra and the Ašvins), 
characterized by a human sacrifice at which blood is drunk together with 


II9 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


with the alcoholic surā; (2) a ritual in which the new gods Sarasvati and the 
Ašvins make their appearance, and during which milk and honey are con- 
sumed; and finally (3) a Vedic-brahmanic ritual, in which Soma is the ritual 
beverage. 

Rónnow's thesis, that the Asuras represent a pre-Vedic Indian religion, 
has not been generally accepted. The reason for such scepticism is simple: 
in origin, the Asuras were clearly Indo-Iranian beings, called ahura in Iran. 
In Indo-Iranian, as in the older Rgveda, gods (deva, Iranian: daéva) and the 
asura/ahura are more or less on a par. In Iran, the Asuras prevailed. In 


' the Vedas, the Devas prevailed, and the Asuras became their enemies. In 


spite of the Indo-Iranian origin of the word asura, it is therefore quite pos- 
sible that Rēnnow is right and that references in later Vedic literature to 
Asuras indicate indigenous, pre-Vedic practices and beliefs. I shall accept 
this as a working hypothesis, for it makes good sense as we shall see. 

Mus (1935) dealt with the Agnicayana in the earlier parts of a mono- 
graph leading up to an interpretation of Borobudur, the Buddhist monument 
on Java. According to Mus, the myth of the dismemberment of Purusa/ 
Prajāpati is not of Aryan origin. There are no references to it in the earlier 
Veda, but it is common “їп the religious ethnography of South East Asia 
and its Pacific dependencies.” Mus also observed that there is “attested, 
parallel to the myth, the practice of putting to death a human being for the 
collective profit of those who offered him, a sacrifice which is followed by a 
dismemberment, or even the dismemberment of the victim while he is still 
alive." He adds: 


The cruel form which the sacrifice of meriah used to take, hardly 
more than a century ago among certain primitive tribes of India, 
is well known. The man was bound to the stake and each person 
tore off a piece of his flesh until there was nothing left of him. Then 
the participants would each go and bury his own portion in his best 
field (Mus 1935, *116). 


Thus the sacrifice, by impregnating earth with parts of the human victim, 
contributed to the fertility of the soil. 

Mus sees traces of such ideas and practices in a great variety of contexts. 
One of them is the belief in relics. In Buddhism, much importance is at- 
tached to the distribution of the relics of the Buddha, and their deposition 
within a stūpa. The Buddha is identified with these relics and with the stūpa 
just as in the Agnicayana the yajamāna is identified with the golden man 
and with the altar itself. The Sinhalese chronicles refer to relics as the life 
(jivita) of the stūpa (Mus 1935, *75—*77). The casting of images of the Buddha, 
and indeed the origin of idol worship itself, may originate in this context. 

In the Agnicayana, a live tortoise (karma) is buried under the altar. 
Dumont (1957, 16-18) has shown that the tortoise was chosen as a symbol 


120 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


of the three worlds (earth, sky, and atmosphere) because of its domelike 
shape. The tortoise was, moreover, regarded as the juice or life sap (medha 
in Taittiriya Samhita 5.2.8.5, erroneously translated by Keith as if it said 
medha, "intelligence”) of the earth: when Prajāpati created the earth and 
threw it into the waters, the juice that flowed from it became a tortoise. 

Biardeau (1976, 18) has recalled that the importance of the tortoise 
(kūrma) lies also in its alleged etymological connection with the verb kr- 
“to do, to make” (cf. Satapatha Brahmana 7.5.1.5-6). Another term for 
tortoise, kasyapa, is a name of Prajapati. Ruben (1939, 241—243) has referred 
to numerous legends among Indian tribes, and also in Central Asia and 
China, where the tortoise is described as support for the world, and is 
connected with its origin. In later times, the tortoise became an avatara of 
Visnu, and in the myth of the churning of the world ocean, the churning staff 
or axis of the world rests on a tortoise (see, е.в., Gonda 1954, 126-129). 
In the Bhagavad Gītā (2.58), the sage is described as withdrawing his senses 


from external objects as the tortoise withdraws its limbs. It seems likely, | 


from what we have seen before, that the lifesap of the tortoise is a remnant 
of the life sap or blood of the sacrificial victim that fertilizes the soil. 

The investigations of Ruben (1939) are in several respects similar to 
those of Rónnow (1929), to whom he does not refer. Ruben has gone a step 
further and suggested that the Asūr, a tribe now living in Central India, 
may be traced back to older tribes with similar names that the Vedic Indians 
interpreted as referring to the Asuras. This might have resulted in the 
development from the Indo-Iranian Asuras into the demonic Asuras of later 
times. Unlikely, no doubt, but not impossible. 

Macdonald (1952 — 1975) has placed Mus' ideas in a wider perspective 
by providing more ethnographic evidence from South, Southeast, East, 
and Central Asia. He has also emphasized that the male victim is symbolic- 
ally coupled with the female earth. This is supported by early Vedic references 
to a sacrificial boar mating with the earth, which is consistent with the fact 
that Purusa/Prajāpati is male, like most animal victims (it is not supported 
by the romantic frontispiece of a girl victim in Campbell 1864). Referring 


to the work of Verrier Elwin, Macdonald has drawn attention to the fact | 


that the stake to which the meriah victim was tied was forked, and that 
**the victim's head was sometimes pulled back across the fork" (cf. Camp- 
bell 1864, 113). According to Maconald this form represents the female sex. 
He is supported, for example, by the practice of the Angami Nagas, as 
reported by Hutton (1921, 231-232), who "spread prosperity" by means of 
two stakes, one forked and one straight, "the former representing 'the 
reproductive organs of the woman and the other the male organ"" (Mac- 
donald 1952, 333 — 1975, 6). It may be noted that the Vedic animal sacrifice 
requires single-pronged (eka-šūla) as well as two-pronged (dvi-šūla) forks. 
Macdonald believes that the dismemberment myth is not, or is not 
merely, an agrarian rite, as Mus had suggested, but that it goes back to a 


121 


si 


PART І THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


period before the beginning of agriculture. He describes or refers to various 
rituals in which the animal victim is shared out among members of the 
community in such a way that it establishes or reestablishes the position of 
each member in the social hierarchy: 


The animal sacrificed was doubtless originally the animal caught in 
the hunt. Meat, the product par excellence of the hunt, was a rare 
commodity for many of the members of the primitive community ; 
that the sharing out of this asset was done unequally is not at all 
surprising. The strong man, the accomplished hunter, the priest on 
whose activities the smooth succession of the seasons depends, the 
maker of arms or of instruments, these will not receive the same por- 
tion as the unskilled adolescent. . . . Prajāpati is the male; the hunt 
is essentially the occupation, the business of the males of the com- 
munity. It is the males whose ranks are fixed in these moments of 
coming together which are marked by communal banquets (Mac- 
donald 1952, 335, 338 — 1975, 7,8). 


If Macdonald is right this would not merely provide background for 
Rgveda 10.90.12, in which the castes are derived from parts of the primeval 
Purusa, but it would throw light on many patterns of hierarchical distribu- 
tion, among the yajamāna and his priests, of offerings and oblations of parts 
of the animal victim, sacrificial cakes, and sacrificial beverages such as 
Soma. The daksiņā or “‘sacrificial gift" is also distributed hierarchically: 
the four main priests (hota, adhvaryu, brahman, udgātā) receive twice as 
much as the next four (maitravaruna, pratiprasthata, brahmanacchamsin, 
prastotā), who in turn receive twice as much as the next four (acchāvāka, 
nesta, āgnīdhra, pratihartā), who receive twice as much as the remaining 
four (grāvastut, unnetā, potā, subrahmanya). The yajamāna defrays the cost 
of the ritual, which the priests perform on his behalf. In the sattra rituals 
the yajamāna has been eliminated and the priests perform the rites among 
themselves. In recent times, when a Soma ritual is performed, the relation- 
ship between the yajamāna and his priests is like that found in a sattra ritual: 
all are chosen from the same group of vaidikas, and the roles may be distrib- 
uted differently at a subsequent performance. This is an institutionalization 
of the cyclical distribution of wealth, which Heesterman (1959) regarded 
as characteristic of the daksiņā. 

Malamoud (1976, 197-198) has drawn attention to another feature of 
daksiņā: the analogy between a ritual performance and medical treatment, 
specifically psychoanalysis. The relationship between the yajamāna and his 
priests is analogous to that between a patient and his analyst. In either case, 
payment of dues is necessary, and without it the performance might not come 
to an end. As Freud emphasized, free treatment produces an increase in 
resistance. Similarly, without daksiņā the ritual would be incomplete. 


122 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


Heesterman (1967) does not reject Rónnow's conclusions with regard 
to the Agnicayana and the human sacrifice that underlies it, but he places 
them in a different perspective. According to him there are several contradic- 
tions inherent in the $rauta rituals, to which the manuals have given various 
solutions. By seeking the origins of these contradictions we can partially 
reconstruct a “‘preclassical’’ ritual. At the beginning of the Agnicayana, for 
example, there is mention of the preparation of the five heads, but there are 
also the alternatives of the sacrifice of a he-goat for Prajapati or for Vayu. 
In the preclassical ritual, animals (including the human victim) were be- 
headed, but in the classical ritual, victims have to be killed by strangulation 
outside the sacrificial enclosure. That the animals were originally slaughtered 
at the time they were tied to the sacrificial post follows from expiation rites 
prescribed in the event blood has mistakenly been spilled on the post. 
Rgveda 1.162.9, moreover, refers to portions of flesh sticking to the post. 


Possibly the peculiar way in which the animal is bound to the stake 
points in the same direction: the cord is fastened to the right foot, 
goes round the left side of the neck and is then wound round the | 
right horn and finally fastened to the stake. Thus room is left for | 
the slaughterer's knife (Heesterman 1962, 18). 1 


According to Heesterman, in such cases the concern is to remove what is | | 
impure and inauspicious from the place of sacrifice (ibid., 19), and to create | 
an ideally ordered world of rationalized sacrifice (1967, 43), impervious to | 
sath Fees 9 : С. аа | 


~ More specific conclusions can be drawn from the introductory rites of 


the Agnicayana. According to the Srauta Sūtra of Baudhāyana, the head of 
the vai$ya has to be obtained in battle, in other words, it is the head of an 
enemy conquered in battle. When the clay for the preparation of the ukha 
pot has to be obtained, a procession starts out towards the loam pit. On the 
way they come across an anthill with a vai$ya posted to its south to guard 
it. The clay they seek, in which Agni is supposed to be hidden, is referred to 
as purisa, a term connected with cattle (see also Gonda 1965a, 224-225). 
According to Heesterman, it is here that we hit “the rock bottom of reality. 
The vai$ya or rival does not so much guard an anthill or a loam pit, however 
weighty their symbolic value, but his own head, his cattle, and his fields" 
(1967, 40). Actually, Baudhayana's phrase "he guards it (i.e., the anthill) 
from the south" (tām daksinato gopayann aste) could be interpreted as: “е 
keeps himself south of it acting as a cowherd" (ibid. note 52a). In other 
words, we are back at the cattle raids and similar raiding expeditions of the 
Vedic nomads, referred to before (above, pages 97-105; cf. Vol. II, page 485). 
The vaišya group, whose domain is called vis, consists mainly of farmers ' 
and cattle breeders. In contradistinction, the ksatriyas or rajanyas, whose 
domain is ksatra, represent the military, the nobility, and the secular power. | 


123 


——__, 


Part I THe AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


Mylius (1974) has drawn attention to a large number of passages in the 
Brahmana and ritual literature in which vai$yas are described as the main 
object of exploitation: they are ādya, “to be eaten." Their chief exploiters 
(attr) are ksatriyas, assisted by brahmins. For example: *'vi$ is food for the 
ksatriyas” (Šatapatha Brahmana 3.3.2.8); “the state (rāstra) eats the vis” 
(13.2.9.8); **he places the juhū ladle on top, and the other sruc ladle below, 
because juhū is the ksatra and the other sruc ladles are the vis. Thus he 
makes ksatra superior to vis” (1.3.4.15); “е places the Soma on the pressing 
stones; Soma is ksatra and the pressing stones are vis. Thus he makes ksatra 
rise above vis” (3.9.3.3.); etc. 

There are also passages stating explicitly that brahmins tried to play ksatra 
and viš off against each other, e.g.: “Ап offering on eleven potsherds for 
Indra and on seven potsherds for the Maruts should be made by someone who 
wants to create strife between vis and ksatra”” (Maitrayani Samhita 2.1.9). 

Starting from the Cosmic Man, we have found notions of human 
sacrifice connected with the Agnicayana. In the case of the head of the vaišya, 
the killing is not sacrificial; it merely reflects the customary raids and ex- 
peditions of the Vedic nomads. It is possible that the notion of human 
sacrifice is inherently connected with the dismemberment of a primeval 
giant. Sauvé (1970) has shown that both occur together in Indian and 
Scandinavian mythology. But human sacrifice in Scandinavia, as described 
by Sauvé, is almost totally different from Vedic sacrifice. There is no com- 
pelling reason, therefore, to derive both from an Indo-European prototype. 
It is not surprising that Vedic scholars have been able to put Purusa and 
Prajāpati together from earlier Vedic material. This is an exercise in in- 
genuity, at least in part. The Vedas themselves are not isolated; it is we who 
happen to be ignorant of most of their context and surroundings. The rela- 
tively late appearance of the Purugasūkta in the Rgveda, and the widespread 
occurrence of notions of human sacrifice in South and Southeast Asia, would 
equally support the hypothesis that the Cosmic Man is a pre-Vedic phenome- 
non. More likely than either of these two theories is the hypothesis that the 
Vedic nomads and the pre-Vedic Indians each had a notion of a Cosmic 
Man whose features may have been combined in the Agnicayana. At the 
present state of our knowledge it would be hazardous to try to derive a more 
definite conclusion. 

The connections between the Purusasükta and the Agnicayana explain 
the importance of the number 1,000 in the construction of the fire altar. 
According to the šūlba sütras, which deal specifically with altar construction, 
1,000 bricks should be used for the construction of the altar at the first 
performance of an Agnicayana. This altar is then piled in five layers of 200 
bricks each. The number five was already an important number, and the 
Agnicayana seems to have made it even more important. Groups of fives 
are widespread in the Vedas and in classical Hinduism (see, e.g., Knipe 


124 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


1972, 28--32; 1975, 1-7). The construction of the altar, however, is a topic 
in its own right and deserves a separate section. 


THE ALTAR 


BEFORE TAKING UP the construction of the large bird-shaped brick altar 
that is the distinguishing mark of the Agnicayana ritual, let us revert once 
more to the culture of the Indo-Iranian nomads before they entered the In- 
dian subcontinent. Mary Boyce's description is suggestive: 


The Indo-Iranian religion was shaped, it seems, during millenia of - 
wandering on the steppes of Inner Asia, and materially it was 
accordingly of extreme simplicity. Worship was offered the divine 
beings without aid of temples or altars or statues, and all that was 
needed for solemnizing the high rituals was a clean, flat piece of 
ground, which could be marked off by a ritually-drawn furrow. The 
offerings consecrated there were made not only to the invisible gods, 
but also to fire and water, which could properly be represented by 
the nearest domestic fire and household spring, although a ritual 
fire was always present within the precinct itself, burning in a low 
brazier. (The fire was placed in a low container within the ritual 
precinct because the celebrating priest himself sat cross-legged upon 
the ground.) To judge from later practice, this ritual fire was either 
kindled for the occasion, or made of embers brought from the 
nearest hearth. The only continually-burning fire known to the 
Indo-Iranians was evidently the hearth fire, lit when a man set up 
his home and kept alight as long as he hiinself lived, a divinity 
within the house. This was tended with care and received regularly a 
threefold offering of dry wood, incense, and fat from the sacrificial | 
‘animal. Such domestic fire could readily be carried in a pot during | 
nomadic wanderings, to continue burning wherever the family 
pitched its tent (Boyce 1975,'455). D oer. 


Lo ——— 


Many features of this description are still applicable to the Vedic ritual. 
Apart from its elaborate altars, the Agnicayana includes simple rites that 
require oblations made into a fire installed on a simple, ritually demarcated 
piece of ground. An interesting question concerns the shape of these Indo- 
Iranian ground altars, and in particular whether they were square or round. 
As we have seen, the contrast between a round domestic altar and a square 


offering altar is found among the Vedic Indians, the Iranians, and also | 


the Romans (above page 93). The Greeks had a round domestic altar 
that was generally small and on which offerings of honey and milk were 


I25 


| 
| 


PLATE 4 
The Indo-Iranian Fire Offering 


Before they built alters, the Indo-Iranian nomads installed fire on a 
flat piece of ground, after loosening the soil and demarcating it 
ritually. The Agnicayana includes oblations into fires installed in 
this simple manner. Here the yajamāna pours butter into the fire 
from his juhū ladle during the animal sacrifice for Vayu on the first 
day (Episode 2). The fire is the “new offering fire," installed at the 
eastern end of the Great Altar Space (mahāvedi). Parts of the tra- 
pezium-shaped outline of the mahāvedi are visible. The “old 
offering fire," burning on a clay altar, is in the background (see 
also Figures 3 and 22). 


-— 
—-— 
—-— 


126 


mem ы 


127 


PART Ī THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


made, and a sguare altar that was generally large and used for animal sacri- 


| fices. The roundness of the domestic altar has been related to the womb. The 


circular altar represented. permanence, immutability, and the home: Itself 
unmoving, it was considered the principle of movement (Vernant 1965, 99; 
122; 142-143), like Aristole” 5 > god, “ше first unmoved mover" (тд mpa@tov 
Kivoby aicivytoy).~ 

The Greek domestic altar was often tended by women, and was sacred 
toa "goddess, Hestia (ёотіа, “hearth”). The square altar, which is also the 
blacksmith’s hearth, is related to the male god Hephaistos, originally a fire 
daemon from Asia Minor. In the Vedic ritual, the round domestic altar is 
also compared to a womb, while the square sacrificial altar represents the 
newly created world for the gods. All these facts seem ‘connected, and admit 
of a generalization. While round and square—as the shapes of altars, temples, 
houses, and cities—are found separately or in various combinations through- 
out the world (see, e.g., Seidenberg, forthcoming), the specific contrast be- 
tween round and square altars is in all likelihood Indo-European. 

~The burial mounds (Smasana) of Vedic titties could be either square or 
round (Caland 1896, 141). Square seems to have been the preferred shape. 
According to the Satapatha Brahmana (13.8.1.5; cf. 13.8.2.1), the burial 
mounds of the godly people (daivyah prajah) are four cornered (catuh-srakti), 
whereas those of “Asuras, easterners, and others” are round (parimandala). 
Thus the square or quadrangle seems to be the Vedic shape, the round one 
| that of the original inhabitants. It has been ‘suggested that the circular, 

“native” shape survives in the round stūpas of Buddhism, which are burial 

mounds in so far as they contain relics. The Vedic preference for the square 
burial might be related to the Vedic nomads Central-Asian background. Even 
in northern Asia, where the corpse is placed on a platform, the platform is 
square or at least rectangular. «a Altaic peoples, who perform a hor: se 
1953, 54). “Elsewhere we find a mixture of square and circular burial pits (as 
among the Lepchas in Sikkim: Nebesky de Wojkowitz 1951, 31). But all of 
this should merely alert us that such parallels may not be taken too seriously. 

The main altar of the Agnicayana functions in several respects as a 
tomb: the golden тап and five heads of sacrificial victims are buried under 
it. Ii the Agnicayana altar, the square definitely prevails over the circle. The 


“bricks are square or have shapes derived from the square, such as rectangles 


апа: triangles (see ‘Figure 9 on page 198). It is possible that an echo of round 


“bricks survives in the so-called mandalestakas, “circle bricks," but these are 


generally taken to be bricks on which a circle is carved or drawn. In the 1975 
performance, they occurred in the first, third, and fifth layer, on top of each 
other. Circles made up of squares occur in the Agnicayana altar in two ways. 
In the central part of the first, third, and fifth layer of the bird-shaped altar, 
the bricks may be arranged in the shape of a circle. This is described in the 
Satapatha Brahmana (for illustrations see Eggeling 1897, IV, 17, 48, and 98). 


128 


` 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


Or else, as a special form, the entire altar may be built in the shape of a 
chariot’s wheel (rathacakra; ‘for illustrations see van Gelder 1963, 311, 313). 
"As we shall see, the altar may also be constructed in the shape of a square" 
bird (pithan) (see Volume II, pages 351—357). 

The predominance of the square in the main altar of the Agnicayana 
derives from the squareness of the offering altar. Roundness is the mark of 
the domestic altar. It seems contradictory that in the Agnicayana the new 
domestic altar is constructed in the shape of square, but this is not difficult to 
explain. In the more complex $rauta rituals, the domestic sphere has receded 
further into the background. The higher we ascend in the hierarchy of rituals, 
the more predominant become $rauta features and the more recessive grhya 
features. The new domestic altar of the Agnicayana, following this trend, has 
become a square. 

It is clear that it would be incorrect to say that the Vedic nomads had 
only square altars. They considered the square more sacred and made it the 
shape of their offering and divine altar. Their circular domestic altar, 
however, exhibited the basic shape. This is in accordance with the data from 
other Indo-European cultures, and is obvious from the ritual. For example, 
the fire for the square offering altar is lit from the circular domestic altar. 
“The pre-Vedic Indians may have had circular altars, in which case the Vedic 
nomads scored two points at the same time when they began to construct 
their new domestic altar in the shape of a square: on the one hand they 
moved further into the divine sphere, on the other hand they put the 
indigenous inhabitants further down. Such double-edged moves are quite 
consistent with the general character of Vedic ritual. 

In the Rgveda, three altars are mentioned, but the shape of an altar 
is mentioned only once, and indirectly. Rgveda 10.114.3 is a riddle that men- 
tions a girl with four tufts (catuskaparda) who is butter-faced (ghrtapratika). 
The mention of butter makes it clear that a fire is referred to (cf. Rgveda 
5.11.1, above page 74), and the riddle implies that the altar on which this 
fire was installed was quadrangular (cf. Potdar 1953, 73). That the Rgveda 
does not explicitly refer to round altars can of course not be construed as an 
argument that there were no such altars in the Rgvedic period. In view of the 
later development it is more likely that it was understood that the domestic 
altar was circular. 

Satapatha Brahmana 13.8.2.1 is another passage that contrasts the burial 
mounds of the Vedic nomads with those of the original inhabitants. It states 
that the former are close to the ground, while the latter are separated from the 
ground “on a cami or some such thing." Eggeling takes camü to be “а shal- 
low stone basis or trough, either solid or consisting of masonry (bricks) in 
the manner of our stone-lined graves" (1900, V, 430, note 1). However, the 
term camü generally denotes a vessel or pot. It seems more likely that this 
camü was used as a coffin, in which case the reference is to urn burials. Pre- 
historic urn burials have been found in several parts of the Indian subconti- 


129 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


nent (see, e.g., Longhurst 1936, 9-10 and Figure 8). Since the Vedic funeral 
involved cremation, there was an area on which the fire was installed. If this 
is the place specifically described as close to the ground, it would seem that 
the Vedic nomads had not reached that stage of development at which fire is 
installed at some height so as to benefit from draughts. This further corrob- 
D the picture of the Indo-Iranian altar as simply a demarcated piece of 
soil. UC MU Uer p as 

. There is a very wide gap between the simple altars of the Indo-Iranians 
and of the Rgveda, and those described in the Yajurveda. The texts of the 
Yajurveda describe the altar for the Agnicayana as an enormous structure 
piled up from at least a thousand kiln-fired bricks. The term used to denote 
bricks, istakā or istikā, occurs for the first time in the Taittiriya Samhita, and 
is subsequently found in the other branches and texts of the Yajurveda. In 
these texts we also find elaborate references to the firing of the ukhā pot, 
which itself is not mentioned in any earlier text. Taittirtya Samhita 4.1.6 pro- 
vides the mantras that accompany the rites at which the pot is moulded from 
clay and smoked, after which a trench is dug, the pot is placed in it, covered 
with fire, and baked for three days. All these things are done, according to the 
mantras, “in the manner of Angiras” (angirasvat). Baudhayana Srauta Sūtra 
10.6 (see VolumelII, page 495) states that a second and third ukha pot (obviously 
spares), five bricks called rsabha (“bull”), and three bricks called mandale- 
stakā (the bricks already referred to, which have a circle carved or drawn on 
their surface) are to be treated in the same manner. The terms dhūpayate 
(“fumigate”) and sudhüpita (“well fumigated”) occur in this context for the 
first time. The verb used for "firing," pacati, is common from the Rgveda 
onwards for cooking, baking, roasting, or boiling, but is used for the first 
time in these Yajurvedic contexts for the baking of bricks. The technical 
sense of "fumigating" is not clear, unless it refers to reduction (cf. Saraswati 
and Behura, 1966, 128—129). 

In an important article, Converse (1974) has argued for the indigenous 
origin of the Agnicayana construction, because the art of baking bricks, 
which was unknown to the Vedic nomads, was practiced by the much earlier 
Harappans: 


The Harappans used millions of kiln-fired bricks as well as countless 
sun-baked ones. . . .The bricks of the Harappa civilization in its 
mature phase were beautifully made,. well fired, and standardized 
in size. The basic size for the bricks was 11 1/2 inches long, 5 3/4 
inches wide, and two or three inches thick. There were also double 
bricks 11 inches square, and special bricks for well copings, drain 
covers, corners, etc. 

Now, in the whole of the Rg-Veda there is no word for brick, 
nor any descriptive phrase for bricks. So far no ruins of brick 
dwellings have been found that can be attributed to the Aryans in 


130 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


the early Rg-Vedic period. The Rg-Vedic references to houses in- 
dicate that they were made of perishable wood and thatch. Bricks 
were thus not part of the Rg-Vedic technical or ritual accomplish- 
ments. There are also no references to bricks in the Rg-Veda Brah- 
manas and outside of the Agnicayana sections of the Samhitās and 
Brahmanas of the Yajurveda tradition, no significant references to 
bricks occur in these or in the Sāmaveda Brahmanas. Thus, in the 
Brahmanas, when references to bricks begin to appear, their use is 
confined to one specialized rite, and the rite itself is found only in 
the Yajurveda tradition. The fire altars in other rites were made of 
packed earth, not bricks. 

The size of the bricks to be used in the rite was one foot square, 
and half-bricks were also to be used (SB vii, 5,3,2; viii, 7,2,17). This 
size and shape corresponds very closely to that of the Harappa 
bricks described above. The lack of any bricks in the early Vedic 
tradition and the presence of bricks in large numbers and of the 
same size in the adjacent indigenous Black-and-Red Ware territory 
suggest that the Black-and-Red Ware culture is the source of the 
Agnicayana brick-making skills. 

The word for brick also suggests a probably non-Aryan origin. 
As a Sanskrit word, istaka is related to the ritual use of bricks as an 
oblation, an isti, and not to their general character as a building 
material. This suggests that bricks first came into Vedic usage 
through this ritual function, rather than through their usual building 
function. By contrast, the brick words in Dravidian-based lan- 
guages such as Tamil are descriptive of the primary use for bricks for 
building. For instance, one Tamil word for brick is cengal; cennu 
means straightness, and kal or gal means stone or clay. Another 
Tamil word for burnt (fired) brick is cutakal, sutakal; again kal 
means clay or stone, and cufu, sutu means to burn, to bake, to burn 
bricks. It is possible that an early form of sutakal was the foreign 
phonetic basis of what becomes Sanskritized into istakā: an inver- 
sion (not uncommon in the incorporation of Dravidian words into 
Sanskrit) of the s and the и, and the dropping of the final / to con- 
form to Sanskrit endings, would give ustaka; the use of the bricks as 
isti would tend to bring about the change from the initial u (not 
common in Sanskrit) to the more common i. Whatever the source 
word, it was the Sanskrit meaning of the approximate translitera- 
tion of the indigenous word that was emphasized, and this Sanskrit 
word, istakā, in no way reflects the building function of bricks but 
only their ritual use (Converse 1974, 83-85). 


Converse's archaeological arguments are strong. It has to be noted, 
however, that the size of the bricks, though perhaps in practice having sides 


131 


PLATE 80 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


of more or less a half foot, a foot, or one and a half feet long, was not an 
absolute measure, but relative to the size of the sacrificer. This is clear from 
the sūtra literature, and mentioned in the Satapatha Brahmana (10.2.2.6): 
“Не measures the altar by the sacrificer with upstretched arms”. 

Converse’s linguistic arguments are less strong than her archaeological 
evidence, and require some comment. A Dravidian origin for istakā is im- 
probable or impossible on etymological grounds (Emeneau, personal 
communication; Emeneau also points out that ceh-kallu means "red stone"). 
Moreover, istakā is not merely Indian, but also Indo-Iranian. Mayrhofer’s 
Etymological Dictionary gives the Iranian cognate уа with the same mean- 
ing, "brick." This term is attested only twice (Martin Schwartz, personal 
communication): both occurrences are in the Videvdād (Vendidad), 8.8 and 
8.10, a late Avestan text, not earlier than the third century B.c. In both con- 
texts, bricks or the dust from bricks or stones are used to cover a corpse, not 
for the construction of a burial mound, but to protect the corpse temporari- 
ly, in bad weather, before it is given to the birds and other animals. In Old 
Persian too išti occurs and means "brick" (allegedly fire dried). It is found, 
for example, in an inscription by Darius from Susa (fragment 29). It refers 
to the bricks used for the construction of Darius’ palace. The inscription 
informs us that Babylonians were employed as brick makers. In modern Per- 
sian, derivatives from the same stem are also common. 

In Iranian, then, the term for **brick" is used in a general sense, and 
is not confined to altar building, or similarly constrained to sacred usage. 
This does not invalidate Converse’s view that istaka in the Yajurveda texts 
refers only to ritual bricks. In Vedic culture, bricks were never used in the 
construction of ordinary buildings: l’emploi en est limité à l “empilement” 
de l'autel du feu (agnicayana)—et accessoirement des dhisnya ("foyers") anne- 
xes (Renou 1939, 504, note 1). In Indian architecture (vastuvidya), bricks 
appear only much later (Bhattacharyya 1948, 249—258). 

The term used for “brick” could have been taken by the Indians from 
the Iranians, or by the Iranians from the Indians, or by both from an earlier 
source. It is possible to derive it from an Indo-Iranian root, but this is open 
to doubt. The term isti, denoting the ritual oblation of a vegetable substance 
and the accompanying rites (see above pages 46-48), is derived from the 
root yaj-, “sacrifice, perform a rite," with past passive participle ista, “ѕасгі- 
ficed.” Satapatha Brahmana 6.2.1.10 adopts this etymology for istakā: ‘‘Inas- 
much as he saw them having sacrificed (istva) they are called bricks (istakā).” 

The root is-, “desire,” also has a past passive participle ista, ‘“‘desired, 
liked, agreeable.” So istakā might alternatively be derived from is-, "desire," 
in which case it could denote а wished-for object, for example, a “wish stone" 
(like our “wishbone’’). This is in accordance with an important feature of the 
bricks of the Agnicayana: as soon as the altar is completed, the yajamana 
wishes the bricks to turn into cows, saying: “Agni, may these bricks be cows 


132 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


for me” (me agna istaka dhenavah santu: Taittiriya Samhita 4.4.11.3p.) If 
this was felt to be the main import of the bricks, they would be called istaka, 
because they were wish fulfillers. This is related to a common theme in Vedic 
and in Hinduism, where Kāmadhenu, “‘Cow of Plenty," satisfies all desires. 
The yajamāna's recitation of the Taittiriya Samhita ends: “Agni, may these 
bricks be cows for me, glorious, giving the milk of desire beyond in the other 
world.” Whatever its interpretation, istakā does not always refer to bricks, 
for example, in Baudhāyana Srauta Sūtra X (sections 27, 29, 31, 34, 39) it 
applies to a piece of gold (hiranyestaka), a pot (kumbhestakā), and all kinds 
of pebbles. All we can say for the present is that the term istaka suggests an 
Indo-Iranian, not a Dravidian background. 

The term istakà survives in modern India in the meaning ‘‘(kiln-fired) 
brick," and is connected with immortality in a manner curiously reminiscent 
of the Agnicayana. Here is a Hindi riddle: “It was born right in the water, 
but seeing the water it dies. Brothers, let's go and cremate it; then it will be 
immortal (jal hi me paidā bhai jalai dekh mar jai; caliyo panco phūk dé pher 
amar ho jai). The solution is: it, "brick." Dundes and Vatuk (1974, 128—130) 
explain this as follows: 


Brick making in India begins with taking mud out of a village pond. 
The mud is placed in a hollow rectangular wooden frame. After 
smoothing the top, the frame is removed and the brick-to-be is left 
to dry in the sun. Village homes are typically made of such sun- 
dried brick. Unfortunately, if rain falls on such a brick, it will 
dissolve. Thus, though the brick is “born in water," it may die upon 
coming into contact with water again. There is, however, a way of 
preventing this catastrophe. By “‘cremating,” or baking the mud 
brick one renders it resistant to water and thus immortal. The 
suggestion that cremation ensures immortality is contrary to general 
eschatological theory inasmuch as everyone who dies becomes im- 
mortal. There is thus a philosophical contradiction in the second 
portion of the riddle statement. And even empirically there is a 
contradiction between an object's being cremated and thus utterly 
destroyed and that object's being made "immortal" in the sense 
of existing and withstanding destructive forces. 


Converse has drawn attention to a special feature of the firing of the 
ukhà pot, which also applies to the mahavira vessel of the Pravargya: both 
are fired with the bottom turned up. This detail is referred to by Eggeling 
between brackets in his translation of Satapatha Brahmana 6.5.4.4: “Не 
then sets down the fire pan (with the bottom part upwards). This informa- 
tion is not contained in the original, which merely says: “е sets down the 
ukha” (ukham avadadhati). Eggeling has probably taken this extra informa- 


133 


PLATES 5,41,42, 
46,58,60B,71,72A, 
85 


PLATE 5A 
The Ukha Pot 


PLATE 5B 
The Mahavira Pot 


134 | 135 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


tion from Kātyāyana Srauta Sūtra 16.4.11, which states that the adhvaryu 
sets down the ukha pot “upside down” (nyubjām). As for the mahāvīra pot 
and the Pravargya, Converse refers to Satapatha Brahmana 14.1.2. 21, which, 
without entering into details, implies that the ukhā and mahāvīra pots are 
to be treated similarly. Kashikar, in a study on Vedic pottery, supports this: 
"Even though the size and shape of this cauldron (wkha) are different, the 
procedure of preparing it is mostly identical with that prescribed in connex- 
ion with the preparation of the mahavira” (Kashikar 1969, 19). This simi- 
larity has been further explored by Ikari (1975, and Vol. II, pages 168-177) 
and fits in well with the relationships between the Agnicayana and the Pra- 
vargya noted by Rónnow and others (see above pages 183-184). 
Converse comments on the “upside down": 


This may seem like an insignificant detail. But it was specifically 
this inverted firing technique by which the Black-and-Red Ware, the 
distinctive trait of the indigenous non-Vedic culture, was made 
black and red! The technique was not used in the making of the 
Gray Ware, except very sparsely at very late levels. Inverting the 
pot during firing limits the oxidation in the interior of the pot, 
and this partial reduction leaves the interior black, while the out- 
side fires to a red color because of the full reduction of the clays 
and washes used (1974, 85). 


Converse has drawn attention to another passage that also suggests 
a pre-Vedic origin for the ukhà pot: Satapatha Brahmana 6.6.2.6 (misprinted 
as “7” on Converse’s page 86) quotes a mantra with which this cauldron is 
addressed, and that Eggeling translated as: *An Asura contrivance thou 
art, made in the wonted manner." Converse comments: 


The reference to the pot as an “Asura contrivance” and to the 
inverted firing technique as the Asuras’ wonted or habitual manner 
of making pots acknowledges that the making of the pot has been 
taken over from the enemy indigenous tradition. Thus the text inde- 
pendently corroborates the archaeological evidence that the Black- 
and-Red Ware technique was identified with the non-Vedic indige- 
nous culture. And this in turn underlines the close connection 
of the Agnicayana rite with that culture (1974, 86). 


These conclusions seem valid though the original text does not entirely 
back up Eggeling' s translation. The mantra quoted in the Satapatha Bra- 
hmana occurs in Vajasaneyi Samhita 11.69 and similarly in Taittiriya Sam- 
hità 4.1.9.2 d and in the other Samhitās of the Yajurveda. It says: "You are 
an Asuric trick (maya), made by self-power (sva-dhayā)” (āsurī maya sva- 
dhayā krta’si; Keith translates: “Thou are the wile of the Asura, made 


136 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


with power”). The magical force of maya is indeed, from the Rgveda on- 
wards, associated with the Asuras. It is true that svadha can mean: “habitual 
state" or custom." But the reference in this context is more likely to be to 
the idea that the ukhā pot is a spontaneous product that comes into being 
through its own power, just as the fire alights in it without being lit. | 

The basic conclusion of Converse stands unaffected: the ukhā pot is 
of Asuric origin. Taken together with the assumption that references to 
Asuras are often references to the original inhabitants, the ukhā pot must 
have an indigenous origin. This may apply to the mahāvīra pot as well. 
However, the non-Vedic character of the Pravargya ceremony should not be 
stressed too far. The hot milk offering (gharma) of the Pravargya, for ex- 
ample, has clearly Rgvedic origins. The term gharma itself does not, in the 
Rgveda, mean merely “heat,” as has been often assumed. Velankar has 
enumerated fifteen Rgvedic verses in which gharma is used in the technical 
sense of “hot milk offering" (Velankar 1962, 228-237). Six of these verses 
occur in Ašvin hymns, which is in accordance with the fact that the gharma 
offering of the Pravargya is dedicated to the A$vin twins. In the Pravargya, 
this hot milk is also connected with tapas, “‘heat,”’ and with sexual excitation, 
a phenomenon not restricted to either Vedic or pre-Vedic India (cf. van 
Buitenen 1968, 37; Kaelber 1976, 348-349). 

If Rónnow, Ruben, and others correctly assumed that references to 
Asuras often indicate indigenous, pre-Vedic practices and beliefs, the same 
appears to hold for the Angirases. In the Brahmanas, the Angirases are often 
contrasted with the Adityas, the golden sons of Aditi, who assist man in his 
struggle for freedom. The Angirases stand in a similar relationship to the 
Adityas as the Asuras do to the gods (Hillebrandt 1927, 181). Hillebrandt 
was the first to draw attention to the numerous references to Angiras in the 
Agnicayana ritual (Hillebrandt 1927, 175-176). As we have seen, the prepara- 
tion of the ukhà pot takes place in different stages, each of which is gone 
through “іп the manner of Angiras” (cf. Renou 1953, 18). 

Who were these Angirases, after whom Agni is frequently called 
" Ahgiras" and “first Angiras?" Hillebrandt concluded from a general survey 
of their occurrence in the Rgveda that “the Angirases were originally a family 
which was rather outside the main Vedic tradition, as shown by their lack of 
prominence in books ii-ix" (Keith 1925, T, 224). Following this suggestion 
there has been a great deal of scholarly discussion on their identity and 
provenance, and on the possible etymologies of their name. Earlier, Mac- 
donnell had defended the view that the Angirases were intermediaries 
between gods and men, and that their name is related to Greek &yyeAos, 
"messenger," English: angel. Evidence for their intermediary status, how- 
ever, is slight, and this view has been generally rejected. More recently, the 
possibility of this etymology was revived by H.W. Bailey (1957, 52-53), who 
postulated a root *ang, “sing, enunciate,” which occurs in the Vedic word 
angiisa, “song of praise." But Schmidt (1968, 51-52) has pointed out that 


137 


Part I THe AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


there are several problems in the derivation of angiras from such a root 
(including the fact that a suffix -iras is not known anywhere else). 

Outside of language, etymologies prove little, “for usage is stronger than 
etymology” (yogad ridher baliyastvat, as the Mimamsa philosophers have 
it). Even if a word is Indo-European, like Asura, for example, it might refer 
to things Indian and pre-Vedic. It is possible that the Angirases were singers, 
and reasonably certain that they were priests of a fire cult. They are directly 
related to the Asuras in Rgveda 3.53.7 and 10.67.2, where the Angirases are 
called *'heroes of Asura” (asurasya virāh). Following Hillebrandt, it would 
not be farfetched to suppose that the Angirases were originally an indigenous 
tribe or family that was incorporated into the Vedic cult at a relatively early 
stage. It is conceivable that the Agnicayana was incorporated into the Vedic 
ritual through their intermediary, since they were primarily priests of a fire 
cult. Thus the theory of Kosambi (1950), criticized in Brough (1953, xiv- 
xvi), that the Vedic brahmins were to a large extent recruited from the priest 
class of the conquered pre-Aryan population, would seem to be valid at least 
in the case of the Angirases. 

In conclusion, available evidence suggests that the altar construction of 
the Agnicayana, and also the ukhā and mahāvīra pots—chief ritual vessels 
of the Agnicayana and the Pravargya, respectively—are of pre-Vedic origin, 
and should be explained by the techniques for firing bricks and pots that 
were known to the indigenous population, and that can ultimately be traced 
back to the Indus Civilization. Within a wider context, this is not surprising. 
The use of baked bricks, though not confined to the Indus Civilization, was 
one of its characteristic achievements. Baked bricks were used in Sumer, 
though not abundantly. In Mohenjo-daro and Harappā, the use of baked 
bricks, rather than of mud bricks, was normal (Wheeler 1968, 8, 55). What- 
ever the explanation of its early distribution, it is likely that the art of firing 
bricks was retained by the inhabitants of Northwest India even after the 
great Indus cities had disappeared. In Iran, the Indo-Iranian nomadic invad- 
ers also inherited the art from earlier, sedentary civilizations. Darius em- 
ployed Babylonians as his brick makers, and, as Professor Schwartz informs 
me, the Iranian term for oven, tanüra, is of Mesopotamian origin. This Meso- 
potamian term survives to the present day in “‘chicken-tandoori.” 

Though the altar of the Agnicayana has not been incorporated in Hin- 
duism, there are later Indian cults that make use of fire altars. These cults 
are characterized by homa, the act of offering an oblation (generally of ghee 
= ghrta, “clarified butter") into the fire (cf. hota: above page 89). Though 
there is hardly any literature on it, the homa cult is found in both temples 
and practised by wandering samnyāsins and yogins. It has been incorporated 
into Buddhism, and has taken root in Tibet, China, and Japan. In the cult 
of the Japanese Shingon and Tendai orders, fire altars play a preponderant 
role. These will be treated by Michel Strickmann in volume II (pages 418-455). 
There is a long gap between these cults and the Vedic fire altar, and not much 


138 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


is known about the historical development. That Vedic elements survive is 
clear. Not only is the Shingon fire ceremony called goma, but the number of 
fire sticks (samidh) is twenty-one, as in the Puruga-sūkta (Rgveda 10.90.15: 


above page 115). 


NATURALLY PERFORATED STONES 


QUIBBLES ASIDE, CONVERSE’S demonstration has established beyond 
reasonable doubt that the construction of the two main altars of the Agni- 
cayana from fired bricks must be traced back to the earlier civilization of the 
Indus Valley. This does not imply that the entire Agnicayana ritual is a Ha- 
rappan ritual, nor is it the end of the story as far as the altar itself is concerned. 
The piling of bricks has many other specific features. The bricks are put down 
in a particular order, they have particular names, and they are consecrated 
with particular mantras. These particular features are basically the same in 
the various recensions of the Yajurveda, and must therefore be ancient 
(Weber 1873, 270). 

Among the bricks, there are two kinds that deserve special mention. 
These are the apasyah “water (bricks)" and the svayamatrnnah, “naturally 
perforated (bricks).” The apasya bricks are put down close to the heads of 
the animals, and it is said that thereby water is put into these victims (Sata- 
patha Brahmana 7.5.2.40; the positions adopted in 1975 were not the same, 
as we shall see, pages 437-438). Baudhayana uses the term apasya to refer to 
certain pebbles or stones that Kātyāyana calls parisrit, *encloser," and that are 
elsewhere called ағаға. Such pebbles are used to mark or demarcate the en- 
closures of altars. They occur in most rituals beginning with the installation 
of the fire (Agnyādhāna), in the Agnicayana itself (see below pages 339, 387) 
and also in the funerary rites, where they demarcate the $ma$ana burial 
mounds (Caland 1896, 145). It is possible that the bricks called after these 
pebbles are remnants of an earlier and less elaborate method of demarcating 
altars. Such methods were probably used by the Vedic nomads and by the 
Indo-Iranian nomads before they entered the subcontinent. Confining fire 
to a hearth by means of pebbles or stones is more or less universal. 

Such a nomadic Vedic origin may also be assumed for the three svaya- 
mātrņņā, “naturally perforated ones,” though on different grounds. A 
Vedic origin would explain the extraordinary importance attached to these 
bricks, which are sometimes treated as pebbles, and which are generally 
shrouded in mystery. According to the Satapatha Brahmana, three svaya- 
mātrņņa should occupy the center of the first, third, and fifth layers of the 
altar. They represent the three worlds, earth (prthivi, bhū), air (antariksam, 
bhuvas), and sky (dyaus, svar). They permit the golden man, and thereby the 
sacrificer, to breath and to pass to the highest regions (Satapatha Brahmana 
6.1.2.31 sq; 6.2.3.1 sg; etc.). If a person who has already performed the 


139 


ee ee 


PLATE 6 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


Agnicayana once wishes to perform another Soma ritual, but is not in a posi- 
tion to repeat the entire Agnicayana ceremony, it is sufficient for him to put 
down the three svayamātrņņā: “Не need only lay down the naturally perforat- 
ed ones; for the naturally perforated ones are these worlds; and this built 
fire altar is the same as these worlds” (Satapatha Brahmana 9.5.1.58). Thus 
the svayamātrņņā represent the Agnicayana itself. 

Though the svayamātrņņā are sometimes regarded as istakā (which need 
not mean "brick," as we have seen), the Šatapatha Brahmana (8.7.3.20; 
8.7.4.1) specifically states that they are pebbles or stones (apasya; šarkara; 
also suskah šarkarāh “dry stones"). A commentator on the Vājasaneyi 
Samhita explains svayamatrnna as “а pierced stone, transversely pierced” 
(Sarkaram chidram chidrayuktam tiryakchidram; quoted in Weber 1873, 
249, note 4). The svayamātrņņā were apparently called “naturally perforat- 
ed" or "perforated by themselves" (svayam) because they were not artifacts 
but were found in nature. They were therefore independent of the brick- 
making activity that characterized the rest of the altar construction. In fact, 
they contrast in their naturalness with the artificial techniques of making 
bricks. This points to their non-Indian, i.e., Vedic origin. 

It may be mentioned in passing that the svayamātrņņā stones are the 
only important stones that play a role in Vedic ritual. The gravànah of the 
Soma rituals, which are generally called “pressing stones,” and are used for 
extracting the juice from the Soma stalks, need not be stones, but are some- 
times the mortar and pestle (ulūkhala) and sometimes wooden (vanaspati) 
(Oliphant 1920, 230—231). 

Coomaraswamy, in one of his suggestive and speculative articles (1939), 
has related the svayamātrņņā to a great variety of religious phenomena all 
over the world. All these express an ascent to heaven (Himmelfahrt). The 
passage of the sacrificer or golden man through the perforated stones and 
through the three worlds is related to the ritual climbing of a tree, a sacri- 
ficial pole, or the axis mundi, at the top of which is the gate to heaven 
(janua coeli). Such notions are found all over the world. They occur elsewhere 
in the Vedic ritual. In a Siberian rite, the Shaman climbs a birch tree placed 
within a yurt, sloping so as to leave space for the hearth, and with its crown 
rising above the smoke hole: this opening is *a hole through which it is 
possible to pass from one world to another" (Coomaraswamy 1939, 13). 
In a final comparison, Coomaraswamy relates Rgveda 4.6.2 (where Agni 
fixes his rays, as if setting up a pole, sending up smoke, and supporting 
heaven) to “Paleolithic man, who already possessed his circular hut with 
central hearth and a hole in the roof for the escape of smoke." 

These speculations support the hypothesis that the idea of reaching a 
higher world by passing through natural holes, passages, and caves was 
brought by the Indo-Iranian nomads from Central Asia. Though Coomara- 
swamy's speculations appear farfetched, and I for one have long been scepti- 
cal, there is in fact a wealth of evidence in support of such a view. Some lin- 


140 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


guistic evidence, inconclusive but suggestive, may be mentioned first. The 
term $arkara, “grit, pebbles, gravel," is probably of pre-Indo-European, in 
fact Caucasian, origin (Hubschmidt, quoted in Mayrhofer's Etymological 
Dictionary). This term is also related to Arabic sukkar (whence English “‘su- 
gar") and Latin calculus, a small stone used for calculation with the help of 
an abacus. | | 

In Siberian Shamanism, stones with holes in them are used in a variety 
of contexts. They are miniature representations of rocks with caves, through 
which the Shaman enters the other world (Eliade 1964, 202). The Yakut 
Shamans wear a symbol of the “Opening of the Earth," called “Hole of the 
Spirits" (abassy-oibono: Eliade 234). The gods descend to earth through the 
same hole through which the Shamans fly up in ecstasy (Eliade 259). Per- 
forated stones, some used as beads, others of uncertain use, have been found 
all over Inner Asia. Here are two examples brought back by Aurel Stein: 


N.xiv, iii.0035. Circular ornament of dark paste inlay. Flat on back, 
and pierced with a hole. Front, from which outer shell is peeling, 
ornamented with six yellow radial stripes, divided by two thin radial 
lines. Between stripes, on dark ground, yellow circles surrounding 
black disks on which six-rayed yellow stars with red centres. Pen- 
dant or button. Fine work. 1" x 3/8". Pl. XXIX (Stein 1921, I, 252). 


D.K.01. Stone bead, echinus shape, facetted, and pierced with large 
hole. Black stone (?) jet. Well preserved. Diam. 1/2", depth 3/8". 
Pl. X. (Stein 1928, I, 133). 


Nothing is known about the use of these stones, but their special char- 
acter could point to a ritual or magical use. Their possible use as beads prob- 
ably derives from this. Nothing is known about their age, but similar stones 
that are almost certainly prehistoric have been found in Tibet. These stones, 
called gzi, are highly valued and auspicious. They have complicated patterns 
of streaks and “eyes” (mig) on them (Nebesky-Wojkowitz 1952). They can 
be used as beads because they almost always have holes in them. Tibetans 
never make holes in them, because the stones are considered too hard. The 
few that are found without holes are therefore not worn as beads, but are kept 
separately (Lama Kunga Losang, personal communication). There are also 
parallels from further east that suggest that such perforated stones, and the 
ideas surrounding them, are in fact ancient. 

The Chinese have long been interested in perforated stones, which are 
miniature representations of rocks with caves, and in particular of the World 
Mountain. These stones are sometimes placed in miniature gardens that ex- 
hibit the same general correspondence between micro- and macrocosm. The 
sacred mountains are regarded as the abodes of spirits, presided over by a 
great deity who can be approached through caves and tunnels. At the same 
time, the perforated stones are models of the celestial palaces of the gods. 


141 


| 
| 
l 


PLATE 6 
Chicken-Fish Pebbles 


These pebbles were found in the Bharata Puzha (bhārata-puļa) or 
Ponnani river at Kannanur, about one-and-a-half miles down- 
stream from Pattambi. They are called kolipparal, “‘chicken-fish,” in 
Malayalam. Some have holes in them and count as “naturally 
perforated” (svayamātrņņā). The Agnicayana requires two peb- 
bles with (at least) three holes, and one with (at least) five holes. 
If no pebbles can be found with fully perforated holes, dents or 
small depressions are acceptable. 


These pebbles are composed of Vivianite, a scarce mineral named 

after the British mineralogist J.G.Vivian, who discovered it in 

Cornwall. It is an iron phosphate hydrate, Еез(РО,):8НО, often | 

Mb bur dies > ERE lg m a 
лил uc erp rM | 10 11 12 13 14 15.16 17 18 
meters. 


9 1 в 


Photo Michael Beaucage 


142 143 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA. RITUAL 


Their holes correspond to the stars. The expression used in this connection is 
*cave-heaven" or “grottoed heaven": tung t'ien JAR, which also means 
“fairyland,” “paradise.” 

These Chinese rock caves or palaces are conceived of as underground 
areas where the immortals dwell, and that are connected with other similar 
places through a network of caves and tunnels. The caves are connected with 
the subterraneous waters and also with the lights of heaven. They serve as 
retreats for hermits who meditate there or use them for initiation rites. Her- 
mits also have the power to recreate these worlds in the miniature cosmos of 
gardens with rocks. The stones found in nature, which have the required 
characteristics, may have been eroded limestones, lava, or fossiliferous rocks 
(for further details see Soymié 1954; Stein 1942; Schafer 1961). 

In Taoism, rocks have long been regarded as symbols of longevity. 
While the magico-religious background of the miniature rock caves and per- 
forated stones has been mainly developed in Taoism, it acquired in later 
times an esthetic dimension. According to Schafer, “the creation of a minia- 
ture mountain in a garden goes back to the early part of the Six Dynasties 
period, probably even to the Han” (1961, 5). In T’ang times, collecting fan- 
tastic stones was a favorite pastime for cultured gentlemen, who rivalled with 
each other in setting up lapidaria, and became the first connoisseurs of stones. 


This not uncommon craze spread to the highest in the land. The 
last of the Northern Sung sovereigns, Hui Tsung, was a notorious 
petromaniac. His greatest single collecting effort was related to the 
construction of a magic mountain to the northeast of the imperial 
palace at K’ai-feng, at the urging of a geomancer. The completion 
of this monumental undertaking required several years, having been 
begun in А.р. 1117. To it were brought stones of wonderful shape 
from all parts of the realm, especially those of the Grand Lake and 
of Ling-pi (Schafer 1961, 8). 


Many of these weird and rare stones were perforated and **riddled with 
holes.” Schafer enumerates some of them in his translation of a Stone Cata- 
logue compiled by Tu Wan in the twelfth century А.р. Here we find such 
entries as: 


49. Heart-pierced Stones (in river at Hsiang-chou, N. Hupeh). Little 
blue-black pebbles, each with a hole, hence the name. The natives 
grope for them in the river bed each spring, as a way of divining the 
number of sons they will have. Recently my brother found one as 
large as a goose egg. It was blue, with two lines of white markings, 
suggesting cursive script done in ceruse. He was robbed of it by a 
young aristocrat. No other like it has been found (Schafer 1961, 72). 


144 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


The importance the Chinese attached to perforated stones and rocks 
as well as cavernous mountains is abundantly illustrated in painting. Some- 
times perforated rocks appear in isolation; more often they dot the land- 
scape (Plate 7A). A sage frequently appears in front of such a rock (Plate 7B); 
at other times a Buddha is seated within it (Plate 8A; also reproduced in 
Hu, 1977, Plate 041-25, together with several similar paintings). There are 
also pictures of stones riddled with holes, which belong to a collection (Plate 
8B). In one painting a cavernous rock appears on the waters like a superna- 
tural apparition (Plate 9). Even at present, the Chinese preserve rocks with 
holes in gardens and other special places (Plates 10A-B). 

The facts we have mentioned are all clearly connected, and a general 
picture emerges. Since ancient times the belief was held in Central Asia that 
caves are the abodes of spirits. Whether this can be traced back to the time 
that men were cave dwellers themselves can only be guessed. In Central Asia, 
speculations on the correspondences between micro- and macrocosm led to 
the importance of perforated stones, which are miniature representations of 
these cavernous rocks, and which were used for magical and ritual purposes, 
possibly connected with divination. Many such practices and beliefs survive 
in Shamanism. These ideas were introduced into China at an early period, 
and were mainly developed in Taoist circles. From the T’ang period onward, 
they acquired an esthetic dimension that survives to the present day in the 
rock gardens of the Orient. 

The Indo-Europeans shared some of the Central Asiatic beliefs about 
perforated stones. The Indo-Iranians imported them into the Indian sub- 
continent. The Indo-Iranians were also engaged in a fire cult, and were pos- 
sibly familiar with the notion of a Cosmic Man. In India, they met with simi- 
lar beliefs and also with an advanced technology that included techniques 
for firing bricks. They adopted these techniques in the construction of a large 
fire altar for the Cosmic Man, piled up from fired bricks in the Indian man- 
ner, but with the addition of their own perforated stones. The Vedic nomads 


contrasted the naturalness of these stones with the artifacts of the sedentary . 


civilization they encountered. Though they constructed the altar of the 
Agnicayana in the indigenous manner, the Vedic nomads continued to be- 
lieve that the essence of the altar was already contained in their own natural- 
ly perforated stones. 

Much of this picture is still speculative, but we shall see that there is 
evidence of a different kind that points in the same direction and is much 
more specific. This becomes clear as soon as we pay close attention to the role 
played by the naturally perforated stones in the construction of the Agnicaya- 
na altar. The Angirases provide a starting point. We have seen that the ukha 
pot is prepared “in the manner of Angiras.” As we shall presently see, all the 
bricks are put down in this same manner. We have also seen that the Angi- 
rases might have been originally an indigenous tribe or family, perhaps 
priests of a fire cult. This implies in turn that the pre-Vedic Indians had their 


145 


PLATES 7-10 


mi КУ у ————— 


PLATE 7A 
Landscape with Perforated Rocks 


The title of this painting is: “Forest Dwellings in the Chü Region” 
RERE. The painter is Wang Meng 3% (1308-1385), of the 
Yüan dynasty. 


PLATE 7B 
Sage in Front of a Perforated Rock 


"Painting of a Lohan" GE, by Сеп Hung-shou ШШ, a 
painter who lived during the Ming dynasty (1368-1644). A Lohan 
(Sanskrit: arhat, "deserving") is a Buddhist sage, defined as a 
person “in whom the outflows of sense desire, becoming, ignorance, 
and wrong views have dried up, who has greatly lived, who has done 
what had to be done, who has shed the burden, who has won his 
aim, who is no longer bound to becoming, who is set free, having 
rightly come to know" (after Conze 1959, 93-94). 


Collection of the National Palace Museum, 
Taiwan, Republic of China. 


146 


dm 


AIR EE Dude e 2 
фрлаа ау ENIM. 


RR rie Aden a ey tee oh 


ert 
mean Zoos end JAA 


PARIS IED ЙД ge 
SO AR Red eee ды үле 
Suid Деле en eS 


PLATE 8A 
Bodhidharma Inside a Cave 


Bodhidharma introduced the Dhyana (Meditation) School of Bud- 
dhism into China and became the First Patriarch of Ch’an (which in 
Japan developed into Zen). He practised what was known as wall 
contemplation, sitting in front of a wall, for nine years. He died in 
535 A.D. Here he is depicted as the twenty-fifth of a series of 
twenty-five Buddhist dignitaries, associated with the Sūrangama 
Sūtra. The series is entitled: “Тһе Twenty-five Perfected Buddhas 
of the Leng-yen Sutra" 11р. It was painted by Wu 
Pin 24% (21601-1643). The entire series is reproduced in Hu, 1977, 
Plates 041-1 through 041-25. 


PLATE 8B 
Perforated Rock in a Private Collection 


The title is: "Painting of а Snow-wave Stone" 28111, by the 
Ch'ing dynasty artist Chang Jo-ch'eng KE% (eighteenth century). 
One of the inscriptions on the painting refers to a “‘snow-wave 
stone" mentioned by the celebrated eleventh century poet Su Tung- 
p'o. Chang Jo-ch'eng saw this stone in a private collection. When 
he met with it again, twenty years later, the characters šī (8 Snow- 
Wave had been engraved on its surface. He made the painting to 
record this remarkable collector's piece. 


Collection of the National Palace Muesum, 
Taiwan, Republic of China 


148 | 149 


PLATE 9 
Peak of the Jade Maiden 


“Drawing of the Peak of the Jade Maiden" E*2/a, attributed 
to the painter Fan Huai-chen #1, who lived during the Southern 
Ch’i dynasty (479-502); but obviously of later date. The Jade Mai- 
den mountain is one of several mountains that were famous among 
Taoists. 


Collection of the National Palace Museum, 
Taiwan, Republic of China 


PLATE IOA 
Perforated Rock in Lake Setting 


The “Three Ponds Imprinted by the Moon” EiēH аге features 
of a small islet in the middle of the West Lake near Hangchow. 
Two great medieval poets, Po Chii-yi of the T’ang Dynasty and 
Su Tung-p’o of the Sung, as Governors of Hangchow, contributed 
to the development of scenic features of the West Lake. The pool- 
studded island on which this rock is set was built at the same time 
as “Su’s Embankment” in the eleventh century. 


PLATE IOB 
Rock with Creeper Trained Through Perforations 


In Soochow, ancient center of Chinese garden arts. The sixteenth- 
century garden to which this rock was brought from nearby Lake 
Tai (Taihu Ж) was rebuilt in the late nineteenth century and re- 
named Liu-yuan 8, *Dalliance Garden," as a pun on the family 
name of its owners, Liu %|. T'aihu rocks of wave = worn limestone 
are a primary feature of Soochow garden landscapes. 


Photographs Cyril Birch 


152 


153 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


own fire cult. This, of course, is only to be expected. The people whose ances- 
tors had built large cities from fired bricks, who fired their pottery, ate cooked 
food, and needed fire for heating (even if not to the same extent as is required 
in Central Asia) could not fail to be concerned with fire. 

At this point we encounter a difficulty. There are no data from the Indus 
Valley Civilization that point in the direction of a fire cult. The Kalibangan 
excavation has yielded “а terracotta tub with traces of ash, a cylindrical 
stone in the center and some terracotta ‘cakes’ arranged around it" (Romila 
Thapar, personal communication; also Volume II, page 14). While this 
establishes the presence of fire, it does not establish the existence of a fire cult. 
There are plenty of hearths at every Indus site, but whether there are altars is 
uncertain. The Harappā seals are equally unhelpful which need not cause 
surprise. Even if the inscriptions on these seals are properly understood, they 
would give an extremely limited picture of a civilization somewhat like the 
picture that would emerge if all that were left of contemporary civilization 
was a collection of postage stamps. Such data are beautiful and interesting, 
but they only make sense if a great deal more is known. For this reason, our 
knowledge of the Indus Valley Civilization, even assuming that the inscrip- 
tions were all satisfactorily deciphered, is of quite a different order from our 
knowledge of the civilizations of the Near East, which left large libraries of 
clay tablets. 

Another comparison may help to put the significance of the Indus Valley 
seals in proper perspective. As is well known, the decipherment by Champol- 
lion of Egyptian hieroglyphs was made possible primarily by the discovery 
of the Rosetta stone, which contained 14 lines of hieroglyphs together with 
translations into 32 lines of Demotic and 54 lines of Greek. The key to the 
decipherment was the occurrence of names in the three languages. In the 
hieroglyphic portion, each of these was clearly marked by being placed inside 
an oval outline. All of this is quite different from the situation in India. In the 
case of the Harappa seals, we have not found a Rosetta stone, and the over 
2,000 seals that have so far been found correspond at best to the material 
inside the oval outlines of Egyptian hieroglyphic inscriptions. 

It is clear that an Indus Valley cult of fire could easily fail to leave any 
traces in the archaeological data or on the Harappā seals. However, such 
a cult could not remain unnoticed in a large body of literature. Therefore, 
if we wish to find out about a possible cult of fire in the Indus Valley Civili- 
zation, positive evidence from similar cultures in the Near East would be 
more significant than negative evidence from the Indus valley itself. Fortu- 
nately, the relevant evidence has recently been collected by Jean Bottéro 
(1973). From this evidence we learn that the ancient Mesopotamians were 
still close to the period of fire collecting. Though the production of fire must 
have been known, there is no single verb that seems to refer to it. There are 
numerous references, however, to the preservation and transportation of fire. 
There were movable fire hearths, there are references to the use of fire in con- 


154 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


nection with pottery and brick making, and—last but not least—there were 
fire gods. The chief god of fire was called Gi-bil or Bil-gi (sometimes Giš-bar) 
in Sumerian, which corresponds to Сіта, Gir(r)u in Akkadian. “This is the 
name of the God of Fire, or of deified fire, known since the period of Fara, 
around 2,600 B.C., or perhaps going back to 2,700 B.c. in the archaic archives 
of Ur. Gi-bil means ‘burning reed" (Bottéro 1973, 10). There was also another 
fire god, called Nusku (ibid., p. 11). 

From this evidence it would seem likely that a similar situation obtained 
in the Indus Valley Civilization. If this is the case, however, the Vedic nomads 
did not merely import a fire cult into the subcontinent; they must also have 
found a fire cult that was already there. What we would expect under such 
circumstances is that the two fire cults were combined. The Agnicayana pre- 
serves evidence that suggests precisely this. 

There is a curious personage in the Agnicayana who acts as a priest, 
but is not found in other Vedic ritual (cf. Staal 1978; 1982, 42f.). He is called 
a brahmin, but he is avidvas, ignorant." The term brahmin should not mis- 
lead us into supposing that this personage must be a Vedic Aryan. Aside from 
the Purusasükta, brahmana occurs only twice in the Rgveda, both occur- 
rences in the hymn to the frogs, Rgveda 7.103. In this context the term, used 
in the plural, refers to officiating priests (cf. Renou 1967, 150). It would be 
safe to assign it the same meaning in the expression “ignorant brahmin" in 
the context of the Agnicayana. 

Like everything else that concerns the Agnicayana, the ignorant brahmin 
appears for the first time in the Yajurveda. The Kāthaka Samhita (20.6: 
24.10) refers to an “ignorant adhvaryu." The “ignorant brahmin" is found in 
several $rauta sütras of the Black Yajurveda, but not in the White Yajurveda. 
Since the Black Yajurveda is older, this seems to indicate that his function 
was important and ancient. Yet soon thereafter, he was no longer understood 
and hence omitted. 

Who is this ignorant brahmin who continues to be ignored? Weber did 
not meet him in the Agnicayana, since his description was based upon the 
Kātyayāna Srauta Sütra, which belongs to the White Yajurveda and there- 
fore does not mention him. Caland discovered him in the Srauta Sütras of 
Baudhāyana and of Apastamba, but even he declared: “Тһе real significance 
of this ‘ignorant’ (1.е., perhaps unfamiliar with the cult of Agni) brahmin is not 
clear to me" [die eigentliche Bedeutung des ‘unwissenden’ (d.h. wohl des mit dem 
Agniritus nicht vertrauten) Brahmanen ist mir nicht klar: note 4 on Apastamba 
Srauta Sütra 16.23.1]. | 
.  Theignorant brahmin appears thrice in the Agnicayana (cf. Baudhayana 
Srauta Sūtra 10.31:29.1; 10.39:37.17; 10.46:46.9-10; correspondingly Apa- 
stamba Srauta Sūtra 16.23.1, 17.1.12, and 17.3.8; Mānava 6.1.7; Vārāha 
2.1.6). He has to assist when the adhvaryu lays down the svayamātrņņā in 
the first, third, and fifth layers of the bird-shaped offering altar. On the first 
occasion, the adhvaryu recites Taittiriya Samhita 4.2.9.1b: 


155 


PLATES 11,67,79 


PLATE II 


The Ignorant Brahmin 


“Earth! 
Let Prajāpati seat you on the back of the earth, 
you who are wide and extending. 
You are the land, 
you are earth, you are the ground. 
You are Aditi, all sustaining, 
supporter of the entire world . . . 
With that god, 
in the fashion of Айрігаѕ, 
Sit firm!” 
(TS 4.2.9.1b) 


The Ignorant Brahmin (on the right) assists adhvaryu (center) and 
yajamāna (left) with the consecration of the first naturally per- 
forated pebble, which has three holes in it. It is hidden in the 
ground, below the center of the altar, which is marked by a peg. 
Some bricks of the first layer of the altar have already been put 
down, but only two bricks have been consecrated. 


156 


157 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


Let the Lord of Creatures (Prajapati) seat you ame aaa ч: qi 
on the ridge of the E iind ; E a e UEM 
you who are wide and extending. sated aderit яз 

You are broadness. Ён «tī чаа ее 

You аге the earth. You are earth. Reratar fara giaa чї 

You are the ground. Jardi deg чре deg * 


You are Aditi all-sustaining, supporter of every being. Bren A | 
Hold fast the earth, make firm the earth, don’t harm afad ат Пага HOME ATE 


the earth. sariani ferent Raia- 
For every breath, for every exhalation, Reasi vig нп CARAT 
for every diffused breath, for every inhalation z C EEA 
саса, , agar aed WIT 
for support, for motion! C Е SE LAS "a 
Let Agni protect you with great welfare, Жата! 


a safe cover! 
With that god, in the fashion of Angiras, sit firm! 


On the third layer, the adhvaryu recites Taittiriya Samhita 4.3.6.2b: 


Let the All-maker (Vi$vakarman) seat you {рдан сап mmqueaeafisret qu 
on the ridge of the sky, — kadi arī qnd- 


you who are wide and extending. А S eL ed 
You are brilliant, sun-filled, ят ап rt эптеп eiaa Ra- 


who shine on the land, in the wide sky. mahat ачетға аң zg- 
B fast the sky, make firm the sky, don't harm the ғай m Rem- 
А єс | 
For every breath, for every exhalation, bu чн 
for every diffused breath, for every inhalation, атат 
for support, for motion! sere aata 
E Mou а you with great welfare, agens чі 
afe cover! E Ņ 
нт wae ийат "Ded 


With that god, in the fashion of Angiras, sit firm! I: 
жат kads yra уат «е Н 


On the fifth layer, the adhvaryu recites Taittirtya Samhita 4.4.3.3 h: 


Son cl - 
Let the Supreme Being (Paramestin) seat you quint сат аттиң Ra: 28 


on the ridge of heaven, «ачбай пуча 
you who are wide and extending. Raadi чуч чуч 
You are strong, 1 Pn a NET 
g, lordly, masterful. fat aes fad eg 


Hold fast heaven, make firm heaven, don't harm heaven. 


*. a 
For every breath, for every exhalation, РЯ яп Rei- 


for every diffused breath, for every inhalation, Еа sorata 
for support, for motion! aac иїёгї# ata 
Let Sūrya protect you with great welfare, qiie Rī vi cae 
a safe cover! PALSA RI, RI 
With that god, in the fashion of Angiras, sit firm! ms] star гай a 
«at katarsia Hat atz u 


There are obvious parallels between these three recitations (not brought 
out in Keith’s translation). Let us consider them before we look at the dif- 
ferences. It is clear, first of all, that the three svayamātrņņā in the first, third 
and fifth layers are made to correspond to the three worlds: earth, sky, and 
heaven. Furthermore, the identical refrain: “With that god, in the Angiras 


158 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


manner, sit firm!” though referring to different deities, underlines that the 
svayamātrņņā have to be incorporated into the altar in the indigenous man- 
ner, viz., in accordance with the brick-piling techniques of the pre-Vedic 
Indians. This refrain, moreover, is repeated for each of the bricks of the 
entire altar, i.e., more than a thousand times. Since the refrain is the same as 
Taittiriya Samhita 4.2.4.4.1, where “that god” refers to Agni, the reference 
for each brick is taken to be to Agni. 
Another mantra is similarly repeated for each brick: 
À sit, ат seg spi 
The spotted cattle, pouring out milk, mix his Soma. чота ata: | 


At the birth of the gods, the tribes are in the three ISS acer 
wag, garai Rat- 


bright vaults of the sky (Taittiriya Samhita 4.2.4.40 = 20 ae 
Rgveda 8.69.3). fart даа 9: ou 


The significance of this second mantra is not very clear. “His” Soma refers 
to Indra’s Soma. The juice is mixed with milk. Cows are also related to bricks, 
because the bricks will turn into cows, and are therefore potentially cows. 
The bricks are wish bricks (see above, page 132). This mantra occurs also in the 
Great Litany (талай uktham) of the Gavām Ayanam, “Cows’ Walk,” a sat- 
tra ritual that lasts for a year and that incorporates an Agnicayana. In this 
ritual, the mantra is meant to represent the vital air pervading the bird- 
shaped body of Agni-Prajapati (Eggeling 1897, IV, 110-112, notes). What- 
ever puzzles surround this second mantra, it clearly refers to Soma, just 
as the first mantra, through Angiras, refers to Agni. The function of the two 
mantras taken together, therefore, seems clear: they relate each of the bricks 
of the pre-Vedic altar to the Vedic cult of Agni and Soma. 

Now let us look at the differences between the three recitations of the 
adhvaryu. In each case, a first deity is asked to seat the svayamātrņņā; and a 
second deity is asked to protect it. The correspondence is as follows: 


FIRST DEITY SECOND DEITY 


Ist svayamātrņņā (lst layer) Prajapati Agni 
2nd svayamatrnna (3rd layer) Vi$vakarman Vayu 
3rd svayamātrņņā (5th layer) Paramestin Sürya. 


The deities of the second group, Agni (fire), Vayu (wind), and Sürya 
(sun), are clearly Vedic deities. They occur in the earliest parts of the Rgveda, 
and they are also Indo-Iranian. They are also basic notions in Shamanism 
(cf. Anisimov 1963, 210-215). Their connection with the three worlds is 
straightforward. They occur frequently in the ritual, for example, when the 
yajamāna, before the Animal Sacrifice for Vayu, takes vows of Agni Lord of 
Vows, Vayu Lord of Vows, and Aditya (= Sūrya) Lord of Vows (below, 
page 306). Here, the three are invoked in order to secure the svayamātrņņā 
within the realm of Vedic religion and culture. 

The deities of the first group are invoked to incorporate the svayama- 


159 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


trnna into the altar, which is constructed in the indigenous manner. While 
they incorporate the Vedic svayamatrnna into the pre-Vedic culture, the 
Vedic deities of the second group are asked to endorse and support this. 
But the deities of the first group, in order to carry out their task, should 
obviously be indigenous deities themselves. | 

This is precisely what they are. Prajāpati occurs only a few times in the 
Rgveda, always in the tenth book, which is the most recent. He is not Indo- 
Iranian. Though he can be put together from Rgvedic pieces, as we have 
seen, he is identified with the Cosmic Man, who occurs also in the tenth 
book, and was quite possibly a deity of the pre-Vedic Indians. Visvakarman, 
architect of the universe, fits into the same category. He is not Indo-Iranian, 
and is clearly related to the Cosmic Man. Though Višvakarman is, in the 
earlier portions of the Rgveda, an epithet of Savitr, the solar force, he occurs 
as an independent deity only in the tenth book, and is later identified with 
Prajāpati. Paramestin is not Indo-Iranian, and does not occur in the Rgveda 
at all. He is found only in the Atharvaveda and in the Brahmanas, and is 
identified with Prajapati and Agni. 

The difference in character between the two kinds of deities is also 
apparent from their names. Agni, Vayu, and Sūrya are real names of pheno- 
mena and of the gods manifest in those phenomena. But Prajapati (“lord of 
creatures"), Vi$vakarman (“all-maker’’), and Paramestin (supreme being") 
are not names, they are functional descriptions. These descriptions are pure 
Vedic, as far as the language goes. Thus Vi$vakarman was applied to Savitr. 
Later they became Vedic descriptions of non-Vedic gods who had their own 
non-Vedic names, which must have been unintelligible and barbaric sounding 
to the Vedic nomads. That the Vedic nomads should refer in such descriptive 
terms to non-Vedic gods is only natural. We do the same when we refer to 
the Aztec Sun God or the Japanese Lord of Heaven rather than to Huitzilo- 
pochtli or Ame-no-minaka-nushi. 

Such a situation is of course not uncommon. There are, in fact, parallels 
from all over the world. The Egyptians met with many gods that were 
different from their own. Sometimes they identified them with Egyptian gods, 
as when they turned Asiatic gods into Hat-Hor or Seth. Later Asiatic and 
Semitic gods (e.g., Baal, Astarte) were worshipped in Egypt (A.J. Wilson in 
Pritchard 1955, 249-250). Such exchanges must have taken place between the 
Vedic nomads and the indigenous Indians, though we know only one side 
of the story. 

It becomes intelligible, within this context, why the Vedic Indians asked 
whom they should worship with oblations? This question occurs at the end 
of each of the nine verses of Rgveda 10.121, another recent hymn. A tenth 
verse was added subsequently, and provides the answer: Prajapati. Such ques- 
tions do not express scepticism, as has been suggested. They express a real 
question that the Vedic nomads asked themselves: what is the identity of the 
pre-Vedic gods of the Indians? No wonder this same question occurs several 


- 160 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


times in the recitations that accompany typical episodes of the Agnicayana, 
such as the animal offering to Prajapati at the beginning of the Agnicayana 
(TS 4.1.8), and the laying down of the golden man (TS 4.2.8.2 e). 

The picture that emerges from the three recitations that accompany the 
putting down of the svayamatrnna expresses precisely the kind of synthesis 
between the two cults which we expected. Pre-Vedic deities are asked to in- 
corporate Vedic cult objects into a pre-Vedic cult, and Vedic deities are 
asked to cooperate and endorse the operation. The brahmanas that interpret 
these Taittiriya Samhità mantras confirm this, specify it further, and enable 
us to solve the riddle of the ignorant brahmin. 

The brahmanas that explain the mantras of the first recitation are given 
in Taittiriya Samhita 5.2.8.1-2. They explain the putting down of the svaya- 
mātrņņā with the assistance of the ignorant brahmin in the following terms: 


They say: fire should be piled upon fire (agnav agnis cetavyah). The 
brahmin is Agni Vaisvanara. To him should he (i.e., the adhvaryu) 
hand the first brick prepared with the formula. The brahmin should 
deposit it together with the adhvaryu. In so doing he piles fire upon 
fire. 


This puzzling passage is found only once. It does not recur in the brah- 
mana portions that explain the mantras of the second and third recitations 
(which are given in Taittiriya Samhita 5.3.2 and 5.3.7, respectively). What 
does it mean? 

I can think of only one explanation that makes sense. The adhvaryu is 
the representative of the Vedic fire cult. The ignorant brahmin is the re- 
presentative of the pre-Vedic Indian fire cult. He is ignorant in the eyes of the 
Vedic nomads, because he is ignorant of the Vedic fire cult (as Caland had 
correctly guessed). It would not be enough to say that, in this ceremony, 
cooperation between the two is essential. Rather, that cooperation is the 
essence of the ceremony. When he puts down the svayamàtrnna, together 
with the adhvaryu, the ignorant brahmin “‘piles fire upon fire,” i.e., he incor- 
porates his own non-Vedic fire cult into the Vedic fire-cult of the adhvaryu. 
Though ignorant, he is a brahmin. He is accepted as such because he officiates 
as a priest in the fire cult. His assistance is essential because he is the connec- 
ting link between the two fire cults, and he exchanges gifts with the adhvaryu 
to seal this cooperation. 

There are parallels to the phrase “‘piling of fire upon fire." Rgveda 
1.12.6 and 8.43.14 (= Taittirtya Samhita 1.4.46 1-m) refer to the kindling 
of fire by fire. In the ritual context, this is taken to refer to the lighting of the 
sacrificial fire from the domestic fire. Elsewhere, fire is offered in fire. This is 
mentioned, for example, in the context of the animal sacrifice. Animals are 
not eager to be slaughtered, but the gods convinced them that it is always 
in fire that sacrificial food is offered: 


161 


PART І THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


Having, then, first secured the animals, and churned the fire, they 
offered fire into the fire (agnāv agnim ajuhuvuh), and then they (the 
animals) knew that this truly is the manner of sacrificial food, this is 
its resort, that it is truly in fire that sacrificial food is offered. And 
accordingly they resigned themselves, and became favorably disposed 
to the slaughtering (Satapatha Brahmana 3.7.3.5, after Eggeling). 


In this context, the offering of fire in fire makes sense. If fire is always the 
receptacle in which everything is offered, even fire itself is offered in fire, and 
this is presented as the most telling example that proves the case. But there 
is no connection here with the piling of fire upon fire in Taittiriya Samhita 
5.2.8.1-2, which cannot be explained in such a simple, straightforward 
manner. 

We have seen that the Agnicayana might have been introduced into the 
Vedic fire cult through the intermediary of an indigenous priest class, the 
Angirases (see page 137). If this is true, it would seem likely that the ignorant 
brahmin was one of them. I know of no rules to that effect, and the gotra 
Angirasa is not uncommon among the Nambudiris. Whatever its signifi- 
cance, the avidvān at the 1975 performance was a brahmin of the gotra 
Angirasa (see below page 267). 

It is possible that the avidvan should be related to the general class of 
priests of the Asuras or demon (asurya) priests, such as Vi$varüpa, Vrtra, 
and Sukra (cf., e.g., O'Flaherty 1976, 98-99, 104—106, 120—122). I leave this 
for others to speculate, since we have yet to answer another guestion that 
is more germane to our investigation: why is the ignorant priest called Agni 
Vai$vanara? Agni Vaisvanara, “бге which is common to all men,” is a com- 
mon appellation of Agni from the Rgveda onwards. This has been interpreted 
as referring to the sun or to the sacrificial fire. It has also been related to fertil- 
ity (Heesterman 1957, 46—47). In the Brahmanas, Agni Vai$vanara is iden- 
tified with the sun, with the year, and with all fires. Later, in the Upanisads, 
he is said to include the “йге of digestion," for the digestive processes of men 
are everywhere the same. 

But who were “аП men" to the Vedic nomads who had entered the 
Indian subcontinent, if not they themselves and the people they met with 
and who were already there? Agni Vai$vanara therefore has a meaning 
that is quite specific: it denotes Agni who is common to the Vedic nomads 
and the pre-Vedic Indians. Both had their fire cults. The ignorant brahmin 
is introduced into the Vedic ritual because he represents the indigenous fire 
cult. Agni Vai$vünara expresses the discovery by ihe nomadic invaders that 
the settled peoples they encountered also knew Agni. Agni, therefore, is 
intensely sought (prsta) [see Rgveda 1.98.2 = Taittiriya Samhita 1.5.11.1 d 
(below page 342), etc. (Renou 1955—1967, XII, 98)]. 

We have almost come to the end of our story, a story that depicts the 
adventures of nomads who combined ideas they brought with them from 


162 


5. ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE 


Central Asia with practices and beliefs of the sedentary citizens of India. 
If it is true that the Vedic Indians were so deeply convinced of the value of 
perforated stones that they insisted that these be integrated into a pre-Vedic 
fire altar, why did they not look for similar stones in India? From what we 
know of these pebbles, they are generally found in or near rivers. On Indian 
soil, the Vedic nomads generally followed the course of rivers, and sometimes 
tried to cross them. We have seen (above, page 97) that their original east- 
ward expansion was limited to the foothills west of the Gandak river, which 
is wide and difficult to cross. Here is a river on whose banks the Vedic In- 
dians must have spent some time, with plenty of opportunity to look for 
perforated stones. 

As it happens, the Gandak river—which the Greeks called Kovdoyatys, 
but which the Hindus derive from gandaka, “rhinoceros”—is primarily 
known in Hinduism because a special kind of perforated stone is found in 
it: the šālagrāma, which is sacred to Visnu. These stones are generally black 
and contain fossil ammonite. They contain apertures or holes that are sup- 
posed to have been made by an insect called vajrakita. They are called 
chidra, “pierced” (e.g., in the Garuda and Padma Puranas: Kirfel 1935, 168), 
like the svayamatrnnà. The name of these stones derives from a village 
(grama) called after the Sala tree (Vatica robusta: Kirfel 1935, 165); or else 
from a mountainous track of land on the Gandak river, called Šālagrāma- 
ksetra (Venkatachalam 1958, 108; cf. also Bhardwaj 1973, 51). The main tri- 
butary of the Gandak river, the Kali Gandak, originates near the Tibetan 
border and flows south between the mountain massifs of Dhaulagiri and 
Annapurna. A little to the east of the river, in northern Nepal, lies Muktinath, 
a Hindu center of pilgrimage that is also associated with the worship of 
the šālagrāma. Downstream, in southern Nepal, several spots on the river 
are connected with the cult of Visnu as Narayana. A section of the Gandak 
river itself is called Narayani. 

The worship of the Šālagrāma is comparatively ancient. It is mentioned 
in Sankara’s Vedanta Sūtra Bhasya (eighth century A.D.) and in several 
Puranas (Kane 1941, II, 716). In the Garuda Purana (with corresponding 
portions in other Puranas), the Salagràma cult is connected with the worship 
of Vastu deities that play an important part in the foundation of a building. 
Chapter XLVI of this purāņa gives a detailed description of a building with 
81 rooms, placed in a diagram of nine by nine rooms. Different deities are 
placed in different squares or rooms, and in a particular order. Though very 
different in detail, the entire construction is not unlike that of the altar of 
the Agnicayana. Various forms of the šālagrāma are placed in this mystic 
diagram or yantra. 

Venkatachalam (1958, 120) has drawn attention to some references to 
šālagrāma worship that may be earlier, but that I have not been able to 
trace. According to the Viramitrodaya, a late text, the šālagrāma is mention- 
ed in the Apastamba Dharma Sūtra, which Kane has dated between 600 


163 


PLATE 12 


PLATE [2 


Sālagrāma Stones 


The Šālagrāma stone is sacred to Visnu. It generally has holes in 
it and contains fossil ammonites. Originally, these stones were 
found in the Gandak river, the ancient Sadānīrā, which constituted 
a barrier to the eastward expansion of the Vedic Indians in the 
northern plains of the Ganges. The river originates in northern 
Nepal and joins the Ganges at Patna, the ancient Pātaliputra. There 
аге many kinds of Sālagrāma that are distinguished by their names, 
often names of Visņu or of vaisņava attributes, e.g., Sanātana- 
gopāla, Sudaršana, etc. The stone on top is from the collection of 
Ajit Mookerjee, New Delhi. Below, in the center, a Sudaršana that 
is a cast of the umbilical area of an ammonite. The stone on the 
right shows parts of the ammonite itself, and a large hole on the 
left. Whether the stone on the left contains an ammonite or is arti- 
ficial can only be ascertained by breaking it. Actually, holes could 
be produced in fossils through various causes. Rows of holes could 
be caused in fossils of amonites or other animals by snail-like shells, 
for example, when mud did not fully enter the shell but left open 
spaces which came to the surface later when the fossil was exposed 
to wind or water. All these ammonites probably belong to the 
large family of Perisphinctaceae, which occurred worldwide. They 
come from the Jurassic formation, which is found in the Himalayas 
but not in the Indian plains. Scale in centimeters. 


Photos John Webb 
Michael Beaucage 


Sete 5. VO 


12 I3. 14 15 16 17. 18. 19 


165 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


and 300 в.с. Venkatachalam also quotes a reference, in an Ašvalāyana 
Grhya Sūtra Parišista, to svākrti, “having its own form,” which has been 
explained as denoting such objects as Siva’s linga and Visnu’s šālagrāma. 
The term svākrti expressed that these objects were not man-made artifacts, 
but originated spontaneously in nature, just like the svayamātrņņā pebbles. 
Even at present, the sacred rudraksa beads (seeds of Elaeocarpus ganitrus) 
that are found naturally pierced for the insertion of a thread are preferred 
to those that have to be artificially pierced (Ghurye 1964, 92). 

The cult of perforated stones in India is not confined to the šālagrāma. 
According to Crooke, who describes related beliefs in the popular religion 
and folklore of northern India, “Тһе respect for these perforated stones rests 
on the well-known principle that looking through a stone which has a hole 
bored through it improves the sight" (Crooke 1896, II, 165). Crooke men- 
tions parallels from other cultures, and relates perforated stones to beads, 
* whose efficacy is at the basis of the use of rosaries" (II, 19). Among their 
virtues are that they give sons, which reminds us of the beliefs of the natives of 
northern Hupeh, referred to in Tu Wan's catalogue of stones. The reason for 
this supernatural power is that the $alagrama stones are themselves sons. The 
Puranas relate how the river goddess Gandaki engaged in ascetic exercises for 
many years, and was rewarded by Visnu who took birth as her son іп the form 
of$ālagrāma stones (cf. Kirfel 1935, 165; Ruben 1939, 232). In Tantrism, lastly, 
similar stones are worshipped as representations of the vulva of the goddess. 

If it is true that the $alagrama cult of Hinduism is related to the svaya- 
mātrņņā pebbles of the Agnicayana, the connections with Visnu and Nārā- 
yana are not surprising, for we have seen that the Purusa of the Purusasükta, 
which is also the Purusa of the Agnicayana, gradually merged with Visnu 
and Narayana in later Vedic literature (above, page 179). This is further 
confirmed by a Vaisnava custom that continues to the present day: wor- 
shippers of Visnu sip the water in which a $alagrama has been washed to the 
recitation of the Purusasūkta (Gonda 1970, 205, note 36). 

These scattered data show that the cult of perforated stones, which the 
Vedic nomads introduced into the Agnicayana ritual, has a widespread oc- 
currence in Hinduism. It is not impossible that such cults existed in India 
at a much earlier date, for perforated stones have been found in Indus sites, 
but it is also possible that it originated when the Vedic Indians found per- 
forated stones in the Gandak river similar to those that their ancestors had 
known in Central Asia.! 


1 Unexpected confirmation of the hypothesis set forth in this section was provided by 
Mr. Ajit Mookerjee, who told me that $alagrama stones are invariably placed in the 
foundation of temples in Bengal (which is the area the Vedic Indians reached after 
crossing both the Gandak and Ganges rivers). An especially large number of such 
stones occurs in the foundation of the terra cotta temple dedicated to Hamsešvarī, the 
Goose Goddess, vehicle of Brahma, in Bamsabedi, a suburb of Bandel (Chinsura Dis- 
trict), north of Calcutta. For further discussion, see Staal 1982, 42—53. 


166 


Chapter 6. THE NAMBUDIRI TRADITION 


A TIME SPAN of about two millenia separates the Vedic Indians from the 
Nambudiris, the Malayalam-speaking brahmins of Kerala. The difference in 
life-style, practices and beliefs between Vedic nomads and Nambudiri brah- 
mins is almost total. Over the millenia, nothing has been left of the social 
structure of Vedic society and the ancient subdivision into classes (varma) 
of brahmins, ksatriyas, vai$yas, and $üdras. We know very little about the 
relations between the Vedic brahmins and the Nambudiri brahmins. In the 
mean time, the system of caste (jāti) based upon birth, with its multifarious 
subdivisions; its distinction between ritual purity and impurity; its emphasis 
on pollution, untouchability, and unapproachability has established itself 
all over India. In Kerala it assumed especially extreme forms. Ritual and 
caste remained such preponderant features of daily life, that Kerala has 
been called karmabhami, “land of ritual (activity),” or—in Vivekananda’s 
words—‘‘a madhouse of caste." At the same time, Hinduism has become 
the religion of the people, including the Nambudiris. As elsewhere in India, 
temple worship, pilgrimages, festivals, religious discourses, philosophical 
discussions, and all kinds of rituals are its main manifestations. While sec- 
tarianism—e.g., the development of Saivism and Vaigņavism—has never 
been strong in Kerala, temples dedicated to various forms and manifestations 
of Siva, Visnu, or the goddess (especially Bhagavati) mark the countryside. 
The favorite form is probably Narayana. In many of these temples, Nambu- 
diri priests officiate. 

In terms of caste and religious observances, the Nambudiri brahmins 
have remained orthodox until recently. Devoted to their rituals, Tantric as 
well as Vedic, from which outsiders are excluded, they were relatively unaf- 
fected by modern “English” education. Most Nambudiris have been settled 
and peaceful villagers, country aristocrats, small landowners, connoisseurs 
of literature and the traditional arts (especially Kathakali), scholars, and 
gentlemen. If there is anything left of a nomadic nature, it is that the Nam- 
budiris, especially the men, are constantly on the move visiting other Nam- 
budiri houses, temples where a special occasion is being celebrated, or Katha- 
kalis in which their favorite actors or musicians take part. 

According to Anantha Krishna Iyer (1912, 170), the most conspicuous 
characteristics of the Nambudiris are simplicity and exclusiveness. Obvious- 
ly, the former predicate does not extend to their rituals. As regards their 
life-style, the following description by a Tamil brahmin from Kerala, though 
not untainted by romanticism and nostalgia, still rings true: 


Among the various peoples of the land the Nambütiris . . . 
occupy a privileged position. They have exerted a powerful influence 


167 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


and 300 в.с. Venkatachalam also quotes a reference, in an Āšvalāyana 
Grhya Sūtra Parišista, to svākrti, “having its own form,” which has been 
explained as denoting such objects as Siva’s linga and Visnu’s sdlagrama. 
The term svākrti expressed that these objects were not man-made artifacts, 
but originated spontaneously in nature, just like the svayamatrnna pebbles. 
Even at present, the sacred rudraksa beads (seeds of Elaeocarpus ganitrus) 
that are found naturally pierced for the insertion of a thread are preferred 
to those that have to be artificially pierced (Ghurye 1964, 92). 

The cult of perforated stones in India is not confined to the šālagrāma. 
According to Crooke, who describes related beliefs in the popular religion 
and folklore of northern India, “The respect for these perforated stones rests 
on the well-known principle that looking through a stone which has a hole 
bored through it improves the sight" (Crooke 1896, II, 165). Crooke men- 
tions parallels from other cultures, and relates perforated stones to beads, 
“whose efficacy is at the basis of the use of rosaries” (II, 19). Among their 
virtues are that they give sons, which reminds us of the beliefs ofthe natives of 
northern Hupeh, referred to in Tu Wan's catalogue of stones. The reason for 
this supernatural power is that the śālagrāma stones are themselves sons. The 
Puranas relate how the river goddess Gandaki engaged in ascetic exercises for 
many years, and was rewarded by Visnu who took birth as her son in the form 
of$ālagrāma stones (cf. Kirfel 1935, 165; Ruben 1939, 232). In Tantrism, lastly, 
similar stones are worshipped as representations of the vulva of the goddess. 

If it is true that the Salagrama cult of Hinduism is related to the svaya- 
mātrņņā pebbles of the Agnicayana, the connections with Visnu and Nārā- 
yana are not surprising, for we have seen that the Purusa of the Purugasūkta, 
which is also the Purusa of the Agnicayana, gradually merged with Visnu 
and Narayana in later Vedic literature (above, page 179). This is further 
confirmed by a Vaisnava custom that continues to the present day: wor- 
shippers of Visnu sip the water in which a šālagrāma has been washed to the 
recitation of the Purusasūkta (Gonda 1970, 205, note 36). 

These scattered data show that the cult of perforated stones, which the 
Vedic nomads introduced into the Agnicayana ritual, has a widespread oc- 
currence in Hinduism. It is not impossible that such cults existed in India 
at a much earlier date, for perforated stones have been found in Indus sites, 
but it is also possible that it originated when the Vedic Indians found per- 
forated stones in the Gandak river similar to those that their ancestors had 
known in Central Asia. 


1 Unexpected confirmation of the hypothesis set forth in this section was provided by 
Mr. Ajit Mookerjee, who told me that šālagrāma stones are invariably placed in the 
foundation of temples in Bengal (which is the area the Vedic Indians reached after 
crossing both the Gandak and Ganges rivers). An especially large number of such 
stones occurs in the foundation of the terra cotta temple dedicated to Harnsešvarī, the 
Goose Goddess, vehicle of Brahma, in Bamsabedi, a suburb of Bandel (Chinsura Dis- 
trict), north of Calcutta. For further discussion, see Staal 1982, 42—53. 


166 


Chapter 6. THE NAMBUDIRI TRADITION 


A TIME SPAN of about two millenia separates the Vedic Indians from the 
Nambudiris, the Malayalam-speaking brahmins of Kerala. The difference in 
life-style, practices and beliefs between Vedic nomads and Nambudiri brah- 
mins is almost total. Over the millenia, nothing has been left of the social 
structure of Vedic society and the ancient subdivision into classes (varņa) 
of brahmins, ksatriyas, vai$yas, and šūdras. We know very little about the 
relations between the Vedic brahmins and the Nambudiri brahmins. In the 
mean time, the system of caste (jai) based upon birth, with its multifarious 
subdivisions; its distinction between ritual purity and impurity ; its emphasis 
on pollution, untouchability, and unapproachability has established itself 
all over India. In Kerala it assumed especially extreme forms. Ritual and 
caste remained such preponderant features of daily life, that Kerala has 
been called karmabhümi, “land of ritual (activity)," or—in Vivekananda's 
words—*a madhouse of caste." At the same time, Hinduism has become 
the religion of the people, including the Nambudiris. As elsewhere in India, 
temple worship, pilgrimages, festivals, religious discourses, philosophical 
discussions, and all kinds of rituals are its main manifestations. While scc- 
tarianism—e.g., the development of Saivism and Vaisnavism—has never 
been strong in Kerala, temples dedicated to various forms and manifestations 
of Siva, Visnu, or the goddess (especially Bhagavati) mark the countryside. 
The favorite form is probably Narayana. In many of these temples, Nambu- 
diri priests officiate. | 

In terms of caste and religious observances, the Nambudiri brahmins 
have remained orthodox until recently. Devoted to their rituals, Tantric as 
well as Vedic, from which outsiders are excluded, they were relatively unaf- 
fected by modern “English” education. Most Nambudiris have been settled 
and peaceful villagers, country aristocrats, small landowners, connoisseurs 
of literature and the traditional arts (especially Kathakali), scholars, and 
gentlemen. If there is anything left of a nomadic nature, it is that the Nam- 
budiris, especially the men, are constantly on the move visiting other Nam- 
budiri houses, temples where a special occasion is being celebrated, or Katha- 
kalis in which their favorite actors or musicians take part. 

According to Anantha Krishna Iyer (1912, 170), the most conspicuous 
characteristics of the Nambudiris are simplicity and exclusiveness. Obvious- 
ly, the former predicate does not extend to their rituals. As regards their 
life-style, the following description by a Tamil brahmin from Kerala, though 
not untainted by romanticism and nostalgia, still rings true: 


Among the various peoples of the land the Nambūtiris cis 
occupy a privileged position. They have exerted a powerful influence 


167 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


over the life and culture of the Malayāļīs. These refined and aristo- 
cratic Brahmins exist and move ina different world and are in certain 
respects a distinct group from the Brahmins of the rest of India. 
Their chief interest is in guarding a way of life that has all but dis- 
appeared except in isolated instances elsewhere, and the cultivation 
of a great body of traditional knowledge. The Nambitiris have 
remained a landed aristocracy from ancient times and consequently 
a leisured class. Rarely has this privileged position of assured 
affluence been abused by the community in the past. As a class they 
have lived a dedicated and disciplined life; but that was never at the 
expense of the refined enjoyments of the arts of life. Devotion to 
religious practices and rites, so pronounced a feature of their daily 
life, has not bred in them a dry asceticism spoiling the sense of relish 
and enjoyment. Behind an apparent outward simplicity, almost 
ascetic in severity, they remain aristocrats with fine tastes. Their love 
of poetry and the arts and sciences are well known; but they have 
fine epicurean tastes too. For the delights of the table they show an 
undisguised weakness; their feasts held on the slightest pretext are 
justly famous for many exquisite delicacies. No less famed are they 
for their evident love for amorous pleasures, a predilection that has 
found ample utterance in a branch of Malayalam literature. . . 
bearing the stamp of Nambitiri genius. Again, as a class, they are 
distinguished for their sense of humour and wit; these features are 
found highly developed in the Kerala theatre. . . . The Nambitiris 
when they converse use picturesque and emphatic hand gestures 
and facial expressions. This habit is too evident a characteristic to 
be missed. As a body they stood aloof from the sweeping current of 
modernity that has all but completely de-cultured the modern In- 
dian. Had the Nambutiris too chosen early to exchange their great 
traditional culture for modern **miseducation" many noble institu- 
tions of the land and Kathakali too would have degenerated be- 
yond redemption (Bharat Iyer 1955, 5-6). 


The Nambudiris have had close social relationships with the other high 
castes of Kerala. Until 1933, only the eldest son was entitled to marry within 
the Nambudiri caste. The other sons married Nayar girls, and the children 
from such marriage alliances (sambandham) belonged to the matrilineal 
(marumakattāyam) lineages of their mothers, and were hence themselves 
Nayars. This led to quite extraordinary caste restrictions. For example, a 
Nayar son could never eat or bathe with his Nambudiri father, who himself 
could not eat food prepared by his wife. This system kept the ancestral pro- 
perty of the Nambudiri family undivided, since the younger brothers did not 
inherit, while spinsters remained abundant. 

One of the principal aims of the Nambudiri Yogaksema Mahāsabhā, a 


168 


6. THe NAMBUDIRI TRADITION 


society founded in 1908, was agitation for marriage of all Nambudiris within 
the community. This aim was embodied in the Madras Nambudiri Act of 
1933 (cf. Rao 1957, 107, 137). In the same year, the Madras Marumakkat- 
tayam Act was passed, by which sambandham alliances were considered re- 
gular marriages, conferring on the children the same rights of inheritance and 
property as held by children whose parents were both Nambudiris. Following 
these acts, Nambudiri land was increasingly partitioned and Nambudiri 
property dispersed. 

While the Nambudiris had close social (but not ritual) relationships with 
members of other high castes in Kerala, their ties with other brahmins in 
different parts of India were loose or nonexistent. They still occupy a fairly 
isolated position among the brahmins of India. They differ from other brah- 
mins in “64 anacarams" or “64 aberrant customs," which include their mar- 
riage customs and many others (see, e.g., Innes 1951, 156; for a complete 
list: Anantha Krishna Iyer 1912, II, 262-266; also see Mencher and Gold- 
berg 1967). Though all brahmins are sensitive to purity and pollution, the 
Nambudiris go to extreme lengths (on the purity of Nambudiri women, see 
Yalman 1963). Yalman (1963, 50) quotes Aiyar: “A Nambudiri only wants 
an excuse for bathing. . . . The fastidious sense of bath purity occasionally 
takes the form of a regular mania, and receives the not inept description of 
. . .possession by a water devil". The Nambudiri pattern of settlement is 
also different from that of many other brahmins. Elsewhere in South India, 
brahmins generally live in the center of villages, where the temples are also 
situated. In Kerala, the Nambudiris, like the Nayars, live mostly outside the 
village in the countryside, where most of the temples are built. When Nam- 
budiris themselves use the term “brahmin,” they generally refer to Tamil 
brahmins. 

Though the Nambudiris were not the original inhabitants of Kerala, it 
would be hazardous to assume that they are direct descendants from the 
Vedic Aryans. A long history has intervened, about which little is known, so 
that speculation is our only resort. In more recent times, we reach firmer 
ground. The Nambudiri settlement in Kerala is described by M. G. S. 
Narayanan and K. Veluthat in Part III of this book. The rest of the present 
chapter will be mainly devoted to the Vedic traditions of the Nambudiris. 
This may be supplemented by the information provided by Kunjunni Raja, 
Raghava Varier, and others in Volume II. 

Before discussing the Vedic affiliation of the Nambudiris, it will be 
useful to survey briefly the present distribution of Vedic schools and of 
šrauta traditions in India (see Map B; for further information on recent $rau- 
ta traditions, see Kashikar and Parpola in Part IIT). 

In present-day India, Vedic traditions survive in two main areas: one in 
western India with extensions to the north (Maharashtra, Saurashtra, and Uttar 
Pradesh), and the other in south India (Tamil Nad, Andhra Pradesh, and 
Mysore). The southern tradition is stronger. In simple terms, it would seem 


169 


PART І THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


Present Distribution 
ot 
VEDIC SCHOOLS 


D Srauta traditions 


ETE ASF TOA OEY ERM. TF CETL LINA ADAM 1 DE EEL 


Map B 


justified to say that the numerous events that determined the course of history 
in northern and central India through the centuries, at the same time caused 
the Vedic traditions to move to the extremities of the country, and especial- 
ly to the south. 

The western Vedic tradition is characterized by the preponderance of 
the White Yajurveda of the Madhyamdina school. It is supported by Rgveda 
of the Asvalayana recension, and Sāmaveda of the Kauthuma-Ranayaniya 
school. There is very little left of the Atharvaveda: a pocket of the Saunaka 
school survives in Saurashtra, and a community of Paippalada Atharvave- 
dins has been recently discovered in Orissa. There are a few isolated Vedic 
traditions in Nepal, exiled from other areas of North India when Islam swept 
over the north. There is hardly anything left in the original homeland of the 
Vedas, the northwest, and equally little in Bengal, in the far northeast. 


170 


6. THE NAMBUDIRI TRADITION 


The southern tradition is characterized by the preponderance of the 
Taittirīya school of the Black Yajurveda (with Apastamba as the prevailing 
sūtra), along with Rgveda and Samaveda from the same schools as prevail 
in the western tradition. The Atharvaveda never seems to have existed in the 
south. Though the Rgveda is the same in the western and southern traditions, 
its style of recitation is very different. Since in each case it resembles the re- 
gional style of the preponderant Yajurveda, it seems likely that Yajurveda 
recitation has influenced the Rgveda. In the south, the Taittiriya tradition 
has been especially powerful. It occupies the center of the Vedic tradition, 
which is in accordance with its importance for the ritual. That the Black Ya- 
jurveda is preponderant in the south, whereas the White Yajurveda prevails 
in the north and the west, can be explained against the historical background: 
the White Yajurveda originated later than the Black Yajurveda, and when it 
began to spread and exert its influence, the Black Yajurveda receded further 
to the south. 

Other historical considerations help to explain the present distribution 
of the Vedic schools. Even in ancient times, the Taittiriya recension was 
considered prevalent in the south, though “south” did not mean anything as 
far south as what is nowadays called south India. The White Yajurveda was 
generally associated with the east, which is confirmed by the role played in 
the Satapatha Brahmana by King Janaka of Videha (i.e., Bihar). Further 
geographical information on the Vedic schools in ancient times is provided 
by inscriptions. Both textual and epigraphical data are reviewed by Renou 
1947: $47 (for Rgveda); $ 73 (Atharvaveda); $$ 116-117 (Sāmaveda); $$ 
194-199 (Yajurveda). The epigraphical data are also available in Renou 1950. 
We find in inscriptions the information, for example, that White Yajurveda 
of the Kanva school existed as far south as Andhra Pradesh. This is in ac- 
cordance with the present situation, which shows the existence of a few 
Kanva villages still further south, in Tamil Nad. 

Kerala is separated from the rest of India by the Western Ghats, a moun- 
tain range with an average elevation of 5,000 feet and a few peaks upwards 
of 8,000 feet. This range runs roughly parallel to the coast, in the north at a 
distance of some twenty miles, further south at a distance of about fifty miles 
from the ocean. Near the middle there is one main gap, the Palghat gap, 
through which most east-west communication takes place. At the northern 
extremity, the mountains come practically to the coast, whereas near the south- 
ern tip of India, some distance is kept. This geographical isolation, which 
helps to explain the Nambudiri "aberrant customs," is also reflected in the 
distribution of Vedic schools. In Kerala we find a tradition that is relatively 
small, but quite different from the rest of India, and entirely self-contained. 
If it had not been self-contained, it could not have supported a homogenous 
&rauta tradition, i.e., a tradition that does not require the importation of 
officiating priests from elsewhere. The Nambudiri Rgveda belongs in part 
to the Kausitaki recension, which is no longer found anywhere else. The 


171 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


Nambudiri Yajurveda is of the Taittirīya school but follows the sūtras of 
Baudhayana (more than 90 percent) and of Vadhtla, less common and 
nonexistent, respectively, in the rest of south India. The extremely rare 
Samaveda belongs in its entirety to the Jaiminiya school, which has not been 
found anywhere else, with the exception of two or three isolated villages in 
Tamil Nad. 

There is no Atharvaveda among the Nambudiris. This is in accordance 
with what we know about the past, including the recent past. The Jesuit Gon- 
galves, who lived 1561-1640, mentions only three Vedas as current among 
the Malabar brahmins (Gongalves 1955, 35), and Rogerius, who visited South 
India in the seventeenth century, states that the Atharvaveda had long been 
lost (Rogerius 1915, 21). 

The Nambudiri Vedic tradition makes an archaic impression when com- 
pared to other Vedic traditions in present-day India. In the realm of the Ya- 
jurveda, the sūtras of Baudhāyana and Vādhūla, closely related to each other 
and similar in style to the Brāhmaņas, are older than the group Bharadvāja- 
Āpastamba-Hiraņyakešin-Vaikhānasa. In the Sāmaveda, the J aiminiya 
school seems earlier than the Kauthuma-Rāņāyanīya (cf. Renou 1947, 98, 
note 1; Staal 1961, 71-72; Parpola 1968, I,1, 91, 95). In the domain of recita- 
tion, there is a unique survival of a very ancient feature: in a special form of 
Rgveda recitation, called jaģāpātha, the originally raised udātta accent, which 
has elsewhere disappeared, is still recited at the highest pitch (Staal 1961, 46— 
47; cf. Levy-Staal 1968). This type of recitation constitutes the only direct 
verification of the raised accent postulated by comparative Indo-European 
philology. The Jaiminiya Sāmaveda chant, lastly, is also archaic (Staal 1961, 
85). It is called “primeval” by Howard in Part III (page 312), and has in 
fact a narrow compass that contrasts with the “musical” qualities of Sama- 
veda chant as heard elsewhere in India (cf. also Howard 1977, 200 and fol- 
lowing). 

The first to deal with the numerical distribution of the Vedic schools was 
Burnell. According to his estimate of 1870, “in Malabar, of 100 Brahmans 
(i.e., Nambudiris), 80 will be followers of the Rgveda, 19 of the Black Yajur- 
veda and 1 of the Sāmaveda.” In order to interpret this it should be re- 
membered that Kerala consisted of three states, Malabar, Cochin, and Tra- 
vancore. Malabar was part of British India, whereas Cochin and Travancore 
were princely states. Logan collected information, again for Malabar, con- 
cerning the distribution of the Vedas from 1,017 manas (Nambudiri joint fami- 
lies) in or about 1885. His data are as follows: 


Excluded 
from the Vedas 
Rgveda Yajurveda Sāmaveda or uncertain Total 
466 406 6 139 1017 


172 


6. THE NAMBUDIRI TRADITION 


A special feature of the Jaiminiya tradition is the “Dravidian” sound Ja 
(see page 278), which does not occur anywhere else in Vedic or in Sanskrit. 
All these features are illustrated on the accompanying tapes. 

The Nambudiris are probably unique in having a subcaste of brahmins 
who are excluded from the Vedas. They are called ēttillātta. These include 
the Cattira Nambudiris, who engaged in military exercise (see Kunjunni Raja 
1964and Volume II, pages 302—304). The astavaidyans, eight families of heridi- 
tary physicians, though not studying the Vedas, are not ēttillātta. Most of 
the Nambudiris are entitled to recite the Vedas, and are called ottan. A more 
recent estimate (reported along with the above estimates in Staal 1961, 35-36) 
gives 35 percent Rgvedins, 50 percent Yajurvedins, 1/8 percent Sāmavedins, 
and the rest excluded from the Veda. Since this last estimate includes Cochin 
and Travancore, and Cochin has important Yajurveda centers, this estimate 
is not inconsistent with Burnell’s estimate and Logan’s table. 

According to the traditional histories of Kerala, Parašurāma, sixth 
avatàra of Visnu, brought the Nambudiri brahmins to Kerala and gave them 
sixty-four villages (grama) to live in. Though they may have settled in differ- 
ent villages, the Nambudiris are still affiliated to certain traditional gramas, 
among which Sukapuram (Chovaram), Perumanam, and Irifijalakuda are 
the most important. In Sukapuram, there were originally only Rgvedins of 
the Kausitaki school, and Sāmavedins. A$valayana Rgveda was added later 
when another grdma, Panniyür, joined Sukapuram. In Irifijalakuda there 
is no Rgveda; the Yajurvedic sūtras are Baudhayana and the rare Vādhūla. 
In Perumānam, the Rgveda is A$valayana, and the Yajurveda, Baudhāyana. 

Nambudiris who are entitled to recite the Vedas have evolved a rich and 
diversified culture of Veda recitation (see Staal 1961). Their recitation is quite 
different from traditional Veda recitations in other parts of India. This is due 
to a variety of features, some characteristic of the Kerala pronunciation of 
Sanskrit (see Kunjunni Raja 1961). An important feature is nasalization, a 
feature of Malayalam in general, which seems to be relatively ancient (in 
Sanskrit it was called anunasikadhiprasara). Another distinguishing mark is 
a certain swinging or trembling pronunciation of many final vowels, nasals, 
visarga (Sanskrit “‘-h’’) and, occasionally, **7." Yet another peculiarity is the 
pronunciation of Sanskrit dentals ¢/d and retroflexes ¢/d, in certain syllable 
final positions, as dental / and retroflex /, respectively. There is a tendency, 
characteristic of Malayalam, to voice voiceless unaspirated stops in medial 
position. Thus šānti, peace," sounds like Sandi, and райса, “five,” like pafija. 
Actually, these sounds may only appear voiced. According to Kunjunni 
Raja (1961, 466), “they tend to become softer, though they are not voiced.” 

These features of pronunciation show that Vedic recitation has been as- 
similated to Malayalam to a much larger extent than, for example, in Tamil 
Nad, where Vedic recitation, and Sanskrit pronunciation generally, has been 
influenced by Tamil to a limited extent. This may be related to the fact that a 
much larger percentage of the Malayalam vocabulary is of Sanskrit origin 


173 


PLATES 13-15 


Part I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


than is the case with Tamil. It may also be connected with the isolated de- 
velopment of the Nambudiri tradition, which was not exposed to contact 
with other traditions. And lastly, though there have been many Nambudiri 
scholars of Sanskrit, there has not been a tendency to bring existing prac- 
tices in line with the norms established in the past. Rather, the living tradition 
has been left to prevail and develop freely. 

The last point may be clarified with the help of an example. There are 
many people in Kerala who know that the pronunciation of adbhuta, “won- 
derful," as a/bhuta is not in accordance with classical Sanskrit as described 
in Panini’s grammar. Yet nobody would suggest to go back to the form that 
is accepted as correct; everybody adopts what has become common practice. 
The same attitude is adopted by the Nambudiris with respect to their Vedic 
tradition. In this sense, the Nambudiri tradition is typically “living,” and not 
“revivalistic.” 

The first four to six years of traditional education among the Nambudiris 
is spent on the memorization of the Veda. Each boy memorizes, of his own 
Veda, most or all of the Samhitā. This may be followed by more advanced 
recitations, in particular of the padapatha and of some of its vikrti modifica 
tions (see above, page 30). There are particular vikrti modifications of the 
Nambudiri Rgveda and special forms of Yajurvedic recitation that are not 
known in other parts of India (cf. Staal 1961, 47-49, 59-61). In both Rgveda 
and Yajurveda recitation, the three Vedic accents, udātta, anudatta and svari- 
ta, are taught in a special manner: the teacher keeps the pupil’s head straight 
for the udātta, bends it down for the anudātta, and bends it to the.right for 
the svarita. When the accents have been properly learned and internalized, 
the head should no longer be moved. There are also special hand gestures 
(mudrā) that accompany special features of Veda recitation. In the case of the 
Rgveda, a set of photographs was made by A. A. Bake, several decades ago. 
One of these is published in De Zoete 1953, Plate 4(a). At the time of the 1975 
Agnicayana performance, some of these gestures accompanying Rgveda 
recitation were filmed. The Nambudiri Sāmavedins use different movements, 
also recently filmed, which are discussed and illustrated in Howard 1977, 
220—248. These mudrās are the subject of a section of Part III (Volume II, 
pages 359-381). 

While all Vedic recitations are taught in the home, there are two special 
schools for the teaching of Rgveda, one at Tirunāvāyi (near Kottakal) and the 
other at Trsšivaperūr (Trichur). The Trichur school, called vadakku matham, 
“northern school,” continues to teach many pupils, though it deserves a 
great deal more of public and private support. It used to be richly endowed 
by the Raja of Cochin and the Zamorin of Calicut (Anantha Krishna Iyer 
1912, II, 253). In this school, several films and many photographs were made 
during 1975. 

There are differences in the style of recitation of the two Rgvedic schools. 
In the Yajurveda, which is not taught in institutions similar to the two 
Rgveda mathams, there are also two traditions that differ slightly in style of 


174 


6. THE NAMBUDIRI TRADITION 


recitation, one following the gramam of Perumanām, the other that of 
Irifijālakudā. Some of these differences are mentioned in Staal (1961, 47, 55). 
The style of Nambudiri Rgveda recitation is analysed by Gray (1959 b). 
The Samaveda, analysed by Howard in Volume II and also in Howard 1977, 
(200-248, 422-451), is transmitted in its entirety in the homes. Actually, there 
are only twenty Sāmaveda houses (see Staal 1961, 86). The Sāmaveda tradition 
is the most feeble and will be the first to disappear (cf. above, page 39). 

As has been explained in the second chapter (page 32), the recitations 
and chants required by the ritual presuppose the “ordinary” recitations and 
chants, but go beyond these, and require a great deal more study. They are 
also much more inaccessible and rare. While nonbrahmins are generally 
excluded from listening to Veda recitation, the ritual recitations had probably 
not been heard by non-Nambudiris until 1957, when I recorded the sāmi- 
dheni stanzas (Staal 1961, 49—52, 92). Among the Sāmavedins, the study of 
ritual chanting is a more or less gradual extension of the study of the non- 
ritual parts of the Sāmaveda. But in the case of the Rgveda and Yajurveda, 
the situation is different. Here, the ritual tradition is transmitted by special 
families of Nambudiris, called Vaidikan. There are six such families: Ceru- 
токко (spelled throughout this book in its customary Romanized form as 
Cherumukku), Taikkāt, Perumpatappū, Kaplingat, Kaimukku, and Pantal. 
Of these, Cerumukkü is located in Malabar (and accordingly mentioned in 
the Malabar District Gazetteer of 1908: see Innes 1951, 109); the others in 
the former Cochin state. The six Vaidikans are affiliated to the three tradi- 


tional gramams in the following manner: 


VAIDIKAN GRAMAM 
Cerumukkü | Sukapuram 
Taikkat Р 
Регшпра{аррй | Perumānam 
Kaplingat 

Kaimukkü ifia ā 
BI, | Iritijālakudā 


The Vaidikans are in charge of the šrauta tradition, excluding only 
what pertains to the Sāmaveda. Thus the Vaidikans, whether they themselves 
are Rgvedins or Yajurvedins, transmit the recitations of Rgveda, Yajurveda, 
and Atharvaveda required by the $rauta ritual: hautram, adhvaryavam, and 
brahmatvam. This implies that there are differences in the style of recitation 
adopted by different Vaidikans. A Vaidikan who is himself a Rgvedin will 
recite Yajurveda in a manner that Yajurvedins regard as slightly Rgvedic, 
and vice versa. The twelve priests and the sadasya priest, but not the Sāma- 
veda priests, are provided—or at least selected—by the Vaidikan who is 
responsible for a $rauta performance. The Sāmavedins provide for the udgata 
and his three Sámaveda assistants, i.e., the audgatram. 

Srauta rituals consist largely, but not exclusively, of recitation and 


175 


PLATE I3 
Rgveda Teacher and Pupils 


The largest school for the teaching of Rgveda to Nambudiri boys 
is the vadakkü matham, “‘northern school," at Trichur (Trásivape- 
rir). It used to be richly endowed. This photograph, which may 
have been taken around the turn of the century, comes from L.K. 
Anantha Krishna Iyer, The Cochin Tribes and Castes, Volume II. 
Madras, London. 1912. 


176 


177 


PLATE I4A-C 
Teachers and Pupils in the Trichur Rgveda School 


The teaching of Rgveda continues at the Trichur "northern school." 
It is mostly confined to the basic text, which is learnt by heart. Some 
of the more advanced students learn the recitation of the padapātha, 
“word-for-word recitation,” and some of its modifications (vikrti). 
Special forms of the Rgveda, such as are used in the ritual, are 
transmitted within the families of the Vaidikans, and are not taught 
in schools. 


178 


| tme 


-A 


wie í 


PT А 


PLATE I5A-B 
Teaching the Accents of the Rgveda 


The Rgveda has three accents: udātta, “raised,” anudātta, "not 
raised," and svarita, “sounded.” The Sanskrit grammarian Panini 
describes the latter accent as a combination of the former two. 
These simple terms give no indication of the complexities that 
characterize the rendering of the accents by the Nambudiri brah- 
mins. The movements, however, which accompany the teaching of 
the accents, are simple: the pupil’s head is kept straight for the 
udātta, is bent down for the anudātta (15 A), and lifted and bent 
to the pupil’s right for the svarita (15B). These movements are in- 
tended for teaching purposes only. An adept reciter should not 
move his head. There are also hand movements (mudra) which ac- 
company recitation. They are described in the second volume. 


E 


180 


181 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


chant. The ritual acts have also to be performed. This is mainly the respon- 
sibility of the adhvaryu and the pratiprasthātā, and to a lesser extent that 
of the other priests. Again, the Sāmavedins are apart. Their ritual activity 
is limited, and is mostly confined to the Soma ritual. The adhvaryu is the chief 
performer on behalf of the Vaidikans. Himself a Vaidikan, he may be a Rgve- 
din or a Yajurvedin. The 1975 Agnicayana performance followed the tradi- 
tion of the Cherumukku Vaidikans who are Rgvedins. Not all the priests 
were Cherumukku Vaidikans, but all were Kausitakins, except one. The 
Sāmavedins were on their own and acted on their own authority. 

Apart from style of recitation, there are purely ritual differences between 
the Vaidikan traditions. Each has its own manuscripts, called, e.g., Yagam- 
bhāsa. They also differ with regard to the Agnicayana. There are three types 
of Agnicayana, distinguished after the basic shape of the large altar of the 
uttaravedi: (1) pithan, which is made up of squares; (2) paūcapatrikā, “‘five- 
tipped,” in which the wings of the bird have five tips (patrika or pattrika); 
and (3) satpatrika, “‘six-tipped.” The first is said to be like the Syena bird 
when it has just come out of its egg; the second, when it is young; the third, 
when it is fully grown. The five-tipped Agnicayana and the square Agnica- 
yana will be dealt with in Part ПІ (Volume II, pages 343-358). The six-tipped 
form was adopted in 1975 by Cherumukku Vaidikan, and is therefore des- 
cribed in the rest of this volume. 

The Vaidikan families have their own manuscripts that describe the 
shapes of the altars in detail. It is on account of these that the traditions 
differ. The six-tipped Agnicayana can be performed by any of the six Vaidi- 
kans. The square Agnicayana can only be performed by Cerumukku, Perum- 
patappü, and Kaimukku. The five-tipped Agnicayana can only be performed 
by the remaining three. The six-tipped Agnicayana is the most common. 
Erkkara Raman Nambudiri, in his eighties at the time of writing (1978), 
has seen it five times. The five-tipped variety had become almost extinct, 
but Erkkara reconstructed it from the available manuscripts, and gave the 
information to Kuttulli Akkitiripad of the Taikkat Vaidikans, after which 
it was performed once. The square bird has not been constructed for approxi- 
mately 150 years. In recent years, the Agnicayana has only been performed by 
the Cerumukkü and Taikkat Vaidikans. The other four Vaidikans have not 
performed it for a long time, and their last Agnistoma took place in the 
fifties or earlier. 

In recent centuries, the Nambudiris seem to have performed only two 
Soma rituals: Agnistoma and Atirātra-Agnicayana. The first is also simply 
called Somayāga, “Soma ritual," and the second: Agni. These rituals can 
only be performed after the sacred fires have been set up. À person who has 
done this, i.e., who has performed Agnyādheya (above, page 41), is called 
Atitiri or Atiri. A Nambudiri who has performed Agnistoma obtains the 
title Somayaji or Somayājipad. A Somayāji who has performed Atirātra- 
Agnicayana is called Akkitiri or Akkitiripad. Only a Somayāji can perform 


182 


6. THE NAMBUDIRI TRADITION 


the Atirātra-Agnicayana. Moreover, only certain families are eligible to 
perform these Soma rituals. They include Rgvedins, Yajurvedins, and Sama- 
vedins. Nobody can perform such a ritual unless he is married, unless his 
father (if he is alive) has performed somayāga, unless he is the eldest son, or, 
in case he is a younger son, unless his older brother has performed somayāga. 

Vaidikans affiliated to the same grāmam belong to a Sabha Matham or 
College of Assembly, an institution primarily devoted to the maintenance of 
the $rauta traditions. Each Sabha Matham is made up of members who have 
performed $rauta rituals. In Sukapuram, which has three mathams, each 
member has to be a Somayāji or Akkitiri. In Inifjalakuda and Perumānam, 
an Atitiri can also be a member. Of the three mathams of Sukapuram, the one 
now located in Shoranur (Soraņūr) used to be the richest. It maintained 
three temples with landed property, and before 1970 its annual income ex- 
ceeded 30,000 para's of rice (in 1977, the price of one para—about 12 liters 
or 40 cups—was fixed at Rs.25/- or about $3.65; it had been twice as much 
in 1975). This income was used to maintain three temples; the remainder was 
distributed among the members. A Somayāji or Akkitiri would therefore re- 
ceive a yearly stipend, the amount depending chiefly on the number of other 
members, the nature of the crop, and the price of rice. Eight families re- 
ceived 20 percent more than the others, but there was no difference in income 
between a Somayaji and an Akkitiri. The average annual income around the 
twenties of this century was of the order of Rs.50/-; in the sixties it sometimes 
climbed to Rs.2,000/-. 

There seems to have been only one economic difference between a Soma- 
yaji and an Akkitiri. In the temple of Karimpula (Palghat District), Akkitiris 
used to be invited once a year, and were given a good feast and nine rupees 
each. The funds were provided by the Vice-Raja (Zamorin) of Calicut. The 
expenditure involved could never have been very large. At the time of 
writing, for example, there are in the Sukapuram gramam three Akkitiris, 
as compared to nineteen Ѕотауајіѕ. 

All of this changed in 1970 when the Kerala Land Reform Act of 1963 
was amended. Under the original act, cultivating tenants were made eligible 
to purchase the right, title, and interest of the landlord. They could exercise 
this right by applying to a Land Tribunal. In 1970, an amendment clarified 
that this procedure was applicable if the owner of the land was a religious, 
charitable, or educational institution. The legal details of the act and its 
amendments are complex (see, for example, Sugathan 1976), but the result 
was that most temples lost their income, and so did the members of a Sabha 
Matham. 

Nambudiris like Erkkara Raman Nambudiri do not feel that these eco- 
nomic changes have contributed much to the decrease of ritual performances. 
Their number was already on the decrease, mainly because many Nambudi- 
ris, especially the younger generation, lost interest, and also because qualified 
Samavedins have become increasingly rare (cf. above, page 39). This trend 


183 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


could only be arrested to some extent by strengthening the Simavedic tradi- 
tion. To this end, a Samaveda school has been added as a branch to a school 
where temple ritual is being taught, the Tantravidyālaya at Covvannir (near 
Kunnamkulam, which is due west from Vadakkancheri). However, the ritual 
chants of the Sāmaveda are enormously extended and complex, and there are 
only two or three people who could teach them competently. Compared to 
their level of expertise, the teaching at the school seems elementary. The situa- 
tion could only be saved by improving the level of instruction considerably, 
appointing at least one of the experts, and making attractive scholarships 
available to the students, together with some guarantee of future employ- 
ment. 

We have not yet tried to explain the curious fact that the Nambudiris 
perform only the Agnistoma and the Atiratra-Agnicayana out of all $rauta 
rituals. At first sight it would seem likely that in a more distant past the 
Nambudiris performed more Soma rituals than only these two. After all, 
the Atiratra is the fourth in the hierarchy of one-day Soma rituals, in which 
Agnistoma is the first. So why should they not have performed the interven- 
ing varieties? Moreover, it seems likely that there were past performances of 
another $rauta ritual, viz., the A$vamedha. Lastly, it is certain that the Nam- 
budiris, as scholars, were familiar with the entire range of érauta rituals. 

In other parts of India the situation is different: what survives is general- 
ly the lower portion of the hierarchy. For example, there are places where the 
Agnistoma is still performed (see Kashikar and Parpola in Volume II: 
Part П); elsewhere, the seven Soma rituāls are performed (e.g., in Andhra 
and Tamil Nad). There is no other area where only Agnistoma and Atirātra 
(whether by itself or in combination with Agnicayana) are performed. Yet 
this is the Nambudiri situation. 

There is of course another possibility, which is at least logically conceiv- 
able, viz., that the Nambudiris never performed the other varieties of Soma 
ritual. In that case there must be a reason for such a particularly selective 
tradition. Barring arbitrariness, which is not much of a cause, the reason 
could be that the Agnistoma and the Agnicayana represent in fact the two 
original and earliest types among the larger $rauta rituals. In that case, the 
Nambudiri tradition would reflect a very early stage of development, when 
only these two kinds of šruata ritual existed, and the systematization that in- 
cludes the seven varieties of ekaha ("one-day") Soma rituals had not yet 
been evolved. However, this seems less credible, for it would take us back to 
a time before the sütra period. Let us see whether it is at all likely. 

First of all, it is quite possible that the Agnistoma represents the orig- 
inal Indo-Iranian Soma ritual, or Somayāga. This would have been a pro- 
duct of the Indo-Iranian fire cult, which developed into a celebration of Soma 
when the Vedic nomads had entered the Indian plains and had left the real 
Soma behind. One would expect that such a Soma ritual would be reflected 
at least in the Rgveda. This is in accordance with the facts, for—though re- 


184 


6. THE NAMBUDIRI TRADITION 


ferences to ritual in the Rgveda are fragmentary and often unclear—its most 
specific information relates to Soma rites, and it is in the domain of Soma 
rites that the Rgveda comes closest to the ritual descriptions of classical times 
(Hillebrandt 1897, 15). The chief priest of this original Soma ritual was the 
hota. Assisted by some helpers, he was responsible for the pouring of ob- 
lations, and later for the В gvedic invocations (see above page 93). 

The construction of the Agnicayana fire altar “1п the fashion of Angiras” 
reflected the indigenous fire cult. It is the chief ritual of the Yajurveda, and its 
main priest was the adhvaryu. When the Agnicayana was combined with a 
Soma ritual, the Soma ceremonies were extended so as to last through the 
night (atirātra). Hence, an Atiratra-Agnicayana would have developed as the 
first composite ritual of an Agnicayana and Somayāga. The *'Atirātra” of 
this original Atirātra-Agnicayana need not have been the same as the Atira- 
tra defined in the classical manuals, i.e., a Soma ritual characterized by 29 
Soma sequences. The name merely indicated that the Soma ceremonies that 
accompanied the Agnicayana lasted through the night. 

In due course, a sequence of Soma rituals was developed and a hierarchy 


' was evolved. Thus arose the seven varieties mentioned in the $rauta sūtras: 


Agnistoma, Ukthya, Sodašin, Atipātra, Aptoryāma, Atyagnistoma, and 
Vajapeya. These are primarily defined by the increasing number of Soma 
sequences, but they have also specific features with various backgrounds. The 
establishment of this hierarchy, however, smacks of scholastic ritualism. Its 
origin may have been largely theoretical, which does not imply that these 
seven varieties were not, in due course, performed. The Nambudiris did not 
engage in these exercises and retained, along with many other archaic prac- 
tices, only the two original rituals, a Soma ritual and an Agnicayana, com- 
bined with an overnight Soma ritual. This overnight Soma ritual was duly 
incorporated into the hierarchy and became the Atirātra of the classical ma- 
nuals. 

A remarkable fact accords with this hypothesis. We have seen that the 
Nambudiri Sāmavedins belong to the archaic Jaiminiya schools. The subdivi- 
sions of the Jaiminiya Samhita mention none of the seven varieties of Soma 
ritual, but only the Agnistoma (after 3.5) and Atiratra (after 3.9). 

Much of this reconstruction is speculative, but there are other facts that 
clearly support it. The Rgveda does not mention Agnistoma, Atyagnistoma, 
Sodasin, Vajapeya, or Aptoryama as names of Soma rituals. In fact, only two 
of these terms occur: Sodašin, which merely means "sixteenth" ; and Ukthya, 
which means “accompanied by uktha,” where uktha denotes a ritual re- 
citation of Rgveda similar to the later astra. However, the term Atirātra 
occurs once in the Rgveda, and clearly refers to a Soma ritual: Rgveda 7. 
103.7 compares frogs during the rainy season to brahmins at an Atiratra Soma 
celebration round a lake. Here is an obvious reference to an extended Soma 
celebration, lasting through the night—the kind of Soma ritual that was 
later defined in more scholastic terms by a succession of 29 Soma sequences, 


185 


PART I THE AGNICAYANA RITUAL 


and sometimes combined with an Agnicayana. The intermediate stage is 
clearly represented by the Aitareya and Kausitaki Brahmanas of the Rgveda, 
which describe the Agnistoma, the Ukthya, the Sodašin, and the Atiratra as 
consisting of twelve, fifteen, sixteen, and twenty-nine Soma sequences re- 
spectively, but mention the other varieties only in passing or not at all (Keith 
1920, 53-54). Whether the Atirātra should include the Sodašin has long been 
a matter of discussion. The option is quoted as an illustration by the famous 
philosopher Sankara, a Nambudiri brahmin of the seventh or eighth century 
A.D. (Brahmasūtrabhāsya 1.1.2). All these facts support the view that the 
Nambudiri tradition is not a fragment surviving from an originally broader 
$rauta tradition, but rather preserves an earlier stage of development. 

In view of the other archaic features of the Nambudiri Vedic tradition, 
it would not be surprising if they had indeed preserved a very early stage of 
ritual development. Such a view might be supported and further developed if 
we knew more about the history of the brahmanical system of exogamous 
clans or gotra. It is a fact, for example, that many Nambudiris belong 
to the gotra Angirasa (see pages 137, 267). Brough and Kosambi rightly 
deplored that we have no precise data about the numerical distribution of 
gotras in later and recent times. Only such information would enable us to 
evaluate the occurrence of the gotra Angirasa among the Nambudiri brah- 
mins. 

The Nambudiris have evolved an arrangement that provides them with 
a substitute for Soma. This substitute, probably Sarcostemma brevistigma, 
an Asclepiad related to the American milkweeds (Wasson 1968, 104; Flat- 
tery, forthcoming, Appendix), is also used in other parts of India. Since it 
grows only in tropical areas, it could not always have been the substitute, as 
Flattery ($ 130) observes. In South India, Sarcostemma grows south of the 
Palghat gap in the Anaimalai Hills of the Western Ghats, in the territory of 
the former Raja of Kollengode.! When the Nambudiris decide to perform a 
Soma ritual, they officially inform the Raja of Kollengode, who then pro- 
vides them with Soma, with the skin of a black antelope (krsnajina) and with 
several kinds of wood needed for making ritual implements. Detailed infor- 
mation about the history of this arrangement is found in the Kollengode ar- 
chives and is discussed by Raghava Varier in Volume II, pages 279—299. 'This 
custom, however, is also gradually breaking down. In 1975, there were some 
anomalies, which will be described in the sequel. 

According to Erkkara Raman Nambudiri, more than 120 Agnistoma 
performances and five Atirátra-Agnicayana performances have taken place 
between 1911 and 1970 (cf. Volume II, pages 252—255). This is in accordance 


1 Earlier I accepted a botanists’ identification of the Soma plant that grows in the 
Anaimalai Hills as Ephedra vulgaris (Staal 1964). However, this identification appears 
to have been erroneous, and I was wrong again when I criticized Brough (1971, 361) 
for maintaining that Ephedra had never been used in India as a substitute for Soma 
(Staal 1975, 203, note). 


186 


6. THE NAMBUDIRI TRADITION 


with the data provided by Cherumukku Vaidikan, according to whom the 
Agnicayana was performed 17 times during the last hundred years and 
five times during the last fifty years. The last performance before 1975 took 
place in 1956. 

Nambudiri ritualists who are engaged in a $rauta performance, and the 
Vaidikans in general, seem to pay scant attention to the hoary interpretations 
of the past, and do not offer many interpretations of their own. There are, 
however, traditions attached to certain features of the ritual. For example, 
the Samavedins believe that an error committed in the chant of the sodasi- 
stotra will cause the chanter's madness. 

In the sixteenth century, Melputtür Narayanan Bhattatiripad, a famous 
Nambudiri scholar and the author of the Nārāyaņiya—a poem in 1036 
verses (5loka), which relates the story of Krsna and Narayana as told in the 
Bhāgavata Purana—wrote a poem called Rājasūyam or Rājasūyaprabandha. 
This poem (see Kunjunni Raja in Volume II, page 309) contains an alle- 
gorical interpretation of the Agnicayana. In this composition, the bricks are 
related to the story of Krsna. Some bricks are called yasoda, which is also the 
name of Krsna’s stepmother. The svayamatrnna pebbles are interpreted in 
terms of naipāyasam, a sweet made of ghee, jaggery sugar and rice. There is a 
double meaning (еза) for the term šarkara, which means both “pebble” 
and “jaggery”. The literary works of Melputtūr Narayanan Bhattatiri, 
like those of other Nambudiri authors, are not kept within the Nambudiri 
caste; they are known all over Kerala. The people of Kerala must have 
had more than an inkling of what the Nambudiris were doing, otherwise 
the seventeenth century author Rāmacandramakhin could not have described 
Kerala as follows (Keralabharana, verse 204): 


Here there is no altar construction, 
no oblation or recitation, 
no consecration or Vedic injunction, 
no exclamation of Vausat. 


in their hearts, the people of Kerala 
cling to desires 
aroused by embracing 
the breasts of courtesans.’ 


! nevāsti vediracanā na ca homamantram 
diksāvidhir na ca vasatkrtayo na vāpi | 
varanganakucatatiparirambhadatta- 
samrambhalagnahrdayáh khalu keraliyah || 


PLATE 16 


PLATE 16 
Altar of 1956 Agnicayana 


The Atiratra-Agnicayana ritual described in this book was per- 
formed in 1975. During the past one hundred years it has been per- 
formed seventeen times; during the last fifty years, five times. The 
most recent performances before 1975 took place in 1955 and 1956. 
The bird-shaped altar of earlier performances has generally dis- 
appeared into the soil, which is quick to take over in the jungle of a 
humid and tropical climate. Sometimes bricks from earlier altars 
have been put to new uses, and so they are occasionally met with in 
Nambudiri compounds, for example, in a courtyard or garden path. 
The plate shows the altar of the 1956 performance, which was 
kept intact in the compound of Nellikat Nilakanthan Akkitiripad, 
on whose behalf the ceremony was performed. The right wing, 
which points to the south, is in front; the head, facing east, to the 
right; and the tail and left wing are visible on the left and in the 
background, respectively. Later, bricks from the higher layers of 
this altar were used for the 1975 performance. 


188 


189 


PART II 


THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


PRELIMINARIES 


1. Eligibility, Time, and Place 


A NAMBUDIRI IS ELIGIBLE to perform the Atirātra-Agnicayana, which is 
an optional (kāmya) rite, only if he has already performed the Agnistoma. 
The Agnistoma can only be performed by a brahmin whose ancestors have 
performed it. If his father or elder brother are alive, they should have per- 
formed it before him. Among Nambudiris belonging to the Šukapuram grā- 
mam (see above pages 175-183), 105 families are eligible. In practice, less than 
seventy-five families have preserved the tradition of performing Agnistoma. 
As a result of these various restrictions, performances of the Atirātra-Agni- 
cayana have been rare in recent times, as we have already remarked (above 
page 186). 

At the time of the 1975 performance, two Akkitiripads (Nambudiris who 
have performed the Agnicayana) were alive. At the time of writing (1977) 
there are three, as the yajamāna of the 1975 performance acquired the title 
Akkitiripad through that very performance. 

Every Nambudiri agrees that one more condition should be met by a 
prospective yajamāna: he should be strong, which in practice is taken to 
mean that he should be young. When an eligible yajamāna finally decides to 
have the ritual performed on his behalf, he has to consult many others, ask 
the support of his elders, and find the necessary priests. Once this is done, he 
is in a position to determine time and place for the performance, in consulta- 
tion with his elders and priests. 

Cherumukku Vaidikan Neelakanthan, third son of Cherumukku Vaidi- 
kan Vallaban Somayajipad, decided in December 1974 to perform the Agni- 
cayana, or rather, he yielded to his father’s persuasion and consented to do it. 
The date was quite late in view of the many preparations that were required. 
Moreover, there was some uncertainty whether he would carry out his inten- 
tion until the final days before the performance. The most likely dates for the 
ritual to be performed were also fixed in December 1974. These issues were a 
matter of prolonged discussion, and the decisions were finally triggered by 
the presence, in Kerala, of Professor Robert Gardner, who was to direct the 
visual and sound documentation, and the present author. Thus started a 
period of frantic activity, primarily for the organizers, the priests, and various 
artisans, and also for all those who were connected with the “Арпісауапа 
Project.” The activities connected with this project will be treated in Part III, 
pages 456-475. 

The prescribed season for performing a Soma ritual, including Agnisto- 
ma or Atirātra, is Vasanta, "the brilliant season,” i.e., spring. Originally 
the Nambudiris seem to have interpreted Vasanta as maghadipanca, “the five 


193 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


months beginning with Magha," viz., Magha (January-February), Phalguna 
(February-March), Сайга (March-April), Vai$akha (April-May), and Jyai- 
stha (May-June). In recent times the rituals have been celebrated only during 
Caitra or Vaišākha. The ceremonies have to be completed within the bright 
half ($uklapaksa) of the month, i.e., to begin on or after new moon (amā- 
vāsyā) and be over on or before full moon (parnimavasya). Or at least the 
yajamāna should start with the intention of completing the ceremonies be- 
fore pūrņimā. 

In 1975, the first new moon within the prescribed period, the first day 
of Caitra, was on April 12; the subsequent full moon, the 15th day of Caitra, 
was on April 26. Since the ceremonies last for twelve days, the only possible 
beginning days were April 12, 13, 14, or 15. The ritual could also be perform- 
ed in Vaišākha, one month later, but by that time it is even hotter and/or the 
southwest monsoon will have started, and so it was decided to resort to this 
later period only in case of emergency. It was similarly decided to start on 
April 12, rather than on any of the subsequent days. 

There is always a risk that the beginning of the performance may have 
to be postponed: the krsņājina skin (see below pages 203, 206) might not arrive 
in time, or there might be pollution (āšauca) due, for example, to a death or 
birth in the immediate (patrilocal) family of the yajamāna or his wife, or to 
the menses of the wife. If the earliest possible date is chosen, the beginning 
may be postponed, or the ceremonies interrupted for a few days, and the 
ritual could still be completed before full moon. 

Barring these specific kinds of pollution, the ceremonies, once begun, 
should continue and be brought to completion at all cost. If one of the priests 
falls ill or dies, another one replaces him instantly, and the selection cere- 
mony (rtvigvaraņam, see below pages 313-316) is performed for the new priest. 

The place where the sacrificial enclosure should be constructed is less 
narrowly circumscribed, and this opened the way to a certain amount of dis- 
cussion. Tradition prescribes that a Soma ritual should be performed on the 
banks of a river, in which the avabhrtha bath on the final day will take place. 
In south India, temple tanks are considered as auspicious as rivers for cere- 
monial bathing. Another consideration is that the Soma rituals are always 
performed in private places. They are never performed near cremation 
grounds, in temples, or on temple grounds, not only because the Vedic cere- 
monies are not related to temple worship in any direct manner, but also 
because the sacred enclosure is set on fire after the performance is over, and 
one does not set fires near temples. 

In December 1974, it was decided to perform the Atiratra-A gnicayana at 
Panjal (Pafifial), and to make arrangements for the final bath to take place 
in the tank of a nearby temple, dedicated to Ayappan. In the past, many 
Vedic rituals were performed in Panjal to the south of a Visnu temple, which, 
however, is mostly restricted to Nambudiris. Panjal, which is one of the most 
important centers of the Nambudiri Jaiminiya Sāmaveda tradition (see Staal 


194 


MEASUREMENTS AND BRICKS 


1961, 86), is a hamlet situated at about 76 18' E and 10 43' N, in the Cheru- 
thuruthi District of the former Cochin State, at about 5 miles southeast of 
Shoranur (see Map C). 


76°30" 
q^ 


IN IE Hac 


E “у Vatampitimangatam S 


Tir uvegapura éndrupatasseri... 07 
à 
pe 


_Kumaranattur M S. 
pu fayannur’ =ч е. 
"Sukapuram Cheruthuruthy°\ x 


\ Du Panjal’ кк сш» 


V. 


$ ari 
Apes { е е Attodr “ychetakita a 
azhanji A 
P Л aa "^sVadakkanther i [ar ы 
M. дон 
\ | 


Trichur 
© 


«Manalur 
TRICHUR 


А p m 
eKattoor — 


сіп injajakuda 7525 зо” | | 


KERALA 


O о KM 
L————— 


76100 ss vas m d 


Map C 


2. Measurements and Bricks 


THE SIZES OF the ritual enclosure and of the main altars are functions of 
the size of the yajamāna. Since the brick-made new domestic and offering 
altars of the Agnicayana are much larger than they are in the Agnistoma, the 
measurements for the ritual enclosure are increased in the Agnicayana. In 
the Agnistoma, there are two basic units: aratni, consisting of 24 viral, and 
prakrama, consisting of 30 viral. The Malayalam viral is a finger's breadth 
and corresponds to the Sanskrit aigula. In the Agnicayana, the aratni is the 
same, but in addition to the prakrama of 30 viral, now called prakrta-prak- 
rama, “ordinary prakrama," there is a madhyama-prakrama, “middle prak- 
rama," of 32 1/4 viral, and a vrddha-prakrama, *'increased prakrama” of 


195 


TE 


Kalappatti à 


SS j ll 
e, ° i ] 
ae Mundoor БА LGHAT | 


| cae b^ an SN ү NC 
уй Edappal Konnanur* и 43 ePalghat ^7 | 


\ 
EL 


NNI IS ] 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


34 1/3 viral. The latter two are used, as we shall see (below, pages 257—265), for 
the measurements of the outlines of the Old Hall (prācīnavamša) and Great 
Altar Space (Mahāvedi), respectively, so that the new domestic and offering 
altars will fit inside. 

The basic units, aratni and prakrama, cannot really be measured in terms 
of viral, for they are relative: they depend on the size of the yajamana. The 
ritual enclosure and altars thereby become his own, and are sometimes identi- 
fied with him. Before anything can be done, the yajamāna has therefore to be 
measured. Standing with hands raised above his head, the distance from the 
tips of his fingers to the ground is copied on a measuring stick, subsequently 
divided into five equal parts. Each fifth (paficami) is marked and determines 
the length of one aratni of his altar. Next this paficami or aratni is divided into 
four equal parts. One is added to the paficami, resulting in the sapāda, **with 
a quarter" or “опе quarter added," which is at the same time caturthi, one 
fourth of the length of the yajamāna, and one prakrama of his altar. The 
division of the stick into five equal parts is done by trial and error, viz., a 
piece of wood of about 1/5 of the length of the stick is taken, placed five times 
against the measuring stick, and if the end is not reached, a little is added, if it 
goes too far, a little is substracted, etc. The division into four equal parts is 
done differently. A thin strip of coconut leaf, as long as the stick, is folded 
once and once again. 

One-half of an ordinary (prakrta) prakrama is called padam, “foot”; 
it consists of 15 virals. One half of an aratni is called pradeša; it consists of 
12 virals. 

To obtain the madhyama-prakrama (“middle prakrama") measuring 
rod, add one padam and one prade$a: 15 + 12 = 27 viral. Divide this by 3 
(by folding a string) and the result by 4. We obtain first 9, then 2 1/4 viral. Add 
this to the prakrta-prakrama (30 viral) and we obtain the madhyama-prakrama 
(32 1/4 viral). 

To obtain the vrddha-prakrama (“extended prakrama’’) measuring rod, 
add one aratni and one padam: 24 + 15 = 39 viral. Divide this by 3 twice, 
and we obtain first 13, then 4 1/3 viral. Add this to the prakrta-prakrama 
(30 viral) and we obtain the vrddha-prakrama (34 1/3 viral). 

Figure 8 illustrates the three measuring sticks and the four basic meas- 
ures they exhibit. These three sticks will be used by the Adhvaryu priest in 
all subsequent measurements. 

The bricks of the altars require some additional measurements. The side 
of the basic square bricks used in the construction of the main altar is one 
aratni or paficami, and is therefore already available. But the yajamāna is, 
in addition, measured from the top of his head to the ground while standing. 
This distance is divided into three and again into seven equal parts. The re- 
sulting units provide the lengths of the two sides of the rectangular bricks 
needed for the new domestic altar. Lastly, the distance is measured from the 
yajamana’s knees to the ground. This is again divided into five equal parts, 


196 


MEASUREMENTS AND BRICKS 


O 24 48 72 96 120 
i esse Seu EE virals 
O 30 60 90 120 
24 . 
eee aratni (pancam/) 
30 R 
(ri em] prükrta-prakrama (sapāda, ordinary prakrama) 
502 1/4 


madhyama-prakrama (middle prakrama) 


HT vradha-prakrama (extended prakrama) 


Figure 8—The Four Basic Measures 


each called muttu (in Malayalam). One such unit determines the thickness of 
the bricks of both the domestic and the offering altar. The final altars will 
therefore reach up to the knees of the yajamāna. 

All these measurements were taken in December 1974, so that the pre- 
paration of the bricks could start immediately. The preparation of the bricks 
is in fact the most time-consuming of the material preparations. More than 
one thousand fired bricks are required for the large offering altar, and more 
than one hundred for the new domestic altar. Other bricks are needed for the 
dhisnya and other hearths, but these are sun dried and need not to be fired 
in a kiln. 

There are several other kinds of material preparations, which will be 
dealt with in subsequent sections. All these took place simultaneously, in- 
volving different kinds of expertise, during the first three months of 1975. 
While brickmakers, carpenters, potters, goldsmiths and other artisans were 
at work, the Vaidikans rehearsed hautram, adhvaryavam, and brahmatvam 
at Shoranur, in the Nambudiri Sabha Маат, and the Sāmavedins rehears- 
ed audgātram at Panjal, mostly in the homes of Itti Ravi, Nellikat Nīlaka- 
nthan Akkitiripad, or in the Visnu temple. m 

Now Iet us take a closer look at the bricks themselves. The new domestic 
altar will be constructed from 105 bricks, equally distributed in five square 
layers, each of which consists of three by seven rectangular bricks. All these 
bricks are therefore of the same size, as we have already seen. 

The main, bird-shaped offering altar consists of bricks of various rec- 
tangular and triangular shapes. Disregarding a refinement (of which anon), 
the general rule is that the total number of bricks is 1,000: 200 for each of 
the five layers. As we have seen, there are three traditions of altar construc- 
tion among the Nambudiri Vaidikans. Two of these are called after the 
number of tips of the wings of the bird: paūcapatrikā, “‘five-tipped,” and 


197 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


|P oe S P I ES B 
! | i x a 
| ч, 
Pies 3/2 үс” 
| 3/4 
(шыр ке AS Ps. cis) A BE б wat Mt V HE JALAD sarc ra rr AAT VĒRĀ. 
adhyardh adhyardhadrdha 


(UNIT SQUARE 
(paficamm 
fifth of size 


of 
yajomana 


long quarter 
(dīrghapādya) 


pancarmyardha 


(pancami- 


3/8 —— < |/4 | padya) 


SES CA 
short quarter (sapūda) 
(šūlapādya) | 


y 


wo a | s “1/8 
Та м, 
й 5/15 N, 
J 

RER SA N 


both , astāmši 
(ubhayi) 


Figure 9—The Shapes of the Bricks 
198 


MEASUREMENTS AND BRICKS 


satpatrika, **six-tipped.” At the 1975 performance the six-tipped tradition 
was adopted. In this tradition, there are ten types of bricks, and the basic 
unit is a square paficami or aratni. The other shapes are derived from the 
basic square by adding and subtracting. In this way the following bricks 
are generated: paficamyardha, “half of fifth"; adhyardha, “half-added,” 
adhyardhardha, “half of half-added," and dirghapadya, “long quarter," which 
is one quarter of half-added. Then the sapāda, **with a quarter," is derived, 
and its long side divided into five equal parts by subtracting from the pafi- 
cami unit square the same quarter that had just been added to it. The sapāda 
rectangle is then divided into four parts: šūlapādya, “short quarter" (of 
half-added), paficamipadya, “quarter of fifth," astāmši, "eighth" (of fifth) 
and ubhayi, “both.” The astāmsi is sometimes called by its Malayalam name 
ettāmši. The derivation of these bricks is illustrated in Figure 9. 

Of these ten types of bricks, five only are used in the first, third, and 
fifth layers, which are all constructed in the same pattern. The second and 
fourth layers exhibit a much more complex pattern, for which use is made of 
all the ten types of brick. This is done so that the interstices between bricks 
(except for the center) are never above or under interstices between bricks on 
the next layer. The final refinement, referred to before, is confined to the fifth 
layer. In this layer, six paficamyardha and four adhyardhardha bricks are 
half as thick as the others, viz., a tenth of a muttü, or a tenth of the distance 
from the knees of the yajamāna to the ground. They are used in pairs, on 
top of each other. 

Table 3 provides the number of each of the types of brick for each of 
the five layers. 

Once the Yajamāna's measurements have been taken, the carpenter 
makes wooden frames for each of these basic shapes, and also for the rec- 
tangulars needed for the new domestic altar. Then clay is made and put inside 
these frames. When the clay is still wet, the wooden frames are lifted off. 
When dry, the bricks are placed in a kiln. Brick and tile making is widespread 
in Kerala, and kilns owned by any of the numerous tile factories are used. 
The quality of the bricks depends on the quality of the clay and the expertise 
of the operator of the kilns. In 1975, numerous bricks were broken, even 
though a large number of extras had been ordered. It became necessary to 
fire many more bricks at the last minute. It seems that similar difficulties were 
encountered on earlier occasions.! 

Bricks that have been used for the altars should not be used for any 
other purpose. Once the performance is over and the sacrificial enclosure 


! During an Agnicayana performed in Panjal in 1898, the bricks were made by mem- 
bers of the Andüràn subcaste, hereditary brickmakers who belong to the Nàyar caste. 
Despite their traditional occupation, they were not experienced, and many bricks 
broke, so that the enclosure “was spoilt” (personal communication from Professor 
K. Kunjunni Raja, referring to Kanippayyar Sankaran Nambudiripad, Aryanmarute 
kutiyettam, “Immigration of the Aryans," II, 37). 


199 


PLATES 17A-B 


PLATE I7A 
Putting Clay in the Wooden Frames 


PLATE I7B 
Lifting the Wooden Frames 


PLATES I7C-D 
Transporting the Bricks 


The bricks of the altar are a function of the size of the yajamāna, on 
whose behalf the performance will take place. They will be the 
bricks of his altar. After the yajamāna has been measured, the car- 
penter uses his measurements to make wooden frames for each of 
the basic shapes of the bricks (see Figure 9). Then clay is made and 
put inside these frames. Before the clay is dry, the frames are lifted 
off. The bricks are then left to dry in the sun, and are afterwards 
baked in a kiln. Finally they are transported from the kiln to the 
place where the ritual will be performed. 


200 


201 


PLATE 16 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 
NUMBER OF BRICKS IN THE FIVE LAYERS 


I II III IV V TOTAL 
paficami 38 11 38 11 38 136 
sapāda 2 21 2 21 2 48 
adhyardha 56 67 56 67 56 302 
paūcamyardha 60 12 60 12 63 207 
(6 of 1/2 
thickness) 
adhyardhardha 44 34 44 34 46 202 
(4 of 1/2 
thickness) 
paūcamipādya — 11 — 11 — 22 
etiamsi — 2 — 2 —- 4 
sūlapādya —- 6 — 6 — 12 
dīrghapādya — 28 — 28 — 56 
ubhayi — 8 — 8 — 16 
200 200 200 200 205 1,005 
TABLE 3 


with allits contents has been burnt, the only remnants are the sguare domestic 
altar and the bird-shaped offering altar. These can still be seen in different 
places in Kerala. However, sometimes bricks are taken from the altars and 
used for the courtyards of Nambudiri homes, for stepping stones, etc. More- 
over, among some families it has been customary to perform Agnicayana in 
one and the same place for several generations. In such cases, the remaining 
bricks are first removed. 

Because so many bricks were broken in 1975, not only were new bricks 
made at the last minute, but also bricks were taken after necessary purifica- 
tions (samskāra), from the altar constructed during the 1956 Agnicayana per- 
formance on behalf of Nellikat Nīlakaņthan Akkitiripad. This altar, partly 
overgrown by vegetation, was in his compound, less than a mile away. 
Though the size of Nellikat Akkitiripad’s bricks was obviously not appro- 
priate, they were still in very good shape. The Akkitiripad gave permission 
for bricks to be removed from several layers of his altar, on condition that 
they would be restored afterwards, and that the first layer would not be 
touched. Though the rule is that no bricks should be tampered with, it is 
felt that it is especially inappropriate to take bricks from the first layer, 
because of the important things which are buried under it (see below, pages 
395-414). | 


202 


ЅОМА, ANTELOPE SKIN, AND WOODS 


Once the newly made bricks were ready, they were transported from the 
kiln to a spot near the ritual enclosure by truck; and finally carried and piled 
up outside the enclosure. 

Certain bricks are marked with drawings in white paste. The five bricks 
called rsabha (“bull”), one for each of the five layers, are marked with a 
picture of a bull. The mandala ("circle") bricks for the first, third, and fifth 
layers, are marked with a circle. The brick called vikarni (interpreted as “a 
woman without ears”), which will be placed in the fifth layer, has a picture 
of such a woman drawn on it. And finally, the asadha (“invincible”) brick 
of the first layer is marked with three lines. 


3. Soma, Antelope Skin, and Woods 


WHEN THE NAMBUDIRIS plan to perform a Soma ritual, they officially 
inform the Raja of Kollengode and request him to provide Soma (viz., the 
substitute Sarcostemma brevistigma: see above page 105), the skin of a black 
antelope (krsnajina), and one kind of wood, needed for making ritual im- 
plements. The letter is of the following form: 


Letter from Cerumukkü Vaidikan Somayàjipad, Kiluprakkat 
Nilakanthan Somayājipad (and three others) on behalf of the 
Sukapuram Sabhà Yogam: 


May the Secretary Pandarathil Kunju Menon inform the Chief 
Raja of the Venganat Palace that it has been decided to perform 
Agni for Cerumukkü Vaidikan Nilakanthan Somayāji during 
the bright half of the coming month Vasanta, and that the necessary 
Soma, kariññāli wood, and a flawless skin of the black deer be 
provided and this letter acknowledged. 


For the information of 
His Highness the Maharaja 
of the Venganat Palace. 
(see also Part III, Volume II, pages 279—299) 


The antelope skin has to be flawless, with horns and hoofs. It is used by 
the yajamāna to sit on from the time of his consecration onwards. When he 
walks, he folds it and carries it, generally over his arm. Other antelope skins, 
or at least pieces of skin, are needed for the mud from which the ukhà pots 
are made, for a sling for the ukhà pot, and for preparing the sandals (upānah) 
for the yajamàna, adhvaryu, brahman, and pratiprasthatà when they walk 
on the Agni ground (agniksetra) and later on the altar. 

While there is no difficulty about obtaining Soma and the required 
woods, the black antelope appears to be extinct in the territory of the Raja, 


203 


PLATES 17C-D. 
18A 


PLATE 75B 


PLATE I8A 


Inspection of Bricks 


When they are ready, the bricks are piled up round the area where 
the ritual will be performed. There are ten different basic shapes: 136 
squares; 48 rectangles of 1 1/4 x 13302 rectnagles of 1 1/2 х 1;207 
equilateral triangles (6 of half thickness;; and many other triangles 
(see Table 3). Itti Ravi Nambudiri inspects their numbers after 
they have been delivered, taking into account that some may break 
and others have already broken, so that there should be extras of 
each kind. 


PLATE 18В 


Inspection of Antelope Skins 


In general, animal skins are impure and should not be touched, 
certainly not by brahmins. However, in the ritual, the skin of a 
black antelope (krsņājina) is needed for the yajamāna to sit on, 
and other pieces of skin are needed for sandals for the priests (see 
Plate 71B) and for a few other purposes. Traditionally it is the task 
of the Raja of Kollengode to provide these animal skins. However, 
the animal has become very rare in the hilly regions of his former 
kingdom. So the present author and members of his team went 
to Varanasi (Banaras) to purchase some skins in the market. 
Fortunately, one of these skins was flawless, and retained its horns 
and hoofs. 


204 


205 


PLATE 18B 


PLATES 19-27 


PLATE 1 


PART П THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


in the Anaimalai Hills of the Western Ghats. The Raja consented to provide 
the skin, but the Nambudiri organizers were doubtful whether he would be 
able to keep his promise. Considerable efforts were therefore spent to obtain 
antelope skins from elsewhere. In due course, some specimens were procured 
by Dr. C.G. Kashikar in Poona, and by us in Varanasi. A bullock skin is 
also needed, to put the Soma on at the time of purchase and pressing. It was 
obtained locally and without difficulty. The Raja sent another antelope skin, 
but by that time the performance had already begun. 


4. Wooden Implements 
(in collaboration with George Dales) 


THE CARPENTER MAKES a variety of wooden implements, needed for the 
ritual proceedings. He belongs to the marasari or āšāri, “carpenter,” caste, 
a subdivision of the kammālan artisan caste. 

The wooden implements used in the rituals are made from specific 
kinds of wood, and we shall therefore begin with a list of their names in 
Sanskrit and Malayalam, along with their botanical identification: 


SANSKRIT MALAYALAM 
ašvattha arayāl Ficus religiosa Linn.! 
bilba kūlakam Aegle marmelos Corr. 
khadira karififiali Acacia sundra D.C. 
nyagrodha peral Ficus Bengalensis Linn. 
palasa plas Butea frondosa Koen, Roxb. 
udumbara atti Ficus glomerata Roxb.! ` 
vahni vahni Prosopis spicigera Linn. 
varanam nīrmātala Crataeva religiosa Forst. 
Or varunam 
vikankata vayyankat Flacourtia sapida Roxb. 
vrksamla puli Tamarindus indica L. 


I shall refer to these woods by their Sanskrit names, which are com- 
monly used in the ritual texts. There are several wooden implements that the 
yajamāna already possesses, and that a carpenter had made on earlier occa- 
sions. These include the ladles required for the daily Agnihotra (in particular 
the agnihotra-havani made from vikankata wood) and implements for making 
fire: the upper kindling block (uttararani), the lower kindling block (adharā- 
rani; both made from a$vattha wood), a churning rod (mantha, Malayalam: 


1 For a pertinent discussion of the significance of these fig species, especially the asva- 
ttha, see Emeneau 1949. 


206 


WOODEN IMPLEMENTS 


itattantu, made from vrksamla wood), and a rope. A half coconut shell may 
be used to press the mantha down into a hole in the adharāraņi. The churning 
rod itself is elaborately carved with a cross section like a twelve-fluted 
column. In fact, the overall design of the rod resembles an architectural 
column. Àn iron peg is embedded in the upper end as a pivot point. Iron 
sleeves protect each end. The fire-generating wooden tip is replaceable. It 
is attached to the rod by means of a triangular recess in the lower end of the 
rod. 

In the $rauta rites, the most important ladles are juhü (made from 
palaga wood), dhruva (made from vikankata), and sruva (made from kha- 
dira). The first two are called sruc. They are of equal length and relatively 
similar in shape. Sometimes notches are cut into the end of the handles to 
help distinguish one type from the other. The sruva has a much smaller 
serving end. It is generally used to scoop butter from a dish. The upabhrt 
ladle, made from a$vattha wood, is generally held under the juhü. There 
are also substitute juhü and upabhrt ladles, of the same shape, size and 
wood as the originals, but provided with a lid. They are used when the ori- 
ginals are already employed. The substitute for the juhü is called pracarani, 
and the substitute for the upabhrt, which is only used in the animal sacrifice, 
is called: prsadajyagrahani. 

Other implements made from khadira wood are: the sphya knife used 
in many special rites; the dhrsti ladle for preparing the hot milk of the 
Pravargya ceremony; the šamyā pin or wedge of the yoke of the Soma cart; 
the musala pestle for pounding grain; and the prāšitra, in the shape of a kind 
of cameleon (called ortu in Malayalam), on the back of which the sacrificial 
cakes are placed. 

Grains are crushed in the u/ūkhala mortar, made from varanam. Three 
oblong containers are made from the same wood: the largest is the dārupātri, 
a trough called after daru, *wood" (etymologically related to English 
*tree”), in which the sacrificial cakes are placed; idapatram, a receptacle for 
the ida meal, of similar shape but shorter; and pranita-pranayanam, in which 
the pranita waters are transported. 

For the animal sacrifice, the carpenter makes an octagonal sacrificial 
pole (yūpa) from bilba wood. The Soma rituals require many special im- 
plements. The largest are the Soma cart (Sakata), made from nyagrodha wood 
with two spokeless wheels, and the stool or “‘throne” (Gsandi), made from 
udumbara, on which King Soma is installed south of the domestic altar. 
Nyagrodha wood is also used for making the droņakalaša vessel and the 
pariplu dish, used to scoop the Soma extract from it. 

As we have seen (p. 52), in addition to the yajamāna, ten of his priests 
are called camasin, *cupbearer"; they have their own Soma cup (camasa). 
The principal cupbearers (mukhya-camasin) are hota, brahman, udgātā, 
yajamana, and sadasya. The hotā's cup is larger (height: 12 1/2 cm, side: 
18 cm.) than the others (height: 7 1/2 cm, side: 12 1/2 cm, on the average). 


207 (Continues on page 214) 


PLATES 4, 48, 91A, 
95 


PLATE 65 


PLATE 2 


PLATE 3, 53 
PLATE 58 


PLATE 20B 


PLATE 23С, 24, 
101 


PLATE I9 
The Potter 


The potter uses his wheel for all the clay pots that have to be made. 
He fashions several other items, such as the clay heads, by hand. 


209 


208 


PLATES 20A-C 
The Carpenter 


The Carpenter, working with two assistants, makes all the wooden 
implements required in the ritual. They have to be made from 
different woods, and the shapes are prescribed by tradition. Though 
Itti Ravi Nambudiri provided the necessary instructions, the car- 
penter had performed these tasks in the past and was obviously 
fully experienced. Among the many items he fashions, there are 
Soma goblets, such as the maitrāvaruņa-pātram, made of nyagro- 
dha wood (Ficus bengalensis, Linn.) and fashioned with two breasts 
(20A). Since each of the wooden implements has to be made of a 
single piece, large vessels such as the droņakalaša require an en- 
tire tree trunk to start with (20B). Another special item is the ša- 
pham, which will subsequently be split lengthwise to constitute a 
pair of poles that will be used to lift the hot mahāvīra pot (20C; see 
Plate 58). 


210 


211 


PLATE 2I 
Soma Goblets Made of Nyagrodha Wood 


Antaryama-pàtram, eight-cornered (astakona) 
Rtu-pàtram, with a face (mukham) 

Rtu-pātram, with two faces (mukhe) 
Maitrāvaruņa-pātram, with breasts (stanau) 
Ukthya-pàtram, with halves (ayava) and eight-cornered 
Atigrahya-patram, round (vrtta) 


212 


213 


PLATES 21, 
105 


104, 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE ` 


All cups are square, each is made out of one piece of nyagrodha wood, and 
their handles have specific shapes. A Sanskrit verse characterizes them: 


vrttam catuhsraktir atha trikoņam 

prthus ca savyavrta eva mukhyah 

adhordhvavakram dvitayam pradaksinam 

rāsnā ca Sankuh camasasya laksaņam 

Round, sguare, and triangular, 

wide and turned to the left are the principal ones. 

Bent downward and upward, double, turning to the 
right, 

girded and pointed, these are the cups’ marks. 


The order of priests is explained by another verse, which begins as follows: 


praitu hotu$ camasah pra brahmanah prodgātuh 

pra yajamānasya pra sadasyasya 

hotrakāņām. .... 

First the hotà's cup should come, then that of 
brahman and udgata, 

next of yajamāna and sadasya, 

then of the hotrakas. . . . 


The hotrakas are those who have a hearth in the sadas, except for the hota. 
They are enumerated in the same order as their dhisnya hearths, from south 
to north (see page 586 and Figure 42), viz., omitting the hota, as follows: 
maitravaruna, brahmanacchamsin, potā, nesta, acchāvāka, to which finally 
the āgnīdhra (whose hearth is further north in his own shed) is added. 
Summing up, the assignment of the cupbearers' cups is as follows: 


SHAPE OF HANDLE OF CAMASA: CAMASIN: 


round (vrtta) hotà 

square (catuhsrakti) brahman 
triangular (trikona) udgātā 

wide (prthu) yajamana 
turned to the left (savyāvrta) sadasya 
downward (adhas) maitrāvaruņa 
upward (ūrdhva) brāhmaņācchamsin 
double (dvitaya) potā 

turned to the right (pradaksiņa) nestā 

girded (rāsna) acchāvāka 
pointed (šanku) āgnīdhra 


Some oblations, called graha, are made to the gods in round goblets’ 


214 


called patram or upasayam. They have specific names (called after gods or 


WOODEN IMPLEMENTS 


rites) and shapes. Their average height is 18 cm and diameter 7 1/2 cm, but 
the opening in the top that contains the liquid is only about 3 cm deep. They 
are from different kinds of wood: 


NAME: SHAPE: WOOD: 
rtu-patram one- and two-faced nyagrodha 
maitravaruna-patram with two breasts nyagrodha 
aindravayava-patram girded nyagrodha 
antaryama-patram еіеһі-согпегей nyagrodha 
asvina-patram two-edged nyagrodha 
aditya-upasayam narrow-waisted nyagrodha 
ukthya-upašayam narrow-waisted and eight-cor- nyagrodha 
nered 

upāmšu-pātram round nyagrodha 
atigrāhya-patram round nyagrodha 
sodasi-patram square udumbara 
dadhigraha-pātram square udumbara 
manthi-patram round vikankata 
$ukra-patram round bilba 


The $ukra-pātram will be made later, from the sacrificial pole (see page 403). 
Notches are again used to distinguish similar looking goblets from each 
other. A final cup, shaped like a leaf, is the sārvausadha-pātram, made of 
udumbara wood, used for making offerings of “all herbs” (sarvosadha). 

The optional Pravargya ceremony requires several implements made 
from udumbara wood: šapham, a pair of poles used for lifting the hot mahā- 
vira pot; and another stool or throne (asandi) for installing mahāvīra pots 
and other Pravargya implements south of the throne for King Soma. 

The Agnicayana calls for more items made from udumbara wood: a 
plough with which the field of Agni is ploughed before the altar construction 
begins; the praseka, a large ladle used for the continuous ghee offering of 
Flow of Wealth; and a small toy cart (ratham) with four spokeless wheels, 


` used for the Holding-of-the-Realm oblations on the ninth day. 


Like all the Vedic ritual implements, these wooden utensils are of an 
archaic simplicity. Zimmer has commented upon this: “Тһе complete ab- 
sence of all decorative symbolism contrasts dramatically with the rich adorn- 
ment usual in Indian ritual objects." He is probably right when he adds: “Тһе 
homeland of such simplicity was not India, but those Central Asian steppes 
whence the late descendants of the Old Stone Age hunters poured southward 
and westward, during the second millenium B.c., not only into India, but 
also into the ancient culture-lands of the Mediterranean" (1955, 39, 41). 


215 


PLATE 20A 


PLATE 60A 


PLATES 20C 
PLATE 60B 


PLATE 64 
PLATES 88-90 
PLATE 91 


PLATES 19, 28-32 


PLATES 40, 100 


PLATES 30, 66, 
98B, 99 


PLATES 62, 82 


PLATE 83 
PLATES 46, 50 


PART П THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


5. Clay Implements 
(in collaboration with George Dales) 


THE POTTER, WHO belongs to the kumbharan caste, has as much to do as 
the carpenter. Many of the clay pots and dishes he makes are indistinguish- 
able from those that are in daily use throughout India. The following descrip- 
tions are partly based upon an extra set of ritual implements, made for the use 
of scholars when the implements for the ritual were made. The extra set is pre- 
served at the University of California at Berkeley. No specific observations 
were made of the manufacturing processes in the field, but from the Berkeley 
examples certain remarks can be made. Most of the vessels are made of a fine- 
to medium-grained paste fired to an orange buff color. Many have an or- 
angish wash applied—often sloppily—to the exterior surfaces and over the rim. 
The most common exterior decorations include multiple bands of grooves 
and ridges, streak-burnishing, punctated designs in bands surrounding the 
shoulder, and multiple intersecting line patterns on the bases of jars and pots 
produced by a carved paddle. The most elaborate vessels have applied coni- 
cal projections around the shoulder, erect penis spouts, and breasts. These 
three features occur in varying combinations on different types of vessels. 
| Foremost among the vessels are large pots, called kalam апа kutam 
in Malayalam. The former has a bigger mouth than the latter. The corres- 
ponding Sanskrit terms are ghata and kumbha. Among smaller vessels, one 
is used for milking (dohana). There are dishes of varying size called catti 
(Sanskrit sthālī). These bowls appear to be mass-produced items, quite in- 
differently fired, resulting in warping, asymmetry, and differential coloring. 
They follow a strict stylistic pattern, however, with externally beaked rims, 
shallow spiral grooves on the exterior of the upper body, and the center of 
the base characterized by a low nipple profile. The different sizes are carefully 
controlled so that each bowl nestles neatly into the next largest size to form 
a stacked set of bowls. One dish differs from the others in having a more 
elaborate external profile with deep grooves and a sharp projecting ledge 
dividing the shoulder from the base of the bowl. It is called prsthodvapani 
(in Malayalam: arakkan catti). Smaller, more crudely formed kapalam 
vessels are used for preparing purodāša rice cakes. The name itself means 
“pottery sherd” and actually, sherds are sometimes used for this purpose. The 
smallest are used for water for washing hands. 

Characteristic of Kerala is a pot with a spout called kindi or karaka- 
kindi. They come in all sizes. A larger one with two breasts added to the 
spout, also called karakam, will be used by the pratiprasthātā to pour a 
continuous stream of water, while he circumambulates the completed altar 
(pages 534-537). Small kindi vessels made of brass are also used, e.g., for 
sprinkling water. Together with the typical brass lamps (Malayalam: vilakku) 
and dishes (uruli) of Kerala, they are probably best regarded as Hindu intru- 
sions into the Vedic ritual. They are outside the potter’s domain. 


216 


CLAY IMPLEMENTS 


Special clay vessels are needed in the Soma ritual: water is poured from 
the sambharani, Soma juice is mixed in the adhavaniya and kept in the pūta- 
bhrt, a large vessel with two breasts. Large clay pots like these are called 
pitavu in Malayalam. Another large kalam vessel is the agrayana, used 
during the Soma pressings. One of the Soma vessels, with a ring of sharp 
clay projections or thorns around it, is called тийи in Malayalam. All the 
distinctions of shape between these pots are customary, not Vedic. They are 
“human” (manusa), in the words of Erkkara Raman. 

The most important object of the Pravargya ceremony is the mahāvīra 
pot. Use is also made of two clay ladles, called pinvanam. The potter prepares 
the mahāvīra pot on his potter’s wheel and not by hand, as the ancient texts 
prescribe (cf. Kashikar 1969; van Buitenen 1968; Kramrisch 1975). Unlike 
what is suggested in the texts, the mahāvīra pot is not fired with its bottom 
up. It is placed in the oven sideways and generally with its opening facing 
east. The pinvanam ladles are put to the east, the ājyasthālī dish (a dish for 
ājya, “ghee”) and the kapalam potsherds to the west of the mahāvīra pot. 
Unlike the other pots, the mahavira, though prepared by the potter, is ritual- 
ly made by the priests during one of the ceremonies that take place on the 
second day (see below, page 336). 

The Agnicayana requires numerous clay items. Foremost among them is 
the ukhā pot, which has eight breasts or udders around its circumference. 
Like the mahāvīra, it is prepared by the potter and, subsequently, ritually 
made (together with eight of the bricks) by the priests during a special cere- 
mony, the Ukhasambharana rite (below, pages 286-302). The construction of 
this elaborate vessel is of some interest. The base is actually a bottomless 
bowl made separately and attached up-side-down to the bottom of the large 
upper bowl. The ledge-rim of the base is decorated with deep concentric 
grooves—unusual, if this smaller bowl was originally intended to have been 
a base for another vessel. The breasts are hollow with a tiny aperture and are 
attached to the exterior solid surface of the vessel. This is true also of the 
other type of vessels having breasts, so they are nonfunctional as opposed to 
the spouts. All the surfaces of the large upper bowl of the ukhā vessel are 
elaborately decorated with burnished lines, especially the interior, where a 
center square motif is connected with the rim by radial burnish streaks. 

One detail in the preparation of the ukha pot is reminiscent of the spe- 
cial prescription given in the Kātyāyana Srauta Sūtra (above, page 136), 
though it is not identical with it: when the ukhā pot is put in the fire made of 
cowdung, chips of firewood, and dry grass, accompanied by the recitation 
of Taittiriya Samhita 4.1.6.2 d (below, page 299), it must be placed sideways 
With its opening facing east. In the case of the mahāvīra, as we have just seen, 
this is also the general practice. In the case of the ukhā it is prescribed ex- 
plicitly in the Malayalam text of the Yagambhasa. The Cerumukkt text has: 

kilakku bilampata, the Taikkat text: kilakkēttu talayayi veykkanam. Both 
expressions mean: “‘put the pot with its opening facing east.” 


217 (Continues page 240) 


PLATES 5B, 60B, 
85, 90 


PLATES 5A, 71, 
72А 


PLATES 41-42 


PLATES 22-32 
Wooden and Clay Implements 


At the time the carpenter and potter prepared the wooden and clay 
implements for the ritual, an extra set was made for the use of 
scholars. This was especially valuable in view of the fact that al- 
most all ritual implements used during the ritual would be destroyed 
on the last day of the performance. The extra set is preserved at 
the University of California, Berkeley. The following eleven draw- 
ings were made from this collection by George Dales, who also as- 
sisted with their description in Chapters 4 and 5. 


PLATE 22 


A: dhruva B: juhü C: sruva D: sphya E: dhrsti 
F: prasgitra. 


218 


PLATE 23 


A: šamyā B: mūsalam С: camasa of hota D: pranita- 
pranayanam E: darupatri. F: mantha 


1:4 scale 


220 221 


PLATE 24 


idhra 
amāna 


āgn 
aj 


а С; 
F: brahman С: y 
hamsin. 


vāka B: udgāt 
ācc 


ā 


ps of A: acch 


poti E: maitrāvaruņa 
sadasya І: brahman 


Camasa Cu 
D: 


H: 


233 


222 


PLATE 25 


A: antaryama-patram В: antaryāma-pātram С: āšvina- 
pātram D: sodaši-pātram Е: atigrāhya-pātram 
F: upāmšu-patram С: sārvausadha-pātram. 


кнот ки E 


HR a P EATER jg! 


224 225 


PLATE 26 


A: aindravāyava-pātram В: maitrāvaruņa-pātram 
C: rtu-pātram D: ratham. 


226 227 


PLATE 27 


A: sārvausadha-pātram B: pütabhrt. 


1:4 scale 


228 229 


PLATE 28 


A-C: three kalams D: mahāvīra E: kutam. 


230 231 


PLATE 29 


A: ukhā B: pinvanam. 


232 


PLATE 30 


A-E: five sthali dishes F: prsthodvapani G-H: two | 
kalams I: dohana J-L: three small sthali dishes. | 


234 235 


PLATE 31 | 
A: kumbhi B: muļļu C: karakam D: kindi. | 


236 | 237 


PLATE 32 


A: vrsņi (ram) B: a$va (horse) C: purusa (man). 


238 


PLATES 44, 72A 
PLATE 67 


PLATE 33 


PLATE 46 


PLATE 91 


PLATES 38A, 54, 
55B, 84 


PLATE 46 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


The potter also makes five clay heads of a he-goat (basta), bull (vrsabha), 
ram (vrsni), horse (ауа), and man (purusa), and six pairs of male and female 
pots (kumbha and kumbhi), which will all be buried under the main altar 
during the ceremonies of the fourth day. The female kumbhi pots have 
applied breasts but the male kumbha pots do not have penis spouts. 


6. The Golden Man 


THE GOLDSMITH WHO belongs to the Tattàn caste, makes the golden man 
(hiranmayapurusa). Any human figure could be used as a mould, and the 
size is not important. The goldsmith who assisted in 1975 (and had done so 
on earlier occasions) had a mould made from an image of Narayana from a 
temple in Palghat. The image is covered with a thin layer of gold and becomes 
the golden man. Like other representations of Visnu, Narayana has four 
arms. In order to obtain the human form, two of these are removed from the 
image after it has been detached from the mould. The resulting figure meas- 
ured about 4 1/2 cm. 

The weight of the golden man should be a hundred (šatamānam), inter- 
preted as a hundred small golden coins, each called panam. These coins, 
which are no longer in use, continue to function in ritual contexts. For 
example, the Ignorant Brahmin presents the adhvaryu with such a coin on 
the three occasions of his participation in the ceremonies (below, pages 419, 
461, 505). Since a hundred golden coins is expensive, it is permissible to use 
fifty, twenty-five, twelve and a half, or six and a quarter panams. The last 
option was adopted in 1975. 

In addition to the golden man, the goldsmith prepares the rukma, a 
small disk worn by the yajamāna on a string round his neck at the time of his 
consecration. He also makes a small copper pipe, approximately 2 1/2 
finger breadths long, to be inserted in the wooden toy cart prepared by the 
carpenter (page 227). The goldsmith may also make the earrings (kundala) 
customarily worn by Nambudiri Somayajis. The few Somayajis who attended 
the 1975 ceremonies already owned such earrings. 


7. Other Prerequisites 


QUANTITIES OF darbha grass and kusá grass are procured from Karalman- 
ņa in South Malabar. Bundles of palāša leaves and avaka plants (Malayalam: 
pucakkuru) are similarly obtained. Hemp is used for making strings, in parti- 
cular the string that ties the yajamana to the ukhā pot. Firewood, including 
samidh and idhma sticks, is brought in sufficient quantity. 

Four hundred and fifty garments (vastram) are bought in the market, 
ready to be used for daksiņā and other purposes. Fourteen sacrificial goats 


240 


OTHER PREREQUISITES 


are ready to be purchased, but the purchase was called off in 1975. Two 
horses, a donkey, two oxen, and a Soma cow are hired. Another cow and goat 
are hired for providing milk. Fifty liters of ghee are needed for the libations, 
as well as quantities of rice and wheat. Coconut oil is needed for the lamps. 
The feeding of several hundred guests (brahmanabhojana) requires large 
quantities of food (including 2,100 kilograms of rice), kerosene, betel 
leaves, beedies, cigarettes, snuff, bamboo mats, soap, etc. The reader who 
wishes to know more may consult the detailed budgets published in the final 
section of Part III (Volume II, pages 457—463). 

Stones for pounding Soma stalks, and pebbles for outlining the shapes 
of the altars and for putting under, inside, and on top of the bird-shaped altar, 
are obtained from an area on the banks of the Bharata Puzha river at Kan- 
nanür, about one and a half miles downstream from Pattambi. These pebbles 
are called kalipparal, **chicken-fish." At least three among them should have 
holes in them: these are the svayamātrņņa, “naturally perforated ones.” 
Two of these should have (at least) three holes in them, and one (at least) 
five. Such holes are called dvara. If no pebbles can be found with fully per- 
forated holes, dents or small depressions are acceptable. 

The pebbles from the Bharata Puzha river were analyzed at Berkeley 
and were found to consist of Vivianite, a scarce mineral named after the 
British mineralogist J.G.Vivian, who discovered it in Cornwall. It is an Iron 
Phosphate Hydrate, Еез(РО,)• H20, often found in beds of clay or in cavities 
in altered fossils. It is reasonable to suppose that there was a tradition, that 
pebbles of this type occur in rivers. The ancestors of the Nambudiris must 
have looked for them, and discovered them in the Bharata Puzha river. 

The chicken-fish pebbles are not only used in the Agnicayana. They play 
a role in other ritual contexts, which throw some light on their post-Vedic 
and contemporary significance.! 

Together with seven other substances, the chicken-fish constitute a mix- 
ture called astabandha, “eight binding substances," used for cementing the 
foundation of images installed in temples. The mixture is obtained by com- 
bining six parts of $amkha (Malayalam: Samkhupoti “powdered conch 
shell”), four parts of sarja (ceficalyam “‘pine resin"), two parts of abhaya 
(katukkattotu "cover of gall-nut"), one part each of kārpāsa (nūtparatti 
“cotton’’), apala (kolarakku *'shellac"), valuka (cettumanal “sand mixed with 
clay”), sajatuka (kolipparal *chicken-fish" pebbles), and a half part of amala- 
kam (nellikkā *gooseberry"). These are powdered, mixed with oil (Sanskrit 
taila, Malayalam enna) and pounded with a hammer for one and a half hours 
(3 3/4 of a nàlika: see page 245) every morning and evening for thirty days. 

The pebbles are also used in connexion with fire. When the aupāsana 
or grhya “home” fire, installed in the household at the time of marriage, has 
gone out and has to be reinstalled, the ground is prepared and purified with 


! The following information was provided by Matampu Narayanan Nambudiri. 


241 


PLATE 105 


PLATE 6 


PLATE 33A 
Fashioning the Golden Man 


The goldsmith fashions the golden figure of a man, which will be 
buried under the altar. 


PLATE 33B 


The Golden Man (Hiranmayapurusa) 
The figure of the golden man is made with the help of a mould taken 
from an image of Narayana in a temple in Palghat. Two of Visnu’s 
four arms are removed to make the figure human. It is about 4 1/2 


cm. high, and weights 6 1/4 panams, a unit of weight equivalent 
to a small golden coin. 


Photo Michael Beaucage 


242 


243 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


a mixture consisting of chicken-fish and various substances, which I list here 
with their Malayalam names: manal (river sand from the Bharata Puzha 
river), ūsaram (desert sand, provided by Tamil brahmins) puttumaņņu 
(anthill), nirarumanna (mud from a permanently wet spot), elippūļi (sand 
thrown up by a rat—eli—digging a hole), pannippüli (sand thrown up by a 
pig—panni—digging a hole), tamarayila (lotus leaf), asani (coconut, jack 
or arayāl tree struck by lightning), a branch with leaves of the arayāl, and 
various woods: atti, plas, vahni, and vayyankat (see page 206). 


8. The Ritual Enclosure 


THE CONSTRUCTION OF the ritual enclosure (yāgašālā) requires precise 
measurements to have been made beforehand. The measurements are made 
with the help of the measuring sticks derived from the size of the yajamāna 
(above, page 196). The results are marked on the chosen ground with the 
help of pegs and strings. 

All measurements can be marked only after determination of the east- 
west line (prsthyā). A stick of about two to three feet is prepared, and at its 
two ends pegs of unequal length are inserted: 


Figure 10—Stick for Tracing a Circle 


The longer peg P is fixed in the ground about one foot to the north of 
where the east-west line is approximately planned. A circle with P as its center 
is scratched in the soil by turning Q around P (Figure 10; not drawn to scale). 

The determination of the east-west line takes four days. At sunrise on the 
first day the shadow of the central peg at P cuts the circumference at a point 
A1, which is marked with a peg. At sunset on that day, it cuts at В,. Similar- 
ly, the shadow cuts the circle at sunrise and sunset on the fourth day at A4 
and B4, respectively (Figure 11). 


244 


THE RITUAL ENCLOSURE 


WEST 


Figure 11—Determination of the East-West Line 


One natural day (corresponding to twenty-four hours) is divided into 
sixty equal units of time, each called a nālika. Let us assume that the time 
elapsed between sunrise and sunset on the first day, i.e., between the deter- 
mination of A; and B;, was twenty-three nālikas. Four days last 4 x 60 = 
240 nālikas. During that period, the distance between A; and А; was travers- 
ed. The arc А.А; is divided into 240 equal units, of which as many parts are 
taken as there were nāļikas between sunrise and sunset on the first day, viz., 
twenty-three. This is done by folding a thin string of the same length as the 
arc АА into 240 equal parts, and unfolding twenty-three parts. The point 
arrived at on the arc, say A*, is marked with another peg. 

Now A*B, is the east-west line. A string is tied and extended further in 
opposite directions on both sides. 

There is another method, simpler and rougher, to determine the east- 
west line. A circle is drawn as before (Figure 12). Let A; and B; mark the 
points of sunrise and sunset on the first day, and А» sunrise on the second 
day. The center А“ of segment А.А; is determined by folding a string of 
length A;A». Now A*B; is the east-west line. | 

In practice, the east-west line is not often constructed by either of these 
methods. Generally there will be a temple or mana (Nambudiri house) near- 
by, and these are already oriented. The directions are then obtained by con- 
structing parallels. 

Given the east-west line, there are two different methods to arrive at the 
north-south line, or in fact at any line at right angles to a given one. Ac- 


245 


~ EAST 


THE RITUAL ENCLOSURE 


Figure 12—Determination of the East-West Line: 
Alternative Method 


NORTH 


SOUTH 


Figure 13—Determination of the North-South Line: 
First Method 


246 


THE RITUAL ENCLOSURE 


cording to the first method, two circles are drawn with centers C; and C2 
on the east-west line, at equal distances to the left and the right of the point 
where the north-south line is wanted (Figure 13). The two circles intersect 
at D; and D». Then D,D: is the north-south line. 

According to the second method, a point C is marked on the east-west 
line where the intersection with the north-south line is wanted. A peg is fixed 
at C, and another at D, three prakramas to the east of C (Figure 14). 


WEST ————— 


Figure 14—Determination of the North-South Line: 
Second Method 


A string four prakramas long is tied to C, and a stick five prakramas 
long to D. The opposite ends of the string and stick are tied together, and 
then the string is stretched. This determines a point E, such that CE is the 


247 


PLATE 34 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


north-south line. Alternatively, DE is also a string, and both strings are 
stretched and made to meet. Or else there is a single string, CED, that is 
marked at E, and E is moved until both CE and DE are fully stretched. 

Such right angles are generally constructed with the help of the triple 
(3, 4, 5). But other triples are also sometimes mentioned, e.g., (17, 17, 24), 
with regard to which “a slight difference” is felt to exist. The Nambudiris 
know the technical terms in Sanskrit for the three sides of the rectangular 
triangle: the two sides CE and CD are called bhūjam and kati, and the hypo- 
tenuse DE is called karn[n]am. 

Once the north-south line is determined at right angles on the east-west 
line, the east-west line itself can be moved north or south, parallel to itself, 
by the same method, to any desired point. The starting point of all subse- 
quent measurements is a point, marked by a peg, that will be the intersection 
of the prsthyā or east-west line and the center of the western wall of the wife’s 
section of the Old Hall. A little further west, a well has been dug. 

As we have seen, the ritual enclosure consists of two main areas: the 
prācīnavamša or Old Hall and the mahāvedi or Great Altar Space. Inside the 
Great Altar Space, the new Offering Altar will be built to the east, in the 
agniksetra or Field of Agni. To its west there are two special sheds: the sadas 
or Hall of Recitation and the havirdhāna or Hall for Preparing the Soma 
Oblations, briefly: the Soma Hall. The Old Hall, the Hall of Recitation and 
the Soma Hall are together called the $414 or Enclosure. It will be provided 
with roofs that will be supported by forty-one poles. Twenty-two of these 
poles are for the Old Hall. The measurements for the sacrificial enclosure 
consist in determining the spots where these poles will be erected. They are 
first marked by pegs. The four corners of the Great Altar Space, and a few 
other spots on its outline, will also be marked by pegs, though no poles will 
take their place. I shall indicate the pegs by numbers @ through @. The 
starting point of all the measurements will be indicated as @, because the 
second pole will be erected there. 

Because of the large size of the new Domestic Altar of the Agnicayana, 
which has to fit inside the Old Hall, the outline of the Old Hall is measured 
in terms of the madhyama-prakrama of 32 1/4 viral (see above, page 196). 
Starting from (2, six madhyama-prakramas are measured to the south, 
reaching (D, and six to the north, reaching (8). See Figure 15. 

Pegs are put in the ground at (2) and $). The measurements continue as 
follows: 

from @) four madhyama-prakramas east, reaching @; 

from @ two madhyama-prakramas east, reaching (5; 

from © four madhyama-prakramas south, reaching ©; 

from (9 two madhyama-prakramas south, reaching (7); 

from @ six madhyama-prakramas south, reaching ©. 

Then @@@@ is the outline for the patnīšālā or Wife's Enclosure, with 


248 


THE RITUAL ENCLOSURE 


‘NORTH 
I3 4 15 і 

* [Uc 
ч i 
NU | 
= ФЦ 
JE 
ч Mae ү Шел 
= "e E U) 
= ice 
2 3 pp 
ү | 
t 
М 


i madhyama-prakrama 
(32 174 viral) 


w prakrta - pgrakrama 
(ЗО viral) 


Figure 15—Dimensions of the Old Hall (Prācīnavamša) 


spaces for doors marked by the segments @@ and @@) Next comes the Old 

Hall itself: 
from @ two madhyama-prakramas east to (9; 
from © two madhyama-prakramas east to (9; 
from 49 four madhyama-prakramas east to (9; 
from @ six madhyama-prakramas north to 12; 
from ® six madhyama-prakramas north to 13; 
from (3 four madhyama-prakramas east to @; 
from @ two madhyama-prakramas east to 15; 
from (3 two madhyama-prakramas east to @; 
from (8 six madhyama-prakramas south to (7; 
from (2 six madhyama-prakramas south to (8); 
from @ two madhyama-prakramas east to 49; 
from (9 six madhyama-prakramas north to Q9 ; 
from @) two madhayma-prakramas north to QD; 
from @ four madhyama-prakramas north to Q2. 


249 


„7 


18 


22 


421 


4 20 


PLATES 34A-B 
Making the Roof 


The roof of the sacrificial enclosure is made from palmyra leaves, 
fastened onto a framework of bamboo poles, tied together with 


strings. This method is commonly used for constructing temporary 
structures, sheds, or ‘‘pandals.” 


250 


PLATES 35, II:21 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


This completes the outline of the Old Hall, (991902, with spaces for 
doors marked at ©@ (previously), O, MB, апа 696). Later, bamboo 
poles will be erected in these spots and support a saddle-shaped roof made 
from palmyra leaves, with its ridge above the east-west line @@ at an eleva- 
tion of about 12 prakramas above the ground. A low wall of clay is made, 
with removable upper parts that may serve as windows. 

Next the location and sizes of altars and other special areas inside the 
Old Hall will be determined by measurement, after which they will be made 
from clay. For all measurements within the Old Hall, the unit of measurement 
is the ordinary prakrta-prakrama: 


2 prakrta-prakrama 


2 prükrta- prakrama 


Figure 16—Dimensions of the Domestic Altar (Garhapatya) 


252 


THE RITUAL ENCLOSURE 


I. The (old) Domestic Altar (gārhapatya), marked G. This altar occupies 
a square of 2 x 2 prakramas, with two concentric circles inside, the smaller 
one with a radius of 1/2, the larger one with a radius of 3/4 prakrama. The 
outer circle is elevated from the ground at about 1/4 prakrama and the inner 
circle at about 1/2 prakrama. The inside of the altar is on a level with the 
outside ground. See Figure 16. 

The center of this Domestic Altar is two (ordinary) prakramas east of 7. 


II. The (old) Offering Altar (āhavanīya), marked A. The outer dimensions are 


the same as those of the Domestic Altar. Inside are two sguares, as indicated 
in Figure 17. 


2 prakrta prokrama 


2 prükrta-prakrama ` 


Figure 17—Dimensions of the Offering Altar (Ahavaniya) 


The center of this Offering Altar is 12 (ordinary) prakramas and 18 
viral east of the center of G. The distance from the center of A to @ is 2 
(ordinary) prakramas and 18 viral. Therefore, the total distance from @ to 


@ is: 
253 


The Ritual Enclosure 


Overview of the ritual enclosure from the east-northeast. The 
Great Altar Space (mahāvedi) is in front, the Old Hall (prācīna- 


| 
| 
PLATE 35 
vamša), with higher roof, in the back. See also Volume 2, Plate 21. 


— — 
| — — um, 
es — 


NW 


T4 


—— — — — — | 


L 


p————— 


uà 
m — 

—— a— 
— — 


2 
254 55 


PLATE 36A 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


@ to center of G: 2 prakrta-prakramas = 60 viral 
center of G to center of A: 378 viral 
center of G to @: 78 viral 


@ to 6): 2 madhyama-prakramas = 64 1/2 viral 


TOTAL: 580 1/2 viral 
This is as it should be, for the east-west dimension of the Old Hall is eighteen 
madhyama-prakramas, or 18 x 32 1/4 = 580 1/2 viral. 


Ш. The Southern Altar (daksiņāgni), marked D. The outer square is again 
of the same dimensions. Inside there is a rectangle to the north and a semi- 
circle to the south. The dimensions are indicated in Figure 18. 


2 ргакг?а- ргакгата 


A ———M———————————————————————————————- 


2 prakrta- prakrama 


SOUTH 


Figure 18—Dimensions of the Southern Altar (Daksinagni) 


To find the center of the Southern Altar we first determine the center M 
of the distance between the centers of G and A: it is 6 prakramas and 9 viral 
from each. The center of D is 4 prakramas and 6 viral south of M. 

Immediately west of the Offering Altar is the Vedi. It has the shape of an 


256 


THE RITUAL ENCLOSURE 


hourglass. The four corners form a rectangle which is 2 prakramas broad 
and 3 prakramas long. These corners are determined by measurement, but 
the hourglass shape is scratched on the ground with the sphya knife, using 
eye and hand. | 

Two ordinary prakramas north from the northwest corner of the Vedi а 
point U is reached, which will mark the position of the utkara rubbish heap, 
which will later be made from clay in the shape of a turtle. Another 3 
prakramas and 7 1/2 viral north marks the spot where the ucchistakhara will 
be made. This is a small square, made against the northern wall, with an 
exhaust through the wall to the outside. It is a receptacle for water that will 
be used to wash some of the Pravargya utensils (Episode 9). 

The need for the use of the middle prakrama as the unit of measurement 
for the outline of the Old Hall is not apparent, of course, from the sizes of 
the three altars, but it will become apparent when the new domestic altar is 
constructed on the fourth ritual day (Episode 7). 

Next the outline of the mahāvedi or Great Altar Space is measured. Use 
is made of the extended, vrddha-prakrama of 34 1/3 viral (above page 195), 
so that the large bird-shaped altar will fit inside.’ All the measurements in- 
side the mahāvedi will again be made by means of the ordinary prakrama. 
The ordinary prakrama is also used to find the starting point (Figure 19). 

The measurement of the mahāvedi or Great Altar Space begins from a 
point A, six ordinary prakramas east from the center of the Sacrificial 
Altar (A).The peg that is placed there is called Peg in Front of the Enclosure 
(salamukhiyasanku). The sadas or Hall of Recitation is measured first: 


from A one (ordinary) prakrama east, then: 
one (ordinary) prakrama south to @; 
and one (ordinary) prakrama north to Q5; 
from @ six (ordinary) prakrama south to Q3; 
from (3 six (ordinary) prakrama north to Q6; 
from @ five (ordinary) prakrama east to @; 
from @ eight (ordinary) prakrama south to Q8 ; 
from 3 six (ordinary) prakrama south to Q9; 
from 69 five (ordinary) prakrama east to 69; 
from 6) six (ordinary) prakrama north to 6); 
from 6) two (ordinary) prakrama north to $2; 
from 63 six (ordinary) prakrama north to 63. 


This completes the outline of the Hall of Recitation @@®@, with spaces 


1 Erkkara Raman Nambudiri visited a performance of the Pundarika (a sattra ritual) 
in Andhra Pradesh in 1977. He reported that the priests not only read the recitations 
and chants from books, and generally without accent or proper pitch, but also that 
ordinary measurements had been used for the Great Altar Space so that the bird- 
shaped altar had to be made small, even though the yajamāna was not a midget. 


257 


PLATE 36B 


PLATE 37 


PLATE 36A 
Digging the Vedi 


The vedi is a receptacle for ritual implements, constructed imme- 
diately to the west of the offering altar. Its shape is that of an hour- 
glass, with four concave sides. The ancient Sulba Sūtra texts specify 
these sides as arcs from four circles, and determine the center and 
radius of each of these circles. The Nambudiris determine only the 
position of the four corners by precise measurement (see Figure 15). 
They construct the four sides by using eye and hand. The plate shows 
the agnidh scratching the outline of the vedi on the ground with 
the help of the wooden knife (sphya). 


PLATE 36B 
Preparing the Utkara 
The utkara rubbish heap is used not only as a receptacle for soil 


and dust, but also as a place to stand on for the agnidh and several 
other priests. It is fashioned in the shape of a turtle. 


258 


ШАТ 


m 


М: 


©, 


' Ud, SUN "tit NI 
a. E HTI || 
ko EP i И i 31 


\ ЇШЇН pops ES T 


259 


VI ja 


n HI i iii 


Ss 


PLATE 37A | 
The Southern and Old Offering Altars 


Inside the Old Hall (prācīnavamša), the Southern Altar (daksiņā- | 
gni: in front) is semicircular. When fire is installed on it, it will be | 
used for protection against evil influences emanating from the | 
southern direction. The old offering altar (@havaniya: in the back- | 
ground) is square. It is the altar for the offering fire, into which many | 
oblations will be made. The preparation of both altars from clay has 

just been completed. 


| 


= j 
N 


V My s d 


PLATE 37B 
The Southern and New Domestic Altars in Use 


A ( Jnd P: 
AS A m 


| 

Weeks later, after the ceremonies have begun, fires are installed | 
оп the altars. The old offering altar, made from clay, has been ге- | 
placed by a new domestic altar, made from bricks (see Plate 47). The | 
new Offering altar, in the shape of a bird, will be constructed later | 
and further to the east, outside the Old Hall. 
| 

| 


tee 


260 


PART П THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


43e 


MAHĀVEDI 


33 


316 


ө28 


42% 


ы aratni (24 viral) 
ыз prakrta-prakrama (ЗО viral) 
w vradha-prakrama (34 1/3 viral) 


Figure 19—Dimensions of the Mahavedi . 


for doors at @@® and 6)69.! Four ordinary prakramas to the east of the east- 
ern side of the Hall of Recitation is the western side of the Soma Hall, a 
square of twelve by twelve prakramas, with outline 6969694) and spaces for 
doors at 366 апа -@9@. 

The outline of the Great Altar Space is marked with the help of the ex- 
tended vrddha-prakrama unit of measurement of 34 1/3 viral (above, page 
196): 


from A, fifteen vrddha-prakrama south to @; 
from A fifteen vrddha-prakrama north to @; 
from A thirty-six vrddha-prakrama east to B; 


1 This description and Figure 19 represent the measurements of the sadas as it was 
constructed in 1975. However, a mistake was made: according to Cerumukkt as well 
as Taikkāt, the sadas should measure 18 aratnis from north to south (not 14 prakra- 
mas). 


262 


THE RITUAL ENCLOSURE 


from B twelve vrddha-prakrama north to @; 
from B twelve vrddha-prakrama south to 43. 


This completes the outline of the Great Altar Space @@@G. From @ and 
(3, 18 vrddha-prakrama west along the outline in the direction of @ and @, 
respectively, we reach two points, C and D, respectively. C will be the middle 
of the agnidhriya shed, a square of four by four ordinary prakramas. Similar- 
ly, D will be the middle of the mārjālīya shed, another square of the same 
dimensions, half inside and half outside the Great Altar Space. Again, going 
west from @ along the northern boundary of the Great Altar Space, we reach 
E after three vrddha-prakramas and F after another nine. One vrddha-pra- 
krama north of E, the cātvāla hole will be dug; опе vrddha-prakrama north 
of F, the outer utkara rubbish heap will be made. 

Next, poles will be erected in all the spots marked by pegs, except for 
42-49 and ®. In the last hole, the audumbari pole will be erected on the 
ninth day of the ceremony (Episode 23), Simple, saddle-shaped roofs are ` 
built over the Old Hall, the Hall of Recitation, the Soma Hall, the Field of 
Agni, and a small cow-shed (gošālā) south of the wife's quarters (patnī- 
Sala). In 1975, two more sheds with roofs were built to the south of the en- 
closure: a shed for sound equipment and crew, south of the (old) Offering 
Altar, and a shed for visiting foreign scholars, south of the Field of Agni (see 
Volume II, page 744 and Figure 32). | 

Now the agniksetra and uttaravedi have to be measured. As if three 
different units of measurement were not enough, a fourth, the aratni or pa- 
ficami, is used. The measurements of the bricks of the bird-shaped altar have 
been in terms of aratni (see above, page 195), and so the bricks will fitin the 
outline. However, the entire altar would not have fitted inside the mahāvedi 
if the extended measure of the vrddha-prakrama had not been used. Starting 
point for the measurements is the intersection of the east-west line and the 
eastern side of the havirdhāna: from there, 1 1/2 ordinary prākrta-prakramas 
to the east a new beginning point is reached, which I shall again denote as A. 
This point marks the western end of the tail of the new āhavanīya or offering 


‘altar, built in the shape of the bird (Figure 20; cf. Figure 7, etc.) 


From A, we go four aratnis north and four aratnis south reaching B and 
C, respectively. BC is the western.side of the tail of the bird. From A, three 
aratnis east reaching D, and from D, one north and one south, reaching E 
and F, respectively, complete the tail BEFC. From D, two further east, 
reaching G, we reach the ātman of the bird. From G, three north and three 
south we reach H and I, respectively; and from G, H and I six east we reach 
J, K, and L, respectively. Thus the entire ātman HKLI has been determined. 
Its center is at M. From M, seven and a half aratnis north we reach N, and a 
T six north we reach O; in southern direction we similarly reach P and 


From O we move in one-aratni steps west, marking R, S, and T; and 


263 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 
NORTH 


Ted aratni (24 viral) 


ym prükrta-prakrama p? 
(30 viral) 


| 


SOUTH 


Figure 20—Dimensions of the Bird-Shaped Altar 


264 


THE RITUAL ENCLOSURE 


east, marking U and V. Now V, U, O, R, T mark the six tips of the left or 
northern wing. One and a half aratni south the inner sides of the tips are 
marked. The same operation is gone through at the southern side, starting 
from Q. From N and P, moving six aratnis east, we reach W and X, respec- 
tively: the shoulders (amsa). This completes the outline of the wings. 

Now only the head is left. From J, two aratnis east, reaching Y, deter- 
mine the neck; and another one and a quarter plus one = two and a quarter 
east, reaching Z, complete the head, the other steps being obvious from 
Figure 18. Finally a string is tied along all the outer pegs, marking the 
outline of the bird. 

A distance of half an ordinary prakrama remains between Z and the 
eastern side of the mahavedi (B in Figure 19), where the sacrificial pole will 
be erected on its intersection with the prsthyā line. 

Now let us check these measurements inside the mahāvedi, going east 
along the prsthyā line and starting from A in Figure 19: 


to sadas: 1 prakrama 
sadas: 10 prakramas 
to havirdhana: 4 prakramas 
havirdhāna: 12 prakramas 
to bird: 11/2 prakramas 

28 1/2 prakramas = 28 1/2 х 30 = 

855 viral 
Continuing east from À in Figure 20: 

tail: AD 3 aratnis 
body: DY2+6+2=10 aratnis 
head: YZ 2 1/4 aratnis 

15 1/4 aratnis = 15 1/4 x 24 = 366 viral 
Remaining: 1/2 prakrama = 1/2 x 30 = 15 viral 


TOTAL: 1,236 viral 


This is as it should be, for the east-west dimension of the mahāvedi is thirty- 
six vrddha-prakramas, or 36 x 34 1/3 viral = 1,236 viral. 

The sacrificial enclosure is now ready for use. After its consecration, 
the enclosure can only be entered by Nambudiri brahmins. 


265 


PLATES 47, 48, 53, 
9IÀ, 98А 


PLATES 18, II: 12- 
13 


PLATES 38B, 55B 


PLATES 1, 38A, 52 


PLATES 38A, 50, 
60B, 71, 91B, 93 

PLATES 2, 4, 46, 
51, 60A, 61A, 62, 
65, 69, 80 ctc. 


PLATE 45 B, 62 


PLATES 40, 53, 
60A, 75А, 88, 108 


PLATES 73, 81B, 
84, 93, 97, 103 


PLATES 50, 97, 
103 


PLATE 103 


PLATE 61 


PLATES 2, 38G, 
39, 49, 50 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 
9. Dramatis Personae 


THE 1975 PERFORMANCE OF the Atiratra-Agnicayana was largely organiz- 
ed by two Nambudiri brahmins: Cherumukku Vaidikan Vallabhan Somayā- 
jipad, a Kausitaki Rgvedin of the Cherumukku Vaidikan family, and Bra- 
hmašrī Muttatukkāttu Itti Ravi Nambudiri, a Jaiminiya Sāmavedin, who 
also assumed the role of udgātā. The reader will be familiar with the work of 
these two men. Both have collaborated with the present author in the pre- 
paration of this volume, and there are few pages that do not carry the imprint 
of their vast knowledge and experience in all matters pertaining to the Vedic 
tradition. 

Erkkara Raman Nambudiri, doyen of Nambudiri Vedic scholars, gave 
his support and assistance and was present throughout the ceremonies. He 
also assumed the role of Sadasya. Erkkara is one of those almost legendary 
scholars that India, throughout the centuries, has continued to produce. His 
name is a household word among students of the Vedas all over the world, 
for he recited the Kausitakibrahmana to its editor, E. R. Sreekrishna Sarma. 

Continuous assistance at the ritual was furthermore given by the two 
Nambudiris who performed Agnicayana in 1955 and 1956, viz., C. V. Vasu- 
devan Akkitiripad, Cherumukku Vaidikan’s eldest son, and the Sāmavedin 
Nellikat Nilakanthan Akkitiripad. 

Cherumukku Vaidikan’s third son, C. V. Nilakanthan Somayājipad 
(now Akkitiripad) was yajamāna; his wife Pārvatī was yajamānapatnī. Che- 
rumukku Vaidikan's fifth son, C. V. Krsnan Nambudiri, was adhvaryu, and 
his sixth son, C. V. Sridharan Nambudiri, was maitrāvaruņa. Two of Cheru- 
mukku Vaidikan's grandsons were potā and nestā. The acchāvāka was also 
related to the Cherumukku Vaidikan family. The pratihartā was the son of 
Nellikat Nīkalaņthan Akkitiripad, and the prastotā and subrahmaņya be- 
longed to the same family. The pratiprasthātā and unnetā were brothers. 

Here follows a complete list of the priests with their sūtras and gotras 
(cf. pages 49, 52): 


Brahman: Mūtedam Šankara Nārāyanan Nambudiri 

sūtra: Aévalayana, gotra: Višvāmitra 
Udgātā: Muttatukkāttu Itti Ravi Nambudiri 

sūtra: Jaiminiya, gotra: Bhāradvāja 
Prastotā: Tēttam Narāyaņan Nambudiri 

sūtra: Jaiminiya, gotra: Vāsistha 
Pratihartā: Nellikat Vasudevan Nambudiri 

sütra: Jaiminiya, gotra: Bhāradvāja 
Subrahmanya: Tēttam Aryan Nambudiri 

sütra: Jaiminiya, gotra: Vāsistha 
Hota: Nārāņa Mangalath Narayanan Nambudiri 

sūtra: Kausitaki, gotra: Kāšyapa 

266 


DRAMATIS PERSONAE 


Brāhmaņācchamsin: Tekkamparampattü Narayanan Nambudiri 


sūtra: Kausītaki, gotra: Kāšyapa 
Maitrāvaruņa: Cherumukku Vaidikan Šrīdharan Nambudiri 
sūtra: Kausītaki, gotra: Kāšyapa 
Potā: Cherumukku Vaidikan Vallabhan Nambudiri 
sūtra: Kausitaki, gotra: Kāšyapa 
Nestā: Cherumukku Vaidikan Vasudevan Nambudiri 
sūtra: Kausitaki, -gotra: Kāšyapa 
Acchāvāka:  Tekku Cherumukku Parame$varan Nambudiri 
sūtra: Kausitaki, gotra: Kāšyapa 
Āgnīdhra or Agnidh: Kunnam Padmanabhan Nambudiri 
sūtra: Kausītaki, gotra: Ka$yapa 
Grāvastut: Mūrtiedam Sankaran Nambudiri 
sütra: Kausitaki, gotra: Angirasa 
Adhvaryu: Cherumukku Vaidikan Krsnan Nambudiri 
sūtra: Kausitaki, gotra: Kāšyapa 
Pratiprasthata: Kavapra Marath Sankaranarayanan Nambudiri 
sūtra: Kausitaki, gotra: Angirasa 
Unneta: Kavapra Marath Nilakanthan Nambudiri 
sūtra: Kausitaki, gotra: Angirasa 
Sadasya: Erkkara Raman Nambudiri 
stitra: Kausitaki, gotra: Visvāmitra 


The avidvān was Vaikkakkara Raman Nambudiri, sūtra: Kausitaki, 
gotra: Āngirasa. Chief parikarmi, “helper,” was Muri Mundanath Sridharan 
Somayājipad, sūtra: A$valayana, gotra: Bhargava. The Soma merchant was 
Professor E. R. Sreekrishna Sarma, sūtra: Apastamba (of the Taittirīya school 
of the Krsna Yajurveda), gotra: Kāšyapa. 

The avidvan or “Ignorant (Brahmin)” should be a Nambudiri brahmin 
eligible to perform Somayāga. There are several speculations about the 
meaning of his name. Some say he should not know what the adhvaryu has 
in his hand when he holds the svayamātrņņā. Also, he takes a cow from the 
yajamāna and gives it to the adhvaryu, because, it is said, he does not own 
anything. 

The Soma merchant is always a Tamil brahmin. He could not be a non- 
Brahmin Malayali of high caste, e.g., a Nayar, because these cannot enter 
the sacrificial enclosure. And he could not be a Nambudiri, because Nam- 
budiris are not merchants. Also, when asked whether the Soma is pure, and 
whether it comes from Mount Mūjavat (below page 347), he must always 
answer in the affirmative. A Nambudiri could not do this, because he always 
speaks the truth. 

What are the priestly qualities for which these men are respected and 
have been chosen to officiate? The priests are chiefly praised for the clarity 
and precision of their pronunciation (sometimes called aksarašuddhi, “purity 


267 


PLATES 55A, 56, 
106 


PLATES 43, 55A, 
107 


PLATE 38D 


PLATE 38E, 102 


PLATES 38G, 59, 
98B 


PLATES 38F, 104 


PLATES 33, II, 42, 
63-65, 67-70, 81 
A, 82, 85—89, 91, 
etc. 

PLATES 42, 44А, 
58, 59, 81A, 82- 
83, 89, 108 

PLATES 38C, 54 

PLATES 38B, 55B 


PLATES 11, 69, 79 


PLATE 45A 


38A 


38B 


38C 
38D 
38E 


38F 


38G 


PLATE 38 


The two Akkitiripads. During the last decades before 1975, 
there were only two Akkitiripads, i.e., Nambudiris who had 
performed the Atirātra-Agnicayana. On the left is Nellikat 
Nilakanthan Akkitiripad, on the right Cherumukku Vaidikan 
Vasudevan Akkitiripad. 

Erkkara Raman Nambudiri, who had assumed the office of 
the sadasya priest, performing the Hiding Rite (nihnava) 
(see also Plates 55B). 

The unnetā priest, whose main task is to pour the Soma liquid 
(see also Plate 54). 

The potā, assistant to the hota, at the ceremony of āpyāyana, 
“sprinkling the Soma with mantras”. 

The nesta, assistant to the hotā, the youngest among the 
priests (see also Plate 102). 

The gravastut, who enters blindfolded to recite a hymn to the 
Soma pressing stones (see Plate 104); here engaged in the 
apyayana ceremony. 

The agnidh assisting the hotā to adjust his earstring. 


268 


269 


PLATE 39 
The Hota Recites 


270 271 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


of syllable”) and for their memory. The adhvaryu’s voice has a ringing sound 
like that of a bell and an almost metallic precision which is also conspicuous 
in the enunciation of the maitravaruna, his younger brother. The hota has a 
soft voice, but he is extremely firm. His prodigous memory is especially ap- 
preciated when he is engaged in reciting pieces such as the A$vin's Recitation, 
which comprises a thousand mantras (see below pages 683-686). The long 
breath of all the reciters is excelled only by the Sāmavedins, whose melodic 
chants are valued for their musical beauty. It takes patience to detect, ex- 
perience, and appreciate these features of recitation and chant, which play a 
large part in the evaluation of ritual expertise by Nambudiri connoisseurs. 
The accompanying cassettes, described in Volume II, may convey some of 
these qualities. 

Other priestly qualities are pictured on the plates. As for the priests' 
dress, it is not Vedic, for all we know. It is the attire Nambudiri men adopt 
on important religious occasions. To put it in its proper context, I shall 
quote in full what Anantha Krishna Iyer, a Tamil brahmin, has to say on the 
subject : 


The Nambuthiris are very sparing in their clothing, and do not 
seem to feel the shame of walking about almost naked, a habit 
which is not countenanced by the Smrithi which they profess to 
follow. The men wear an under garment (koupinam), which is a 
strip of cloth, passing between the thighs, the ends being attached 
to a string round the loins both at the back and at the front. They 
are strict Swadéshis and would not, on any account, go in for 
Manchester piecegoods, which are taboos to them. They wear 
round their loins, stretching a little below the knee, a cloth of 
local manufacture, four or five cubits in length, two and a half or 
three cubits in breadth, with a coloured border or sometimes laced 
at the edges. They do not use silk or coloured cloth of any kind or 
plain white cloth without a border. It is considered very fashionable 
or dignifying to wear it rather higher than the loins, that is, about 
the pit of the stomach. A second small cloth (thérthumundu) is worn 
over the shoulders and the chest. At home or in a temple close 
by, when he is at prayers, he is almost naked, either covered by a 
small loin cloth or only with a koupinam, which is a repulsive sight 
to others. In this he is a marked contrast to the Tamil Brahmans of 
the east coast, who are neatly dressed on these occasions. Their 
mode of dressing on religious occasions is peculiar and is known as 
Thattudukkal, which consists of a long piece of country-made cloth 
tied round the loin with a portion of it passing between the thighs 
and 'tucked in at the front and behind, with a front portion ar- 
ranged into a number of reduplications. This mode of dressing 
exhibits a front covered by numerous folds hanging down from 


272 


DRAMATIS PERSONAE 


the waist to the feet, while the buttocks are almost exposed. They 
wear wooden sandals, but are not averse to leather ones, though 
they will not allow the heel of their foot to be covered up. On ordi- 
nary occasions, they dress like the Nayars. There is a tendency 
among the young men of these days to wear coats and caps, when 
they go out, and to be slightly influenced by the vices of modern 
civilisation. 

(1912, II, 281—282). 


As mentioned before, the priests were engaged in rehearsals from De- 
cember 1974 until April 1975. Nellikat Nilakanthan Akkitiripad and Itti 
Ravi Nambudiri supervised the Sāmaveda rehearsals in Panjal, while 
Cherumukku Vaidikan and Erkkara supervised all other rehearsals, which 
took place in Shoranur. When the preparations were complete, the cere- 
monies could begin, but not until offerings were made, in their respective 
temples, to Daksiņāmūrti and Ganapati. 


273 


PLATE 67 


THE PERFORMANCE 


Introductory Note 


AS HAS BEEN mentioned in the “General Introduction” to this work, the 
following description is a description of the actual performance that took 
place in 1975, not of the ritual as it is prescribed in texts. There are dis- 
crepancies between the two, though they are generally minor and often 
minute. I shall mention a few of the more important ones, but the reader 
interested in these relationships should compare the following description 
with the translation of the relevant sections of the šrauta sūtras in the 
second volume (Part IV). 

Even though the description is confined to the events of the 1975 per- 
formance, there are limits to the degree of its empiricity. It is a description of 
the ritual competence of the participants, rather than of their ritual per- 
formance. For example, obvious and irrelevant mistakes have not been 
recorded. Rather, they have been rectified. A general example of such a 
mistake is a false start, immediately corrected. A specific example is the 
commotion caused by the adhvaryu when he tried to shoot an arrow at the 
outset of the setting up of the Agni field (page 387), but held the bow the 
wrong way round. Helpers showed him how to hold it. Such a “mistake” is 
not recorded. All it would show is that the adhvaryu is out of touch with 
archery, which fact interfered with the exercise of his ritual competence, but 
does not affect it. Sometimes I mention even such extraneous things, to 
alleviate what might be called ritual strain. Important incursions from the 
outside world that have ritual implications are always mentioned. For 
example, the menses of the wife of the yajamāna, which entailed numerous 
modifications in the ritual proceedings, have been referred to, and the ensuing 
modifications have been recorded. 

As it is basically concerned with knowledge, the description is not 
behavioristic. For example, when the adhvaryu buries the various Agnis 
under the first layer, he does so in specific spots (see Figure 25). He does not 
determine the location of these spots by measurement. He buries the Agnis 
“under” the bricks that are going to be placed there only later. It is obvious 
that what he has in mind is the arrangement of bricks (Figure 24) which is 
known to him, though invisible to most of the outsiders, and certainly to the 
camera. Such a nonbehavioristic fact, however, is recorded as part of the 
description. Similarly nonbehavioristic is the description of mantras that are 
recited mentally (e.g., pages 417, 462). 

On a deeper and more general level, the description is not behavioristic 
in any significant sense. It does not relate what happened asa linear sequence 
of events; it describes the events as structured rites, and therefore always in 
terms of larger structures. For example, when rites of type A interrupt rites of 


274 


INTRODUCTORY NOTE 


type B, this is recorded as such. No pretense is made that we were witnessing 
a mere succession of unstructured acts. Similarly, interpretations of a non- 
behavioristic and structural kind occur when some rites are omitted from the 
description, while others are described only briefly. 

The description, finally, is not complete, but selective. A complete 
description would fill many volumes, include repetitions, and duplicate work 
already done by others. My main concern has been with the Agnicayana 
portions of the ritual, and not with the Soma ritual, or any other specific 
ceremonies (such as the Pravargya) that are incorporated in the Atirātra- 
Agnicayana. However, characteristic features of the Atirātra that go beyond 
the Agnistoma have been included, because they have not been described 
before. For all the missing rites and rituals, the reader should refer to the 
manuals by Caland-Henry, Hillebrandt, Schwab, van Buitenen, etc., and to the 
Srautakosa. 

Nevertheless, I shall include some of the more interesting episodes of 
rites that have already been described, especially when their omission would 
affect the continuity or intelligibility of the description. For example, the 
dīksā or consecration of the yajamāna cannot be omitted without distorting 
the entire ritual. Nor would it be sufficient to refer only to the modifications 
to the normal dīksā due to the Agnicayana (e.g., those relating to the ukha 
pot), for the impact of such modifications can only be understood when 
the normal dīksā is understood. The resulting description is therefore con- 
tinuous, but the degree of its detail varies. In some cases, a mere sketch of 
ritual activities is provided; in others, the rites are described in detail, and 
the recitations are given in full. On the whole, an attempt has been made 
to make the presentation self-contained. To follow it one does not need 
access to a Vedic library. 

The simplest subdivision of the ritual is the subdivision into the twelve 
days of its performance. A complication arose because on the third and 
fourth day of the ritual, April 14 and 15, the menses of the wife of the yaja- 
mana occurred. The ritual was interrupted for these two days, and the rites of 
the third and fourth day were combined and performed on April 16. After 
that date the proceedings continued their regular course. The days of the 
ritual, therefore, occurred on the following dates: 


Ist day: April 12 
2nd day: April 13 


3rd day: April 16 [one rite postponed to April 21] 
4th day: April 16 
Sth day: April 17 
6th day: April 18 
7th day: April 19 
8th day: April 20 
9th day: April 21 


275 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


10th day: April 22 
lith day: April 23 
12th day: April 24 


For ease of reference, the description will be further subdivided into smaller 
episodes, consecutively numbered 1-32. 


Abbreviations 


THE RECITATIONS AND chants of the ritual have been identified by re- 
ference to Vedic texts. The system of reference employed here is the custo- 
mary system used by Vedic scholars. It is sometimes different from the 
Nambudiri system of reference (cf. Staal 1961). For the Jaiminiya Sāmaveda 
texts, which have not been published, see the following note. 


AG - (Jaiminīya) Araņyegeyagāna (candrasamani) 
AV = Atharvaveda Samhitā 

BSS - Baudhāyana Srauta Sūtra 

GG - (Jaiminiya) Grāmegeyagāna 

JA - Jaiminīya Ārcika 

JB - Jaiminiya Brāhmaņa 

JSS - Jaiminīya Srauta Sūtra 

KB - Kausitaki Brāhmaņa 

RG - (Jaiminiya) Rahasyagāna (Zsani) 
RV - Rgveda Samhita 

SK - Šrautakoša 

SSS – Šānkhāyana Šrauta Sūtra 

TA - Taittiriya Āraņyaka 

TB - Taittiriya Brahmana 

TS - Taittiriya Samhita 

UG - (Jaiminiya) Ūhagāna 


A Note on the Jaiminiya Samaveda 


THE TEXTS OF the Jaiminiya Sāmaveda have not been published, with 
the exception of Caland’s edition of the Jaiminiya Arcika of 1907 (reproduced 
by Raghu Vira in 1938). However, there are manuscripts (see Parpola 
1973, especially pages 16-22). For the chants published in the present 
volume, use has been made not only of our 1975 and other recordings, 
but also of manuscripts prepared by Itti Ravi Nambudiri and now in the 
possession of Asko Parpola. (I have copies of these manuscripts, but Dr. 


276 


INTRODUCTORY NOTE 


Parpola put the originals at my disposal during the preparation of the 
present publication.) 

I have adopted the system of reference used in Itti Ravi’s manuscripts. 
In these manuscripts—written down in Malayalam script, without sound 
notation, and largely from memory (that of Itti Ravi, his elders, and his 
pupils)—the Jaiminiya Arcika is divided into 112, the Gramegeyagana into 
59, and the Araņyegeyagāna into 25 ottus ("songs"). The Nambudiris call 
the sāmans of the Araņyegeyagāna candrasamani, “тооп chants." A refer- 
ence such as AG 25.7 refers to the seventh sāman of the 25th ottu of the 
Jaiminiya Araņyegeyagāna. The textual sources of these chants, which are 
listed in the Jaiminiya Arcika, can be found without difficulty in Caland’s 
edition, which uses a different system of reference but has an excellent index. 

The Ūhagāna is divided into 8 pattus (“decade”: Sanskrit dašati), 
together comprising 77 ēttus. The first seven pattus contain 10 ottus each, 
the eighth pattu contains seven. A reference such as UG 4.1 refers to the 
first sāman of the fourth ēttu (which therefore belongs to the first pattu) 
of the Jaiminiya Ūhagāna, UG 14.1 refers to the first sāman of the four- 
teenth ottu (which belongs to the second pattu), etc. 

The Rahasyagāna or Ūhyagāna, which the Nambudiris call їзїш, 
is divided into 16 ēttus. A reference such as RG 2.3 refers to the third sāman 
of the second ottu. 

While most of the ritual chants of the Agnicayana come from the 
Grāmageyagāna and Araņyegeyagāna, the twenty-nine stuti chants that 
characterize the Atirātra are listed in the Ūhagāna and Usani. 

Here is a synopsis of the Jaiminiya corpus and its main subdivisions 
into Ottus: 


JAIMINIYA ARCIKA Dvandva: 19-24 
Agneyam: 1-12 Sukriya and 
Aindram: 13-48 Aupanisadam: 25 
Pavamānam: 49—59 
Dvādašāham: 60—106 ŪHAGĀNA 
Āraņyakam: 107 I: 1-10 
Uttaram: 108-112 II: 11-20 
III: 21-30 
GRAMAGEYAGANA IV: 31-40 
Agneyam: 1-12 V: -41-50 
Aindram: 13—48 VI: 51-60 
Pavamānam: 49—59 VII: 61-70 
VIII: 71-77 
ARANYEGEYAGANA 
Vrata: 1-12 USANI (UHYAGANA) 
Arka: 13-18 1-16 


271 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


As mentioned in the General Introduction, the inclusion of some of 
these chants in the present volume is primarily of interest to specialists. 
While the recitations from the other Vedas will generally be given in trans- 
lation and in the original Vedic printed in the Nāgarī script, the texts of the 
Jaiminiya chants are given in Roman transliteration. This serves to illustrate 
their distinctive character, and also gives the reader an idea of their sound and 
structure. They are not translated, since they are largely devoid of literal 
meaning. There is an additional reason for their Roman transliteration. The 
Jaiminiya Sámaveda is essentially a South Indian tradition. Such sounds as 
the Dravidian “|” (above page 173) or the distinction between short and long 
“е” and “о” (maintained in the Jaiminiya tradition but nonexistent in Vedic 
or Sanskrit) cannot be expressed in Nāgarī, which is a North Indian script 
(see pages XXXIV-XXXV). 

The manuscript readings are not always consistent. For example, we 
find: o yi 14, as well as: 6 yi 14. In spite of such real or apparent inconsisten- 
cies, I have reproduced the manuscript readings as I found them, correcting 
mistakes only rarely when they were obvious from the sound recordings, and 
confirmed during a final round of checking with Itti Ravi Nambudiri in 
December, 1978. The subdivision of the flow of chant into words and sylla- 
bles is not always clear, and may sometimes be arbitrary. I have omitted 
graphic variants, such as -rmma for -rma, etc. I have written -yya, even 
though the first “y” is clearly nasalised, since the manuscripts do not indicate 
it. 

When dealing with these songs and chants it should be remembered that 
the Sdmaveda is replete with what, from a textual point of view, are un- 
expected variations and varieties. These features are characteristic of the 
Sāmaveda, Kauthuma-Rāņāyanīya as well as Jaiminiya. Whenever regular 
patterns seem to emerge, there are new deviations that break the pattern. To 
treat the text as if it were corrupt would be to miss its very raison d'étre. But 
even if we accept its playful deviations, we find that the rules of this game 
often escape us. Many forms that may seem to be printing mistakes or 
mistakes of the manuscripts are therefore in fact what they should be. 

The inclusion of these chants has increased the length of a description 
that would be long enough without them. However, I have added them 
because they constitute an essential part of the ritual, and also because they 
constitute a sample of the rare Jaiminiya tradition. A complete edition of 
the chants, the only part of the Vedic corpus that has not been published, 
clearly remains a desideratum. 


278 


First Day: April 12, 1975 
EPISODE I 


Ritual Preparation of the Ukha Pots and Introductory Rites 
(Ukhasambharanam, Punyahavacanam, Upavyāharaņam, Samkalpa) 


THE THREE FIRES that will be installed on the altars are the fires of the 
yajamana, for it is on his behalf that the rites are performed. Since he had not 
kept his fires burning, the ritual for reinstalling the fires (punarādheya: see 
above, page 44) had to be performed first. It was done on April 10, 1975. 
In the early morning of April 12, the isti for the new moon (daršesti) is 
performed. When it is completed, the yajamàna goes to the ritual enclosure 
in procession with his wife and the priests. A helper goes in front, carrying the 
Agnihotra implements in a basket on his head, with the dārupātrī on top. 
The three fires are carried in clay pots on a plank, from back to front: the 
domestic fire, the southern fire, the wooden blocks for churning fire, and the 
offering fire. 

By the time the procession arrives at the enclosure, the Old Hall has 
already been fully prepared, but the mahāvedi or Great Altar Space does not 
yet exist. However, its outline is marked on the ground and its roofs have 
been completed. Generally, Nambudiris carry out the ritual preparation of 


N 


PLATE 40 


M mme en «зи mrn amoye men re, anes omen агаи аа ee | 
r F tam o E. 


Figure 21— Ritual Enclosure for Preparing the Ukhā Pots 
279 


PLATE 40 
Arrival of the Fires 


At the outset of the ceremony, the three sacred fires and imple- 
ments for making fire are carried towards the ritual enclosure: 
from left to right, the domestic fire, the southern fire, the wooden 
blocks, and the churning stick for making fire (see Plate 1), and, 
partly hidden behind the brahmin priest, the offering fire. 


280 


281 


PLATE 41 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


the ukhā pots (ukhāsambharaņam) and the animal sacrifice for Vāyu (vāya- 
vyam pašu) in small enclosures constructed somewhere between the house of 
the yajamāna and the large enclosure. However, in 1975, the ritual prepara- 
tion of the ukhā pots takes place in the area east of the Old Hall, roughly 
where later the Sadas will be constructed. The three altars and utkara 
rubbish heap have already been prepared, as in Figure 21. 

The plank with the sacred fires is put down north of the three altars. The 
yajamāna”s wife sits down under her parasol west of the domestic altar, her 
usual place, on a “tortoise seat” (kūrmāsana), a wooden plank in the shape 
of a tortoise, used by all the chief participants. The yajamāna measures the 
three altars with his sphya, and sprinkles water on them from a clay kindi. 
He then sits down on the utkara and recites: 


NEN f c c da ek 
b. Waters! You are givers of health. EU ЗАВИ пуни Ч Gat аач | 


Give us strength to see great јоу! He el чыё " 

c. Like eager mothers grant us here the most wa: Сача Ta апта 4: | 
auspicious essence that you possess. sae ur n 

d. To this may we suitably come, to whose power «enr «rt ит 3X чет graba Birds | 
you impel us. Waters, propagate us! sat агарт 9 9: N аса 


(TS 4.1.5.lb-d). 


Between the mantras he sips water (ācamana). Then, sprinkling his face, he 
recites: *earth—sky—heaven." Again he measures the three altars with his 
sphya, and then installs his three fires on the three altars. The wooden blocks 
stay to the north. 

The yajamāna is ritually measured; the actual measurements have 
already taken place (above, page 196). The ukhā pot, two spare ukhà pots, 
five bricks called rsabha ("bull") and three called maņdalestakā ("circle 
bricks,” i.e., bricks with a circle on them) are ritually prepared. They have 
already been physically made by the potter and brick makers. The potter has 
also prepared the five clay heads that are now kept at hand. The adhvaryu 
takes some clay, which he has received from the potter. One šamyā throw 
(cf. above page 98) from the eastern gate of the Old Hall, he ritually pre- 
pares a piece of ground by sprinkling water and touching it with the sphya. 
He places a banana leaf there, and puts the clay on top of it. 

The first major rite is samkalpa, the solemn declaration by the yajamāna 
of his intention to perform the ceremony. This ritual, which occurs several 
times during the ceremonies, consists of a sequence of rites. First is “ех- 
ternal purification" (bahyasuddhi), which is comprised of snana (bathing), 
pavana (cleansing), @camana (sipping water) and punyaha(vacana) (proclama- 
tion of auspiciousness). This is followed by "internal purification" (antahšu- 
ddhi), comprised of pranayama (breathing) and akatyavedana (another 
declaration of intention). This is followed by the samkalpa proper. 

For the proclamation of auspiciousness (puņyāhavacana), the adhvaryu 
puts cuntanga berries, candana (sandal-paste), puspa (a flower), aksata (rice 


282 


RITUAL PREPARATION OF THE ОКНА POTS 


and paddy mixed together), and water in a brass dish (in Malayalam, uruļi). 
The yajamāna first recites together with adhvaryu, brahman, and a helper, 
standing up and jointly holding this dish. This is followed by pranayama 
(breathing); the yajamāna recites thrice without breathing out: 


OM! earth OM! sky OM! heaven! аап tak а: ta ECT 


OM! greatness OM! people, эй HE: 1 sīf send 
OM! austerity OM! truth. ay WT: | Bl Sec | 
May we receive this desirable sit «сач о А 
light of the god Savitr, who watt хаел аб 1 
shall impel our thoughts. rar vale marša 
(RV 3.62.10) 3 Siret. Il 

OM! water OM! essence of light, sit SHAT 
Immortality, Brahman, 599 иш 
Earth sky heaven OM! яа: азац u 
Then he breathes out. Next comes the ākūti declaration of intent: 
Those that flow before, those qi qe Ure 
that flow behind, with those dRerrtdtar m: | 
purifying rays, with confidence anit «ачта: 
I undertake the ritual. si 3 kr | 
You gods that know the way, tat 

find the way to the ritual! : mg at 
May the ritual be propelled arg п Rega | 

by the wind, through the god, age 89 

master of mind! aatan: agran aN 

(TB 3.7.4.1) F 
Šraddhā, come here! ag ufu 
I call you with truth! | wera кат u 
I honor you for intent, desire, Eu 
: ATEA TAT SERT TAT At сат | 

prosperity, N iE EY „йе 
and for immortality, for life. SUC SH AAA HTT Ц 
His intent for help, his desire эгЕнепЧё | 

for success, ТЕД ЖЫЙ 1 
Indra’s thoughts are harnessed. water speret Red: au 


I honor the divine intent of the mind, 
Mother of the ritual, may she be 
easily invoked by me. 


siet Жат ere: чў dūri 
A ATM Gaal À ng | 


What I, full of desire wish with my mind я =й чеп чып: l 
May I find that reposing in my heart! Райа fer u 


(TB 2.5.3.2) 


These introductory recitations are the same for each samkalpa. In the 
Agnicayana, the first samkalpa is pronounced at the beginning of the ritual 
preparation of the ukhā pots. The yajamāna sits down on a blade of grass, 


283 


PLATE 4I 
Ukha Pots; Bull and Circle Bricks 


The ukha pot (Plate 5A), two spare ukha pots, five bricks called 
rsabha, Bull, and three called maņdalestakā, Circle bricks, are 
ritually prepared during the first rites of the Agnicayana cere- 
mony. They have already been physically made by the potter and 
brick makers. On the left is the donkey that has assisted in fetching 
clay. 


284 


285 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


placed upon his tortoise seat, and declares six times (three times softly and 
three times loudly, so that the gods will hear): 


Desirous of all I shall pile Agni! «demisit Ч | 


According to Erkkara Raman Nambudiri, the expression sarvakāmaļ here 
means “desirous of the common good." In the corresponding ceremony of 
the Agnistoma, the expression is: svargakamah, “desirous of heaven." This 
expression is prescribed by Baudhāyana for both the Agnicayana and the 
Soma rituals (BSS 2.1:34.15). 


The yajamāna then addresses his priests: 


May this succeed for me, may it be fulfilled for me; чет maai ae agaat 
then may my wish come about! SSH ATT TH: | 


The priests answer: 


May this succeed for you, may it be fulfilled for аға nemi 
you; qeu ueni 
then may your wish come about—let it be so! TA ATI ала: | AT wem 
(BSS 2.1:34.16-19). 


Adhvaryu and subsequently pratiprasthātā stand on the utkara, facing 
east, and recite: 


gel Зарна 1 
May Ida be invoker of the gods, may Manu шч erai 
be leader of the ritual, may Brhaspati rfr | d 
recite the hymns and lauds! ^ dard: 
The All-gods are reciters of the hymns. b & s ! 
Do not harm me, mother earth! arate emerit ат fish: | 
I shall think of honey, md алд 
I shall produce honey, "d sis | 
I shall announce honey, uy aem 
I shall speak honey. ay aften | 
May I raise my voice full of honey for eder їчтї агаң! 


the gods and acceptable to men! 
May the gods further me towards splendor, 2a 
may the ancestors applaud me! 9 ail ay etary 1 


(TS 3.3.2.1c-2h) arm Грау u 


gr agru: | 


The adhvaryu, accompanied by yajamāna and his wife, goes east and 
continues with the ritual preparation of the ukhā pots and the rsabha and 
mandala bricks. Back at the three altars, he sprinkles the fires and cuts 
darbha grass. He prepares a ghee oblation (gjya-samskara) in a small dish at 
the domestic fire. Sitting down west to northwest of the sacrificial fire, with 
the sruva he pours four spoonfuls from this dish into the sruc. The yajamāna, 


286 


RITUAL PREPARATION OF THE UKHA POTS 


who has been sitting together with the brahman south of the sacrificial altar 
(their usual place), gets up and goes to the west of the sacrificial altar. When 
he passes in front of the adhvaryu, the adhvaryu passes the sruc around him. 
The yajamāna sits down to the right of the adhvaryu, and touches the sruc, 
which the Adhvaryu holds in his right hand. Throughout the following 


recitation, the adhvaryu holds the sruc, which the yajamāna touches. 

Prompted, mantra for mantra, by Vallabhan (Vasudevan Akkitiripad’s 
son and Cherumukku Vaidikan’s grandson) who stands behind him, the 
adhvaryu recites the beginning mantras of the fourth kanda of the Taittiriya 
Samhita, which mark the beginning of the Agnicayana: 


a. First harnessing the mind, Savitr, 
creating thoughts and 
perceiving light, 
brought Agni from the earth. 
b. Harnessing the gods with mind, 
they who go with thought to the sky, to heaven, 
Savitr impels those 
who will make great light. 
c. With the mind harnessed, 
we are impelled by god Savitr 
For the ability to go to heaven. 
d. The priests of the lofty wise priest 
harness their minds, they harness their thoughts. 
He who alone is possessed of knowledge 
distributed the priestly duties: 
Great be the praise of god Savitr. 
e. I harness with honor your ancient hymn. 
The verses go like Sūras on their way. 
All the sons of immortality 
who have ascended to divine dwellings listen. 
f. Whose journey the other gods follow, 
praising the power of the god, 
who measured off the radiant regions of the earth, 
He is the great god Savitr. 
g. God Savitr, impel the sacrifice! 
Impel for good fortune the lord of the sacrifice! 
Divine Gandharva, purifier of thought, purify 
our thoughts! 
Today may the lord of speech make our words 
sweet! 
h. God Savitr, impel for us this sacrifice, 
honoring the gods, gaining friends, 
always victorious, winning wealth, winning 
heaven! 
(TS 4.1.1.1a-3h) 


287 


ята: да HAR- 
grant afer б: | 
att estf tart 
TSA TESTU, И 


=й благ ба | 

arm: «а: 

чт л garā ara, 

gta Hae яй au ufu: we | 

gaala aa n 

язта wt ga зт feet 

fast fret gedt (durt | 

fa dat at agate зч. 

че cae fag: gR: || 

Rr mat aku wala at: | 

grafa aa ager чат 

E чї trent 9: Н 

аєа STUDIEN FAA 

tar aet ийин: | 

a: nia Bax a udi 
ме ea: «ат Ачат || 

зч айа: я ңа зї 

я da mei ія 

бей акыя: | 

HAL Eos 9: Old: 

anakataa Aaf =: || 

за al ša абе я ҷа 

agas «Вар 

waist dt. ай і 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


Afterwards the adhvaryu makes an oblation for Savitr with svaha! The 


yajamāna says his tyāga: 


This is for god Savitr—not for me! 


After the Savitrhoma, the actual preparation of the ukhā pots begins. 
The adhvaryu begins by establishing a connection between meters of the 


Rgveda and chants of the Sāmaveda: 


With the rc make the stoma prosper; 

with the gayatra the rathantara ; 

the brhat, whose meter is gāyatrī. 
(TS 4.1.1.31) 


Заа uk gà а яя 


Then the adhvaryu picks up a spade (abhri) and recites: 


k. At the impulse of god Savitr, 
with the arms of the Ašvins, 
with the hands of Pūsan. 
with the gayatri meter, 
I take you in the fashion of the Angirases. 
1. You are the spade. 
You are the woman. 
From the dwelling of the earth 
bear the muddy Agni. 
With the tristubh meter I take you 
in the fashion of the Angirases. 
m. You are the bearer. 
You are the woman. 
From you may we have the strength 
to dig the muddy Agni in his dwelling. 
With the jagati meter I take you 
in the fashion of the Angirases. 
n. Savitr, taking in your hand, 
holding the golden spade, 
digging Agni with that, 
bring to us undying light! 
With the anustubh meter I hold you 
in the fashion of the Angirases. 
(TS 4.1.1.3k-4n) 


After entrusting the abhri spade to the Brahman, the adhvaryu takes a rein 


(Sanskrit rasanā, Malayalam kayar) and recites: 


At their ceremonies in ancient times 
the sages grasped this rein of order. 
Thereby the gods gained the pressed 


288 


зз Ва і 
apa ян 
gias: anaki 
garam az 
agra сат 
заат 51350599, t 

att «пн 

carat ячх Tata fA яя 
9 чїч SH сат 
Rss LĪS ĪRE, It 


fit edt я om WU 
SSŪZĪTA cat 
GRASS Zs RET, Il 


ZARI, TARTAR 


чї age 999 asa | 


RITUAL PREPARATION OF THE UKHA POTS 


(Soma juice)— 
During the Sāman of order (rta) it proclaims 
the stream (saram ārapantī). 
(TS 4.1.2.1a) 


«el tat: gau dq 
KA ATTRA ti 


He fastens the rein to the horse, which is kept waiting, with: 


Run swiftly here, horse, 

along the wide expanse of space. 
Your highest birth is in heaven, 
your navel in the sky, 


your womb on earth. 
(TS 4.1.2.1b) 


He makes the horse face east and takes another rein with the same mantra 
(TS 4.1.2.1a), and fastens it to the donkey, which has also been brought: 


c. You two of great wealth, 
yoke on this course the donkey that bears Agni 
who seeks us. 
d. In every battle and every contest 
as friends we invoke Indra, the very strong, 
to help us. 


Sees went ga- 
sf at guva | 
їй AGAATAJA N 
AMAA TARE 
ATARI SAAT | 

1 У] 
aata ĀTI 


Yajamāna, brahman, and adhvaryu move east while addressing the horse 


with: 


Come here guickly, 
trampling the enemy! 
Come at Rudra”s command 
to give us pleasure! 
Traverse the expanse of the sky 
so that we may have pastures 
full of cows and freedom from danger! 
| (TS 4.1.2.2e) 


and the donkey with: 


f. Together with Pūsan, 
go from the region of earth 
in the fashion of the Aügirases 
towards Agni hidden in the mud. 


AZ MAIAT, 
= 1 

за иара 
єтїїнї 
матч Pray | 


1 
зел est 96 | 
rem: qaal- 
afit gA- 
паа u 


Then a “Vaisya,” in fact one of the Nambudiri helpers, sitting close to an 
anthill (a heap of sandy mud), addresses the three priests: 


Men, what are you going to fetch? ў 
(BSS 10.2:2.11) 


289 


чеч: fase | 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


Yajamāna, brahman, and adhvaryu answer: 

In the fasion of the Angirases, aft gå- 

o E ла 
(TS 4.1.2.2g) 

Yajamāna, brahman, and adhvaryu address the anthill with: 


In the fashion of the Angirases, 


Q | 
we shall carry Agni att gt 
hidden in the mud. ааста: N 
(TS 4.1.2.2h) 
The adhvaryu leads the horse further east with: 
k, Agni, the all-knower, the first one, ET 
looked out over the beginning of the dawns, e. = 
out over the days, saal serait SISSE l 
and out in many ways along the rays sq «a GRA 4 t- 
of the sun. ag «татай er dare u 


He spread over sky and earth. 


By this time the procession has reached the point where the adhvaryu had 
earlier placed some clay on top of a banana leaf. He makes the horse step on 
the clay with its right foreleg, reciting: 


1 | 
The stallion coming from the way se 
scatters all the enemies. wat wat fa чч! 
He desires to discern with his eye Agni af eret retā 
in his great place. agar fr tat п 
Striding on earth, Stallion, TERT sts, ufirdt- 
search for Agni with your brilliance. AMS Wu саа, | 
Turning from the ground tell us + qart at ale 
where we should dig for him. ча: aaa & ал 


(TS 4.1.2.3 -m) 


The adhvaryu rubs the back of the horse, saying. : 


n. Your back is heaven; are gt 
your dwelling earth; Wah ачы: 
your spirit the sky; en 
your womb the ocean. E EA. 
Perceiving with your eyes, ачы die | 
destroy the enemy! Reng atit a- 


(TS 4.1.2.3n) sf fae чата: u 
The adhvaryu leads the horse further : 


290 


RITUAL PREPARATION OF THE UKHA POTS 


o. O wealth-giving stallion! зеъїн wed dhdun- 
Arise for great prosperity from this place. EIEE IGLE zama atfra | 
May we enjoy the blessing of earth, крена gait den 
as we will be digging for Agni in her lap. э TS Г СЕ i 


p. The strong stallion has come forward, 
giving wealth! 


зви ийат атэчай- 


Y Los . 
He has made the piece of earth lucky. 5%: a ge Gee forent: | 
From there let us dig the beautiful-faced Agni, аа: ura азза, 
as we ascend to heaven, to the highest vault. gat Salo ale EIE s N 


(TS 4.1.2.40-p) 


At the farthest point of their journey, the abhvaryu ties the two animals, 
returns to the mud, fills a pot with water, and pours some water into the 
footprint that the horse has left in the mud, reciting: 


EN Ц 1 m 
g. Pour, for the good health of men, et кр agai- 
the divine waters full of sweetness! ASAT IWA: 1 
From their place may plants атат enag- 
spring up with beautiful fruit. ai: gE: d 


The adhvaryu takes the shovel from the brahman and uses it to part the mud 
into two. He places a piece of gold on the southern portion and makes an 
oblation over it, saying: 


With mind, with butter I sprinkle Agni Rari aa gius 
who dwells in all worlds; aera yani frat à 
widespread, vast, full of pervading energy, ay fra айап qued 


most expansive, the impetuous winner of food. (My ub 
(TS 4.1.2.51) #18995 cat Prnt I 


He does the same over the northern portion, reciting: 


I sprinkle you with speech, with butter. 
Enjoy it with a friendly mind. 
Possessed of youthful splendor, 


эп cat наб ada al- 
TAT AAA азчы | 


| ^ 
and of an enviable color, misit creag af- 
bristling Agni cannot be “їз agar su tt 


touched along his body. 
(TS 4.1.2.5s) 


In order to facilitate the taking out of the mud, the adhvaryu thrice digs a 
trench round the area, using the shovel and reciting: 


t. Lord of booty, sage, qR antufē: nfà- 
Agni has gone around the offerings «тере | 
and given jewels to the donor. — n zm | 


i! ! Mi ! P. 
u. Agni! Sage! Mighty one! чӣ агй чї яй 


291 


i. ut <S 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


May we place you around us each day 
as a secure fort, 
you who are courageous each day 
and the destroyer of what is 
crooked. 
v. Agni, throughout the days, 
desire to shine upon us! 
From the waters, from the rock, 
from the forests, from the plants, 
you, lord of men, are born pure. 


The adhvaryu digs clay twice, using the spade. In the southern half he recites: 


a. At the impulse of Savitr, 
with the arms of the A$vins, 
with the hands of Pūsan, 
in the dwelling of the earth, 
I dig Agni in the mud 
in the fashion of the Angirases. 


In the northern half: 


b. Agni! In the region of the earth, 
in the fashion of the Angtrases 
I dig you from the earth, 
full of light, of beautiful appearance, 
shining with perpetual radiance, 
benevolent and harmless to our offspring. 


са aerea ien- 
«ed gai dat aà gft: u 


Faret сат аР: dad- 
sfirātaigvit 

vit Katrai 

gra: guest 
gieda єч, dafür u 


siege сапой gra- 
язд waa STAT | 
Bri aarts Rat 
gan: gads 
чөнүн, ЗЇ i 


(TS 4.1.3.la-b) 


He takes a lotus leaf to be used as a receptacle for the clay: 


c. You are the broad, expansive ridge of waters 
that will bear Agni, 
not to be cast aside. 
Spread across the broad measure of heaven 
like a lotus growing to maturity. 


smit grafa at зїї 
aRar | 


чата нє эт a цер 


RA mia after кш n 


He places the skin of a black antelope (krsņājina) on the ground, puts the 


lotus leaf on it, and touches both: 


d. You two, vast and unbroken, 
are a shelter and protection. 
Expanding, remain together! 
Support Agni of the mud! 

e. Remain together winning heaven 
in the union of heart and self 


292 


та =ч әү ad a єчї 
чех TS эй 1 
едена & derit 
маай TET || 

а datuma qais 
etit stat rt | 


RITUAL PREPARATION OF THE ŪKHĀ POTS 


that will support within the eternal Agni 
full of light. 


эйе нөт 
Sh terraces 1 


(TS 4.1.3.2d-e) 


The adhvaryu divides the mud into four portions. He picks up the first 
portion while reciting the first of the following mantras. He places it on the 
antelope skin with the second mantra. He does the same three more times, 
using the three remaining portions of mud and the following eight mantras in 


the same manner: 


f. You are of the mud, 
supporter of the all. 
Atharvan first drew you out, Agni! 
g. Agni! Atharvan first drew you out 
from the lotus, 
from the head of every priest. 
h. Dadhyafic, son of Atharvan, kindled you, 
the slayer of Vrtra, 
destroyer of fortresses. 
i. Pāthya Vrsan fully kindled you, 
best destroyer of enemies, 
the winner of wealth in every battle. 
k. Sit, hota, shining in your own world 
and place the sacrifice in the womb 
of good deeds! 
Eager for the gods, you shall worship 
them with an oblation 
Agni, place great strength 
into the yajamana! 
1. The hota, pure-tongued Agni, 
most wealthy, bearing a thousand, 
undeceivable intentions and vows, 
wise, brilliant, shining, and clever, 
has sat down in the place of the hota. 
m. Sit down! You are mighty. 
Burn, greatest gratifier of the gods! 
Agni, eater of the oblation, 
famous one, 
release your Clearly visible, reddish smoke. 
n. At the beginning of the days 
be born noble, properly red 
amid the proper woods. 
Placing seven jewels in every home, 
Agni is sealed as the hota, 
the excellent ritualist. 


чаа Kert: 1 
weld cat sert багай ti 


атай gehaad RATA | 
sri багет sad: N 


ag eat хета: ga Shr эт: | 
чле BRA 1 


«8 еп чтейї Tar «19 GEFAAR | 
ATT TUT Ц 

dig da: as ate 

Rificatecareat ari 

spese TA | 

Zari, efiat sere, 

Я gehe art "at: ui 

fr Stat ачах faata- 

«а Ga saga, gad: | 


Самі 


заета: 
serene TST A | 
ах diqa wary sft 
чча аад: | 

fa gara эгеч Әт 

ER area FETA | 
Эт R Зей a эге] 
fect асч ay | 
яйчй ae чет Tabi 
sfhatar Kramer ЭП, d 


(TS 4.1.3.2f-4n) 


293 


The hole from which the clay has been taken is filled with mud. Then water 


PART IJ THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


is poured over it with: 


a. May Vayu, Mātarišvan, unite the broken heart 


of you who are stretched out. 
To him who moves with the exhaling of the 
gods, 
and to you, goddess, be the vasat exclamation! 
(TS 4.1.4 1a) 


dd agaat garr- 
^M bs єх єз 
arm wud afkfēea | 
al 


Жата атт ATT 


att чї Wee qma d 


The mud is then covered with a leaf, and a grass string is tied around it: 


b. Well born with light 


you sat in heaven, 

a protector, a guardian. 

Agni, full of light, envelop 

yourself in your clothing of many colors! 


gatar safer az 
AA TEAMU: Ҹа: | 
atāt ab fares, 

& єй feat dd 


The adhvaryu stands up with the clay in his hands, reciting: 


C. 


d. 


The adhvaryu goes towards the donkey, reciting: 


e. 


You, good at ritual 
rise up and aid us with divine tenderness! 
Blazing with lofty radiance for us to see, 
come here, Agni, in response to our 
invocations. 
Rise up to help us like god Savitr, 
erect to give reward, 
when we invoke you with the shining 
sacrificers. 
(TS 4.1.4.1c-2d) 


Agni! You are born the lovely child 
of heaven and earth, 
distributed among the plants. 
You come forth, thundering from your mothers, 
a many-colored child spread out 
beyond darkness. 


They put mud on the donkey with: 


f: 


Be firm with powerful limbs! 

Be swift, a mighty stallion! 

Be broad, a friendly seat! 

You are supporter of the mud for Agni. 


After this, the adhvaryu recites: 


294 


зан avat- 
al ay ta ut | 

| all 1 - 
eX a этет desi gge- 
ust mÈ gartatt: u 


Seat атлап fiar аб 
aatia u 


a mat тїй af weet 
ха mfg Athy i 

faa: Вга: Ч niens. 
serez aba аат: 1 


Rad sta did 
amia redde | 
quit gaged- 


qu Чётшкеп n 


RITUAL PREPARATION OF THE UKHA Pors 

fray ata хапай 

ат Фое | 

ат aratzfordt этїї! 
asaka m THETA di 


g. Be auspicious to men's offspring, Angiras! 
Do not scorch the heavens, 
the earth, the sky, or the trees! 

(TS 4.1.4.3g) 


The adhvaryu unties the horse and the donkey, and addresses them, re- 
spectively, with the two halves of: 


Ad ty = 
h. Thundering may the stallion advance is zm afia: 
and bellowing the donkey, swift! MESE S | 
As it bears Agni of the mud, wei atri 
may it not fall before its time! ят чач: T U 
He continues: nais: 
qr grat di | 
a alati ga 
ята «бө: a 


1. You virile ones! 
May the thundering donkey, that swift messenger, 
well yoked to your chariot, 


carry Agni of the mud from here! SE 
k. The virile, bearing the virile Agni, east arti pu 
oceanic seed of the waters, o Agni! gat mis eng | 
Come here to pursue cosmic order, aa ап alfà ч 
truth! RIX AAA 11 


The final words, rtam, “order,” and satyam, “truth,” are recited thrice. 
Each time the adhvaryu bends his head down when he recites “order,” and 
lifts it when he recites truth.” They return to the place where the vaišya was 
sitting, and he asks them: 


Men, what are you carrying? : Beat: fe Tu | 
(BSS 10.4:4.14) 
They answer: 
In the fashion of the Aügirases, writ gaa- 
we are carrying Agni —— "— Т 


hidden in the mud. 
(TS 4.1.2.21) 


Finally the clay is placed on a khara, a small earthen platform north of where 
the vaišya has been sitting, while the adhvaryu recites: 


1. Plants! Accept this Agni 
who is coming to you with benevolence! 
Throwing aside all hostilities, 
all malignity, seating himself, 
he shall drive misfortune away from us! 


295 


sia: fi getras 
Ramada gena, | 
sae нт ideet- 
ач sir at аб dam 1 


SSS OOo ee 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


m. Plants, rich in fruit and flowers, 
welcome him with joy! 
This seed of yours has sat 
at the proper time in his ancient seat. 


fes var: aft maai 
1 

sende gue | 

"p gt qd жая: 


(TS 4.1.4.4/-т) . їч 990915938 || 


The ukhā pot will now be ritually and symbolically fashioned from the | 
mud that has been obtained. Physically it has already been prepared by the 
potter. First the adhvaryu unties the string from the mud, reciting: 


a. Radiant, broadly shining, 
drive off the enemy, demons, hostility! 
May I be protected by the great protector! 
May I be led forward by Agni, easy to invoke! 
(TS 4.1.5.la) 


fa чтяат {уят wear 

area feat curet afian: 1 
sl el 

яча gga: safer en- 

ANTEX weder ЯО u 


RITUAL PREPARATION OF THE UKHA Pors 


h. The mud for the sacrifice is mixed 
by the Vasus, the clever Rudras. 
Smoothing it with her hands, 
may Sinivali fashion this. 
i. Aditi! Great One! 
May Sinivali with beautiful braids, 
with beautiful head dress, 
with beautiful hair, 
place the ukhā pot in your hands! 
k. May Aditi fashion the ukhā with skill, 
with her arms, with wisdom. 
May she bear Agni in her womb 
as a mother a child in her lap. 
(TS 4.1.5.2h-3k)! 


ax det ag si- 
AR: =ч zu, | 
garni wet асат 
Вател ат SFK u 
fain’ єч 
Чат «чап 1 

ат grata ac 
айа gara көй: tl 
sai ata weal 
agrajā 1 
WISI чӣ eee 
їй fag st ап t 


Before each portion of mud is handed over, it is rolled into a stick three 


He removes the leaf and pours water three times from a kindi over the mud times, with the recitation: 


with: 
1. You are the head of Makha Aa Pris 1 


b. Waters! You are givers of health. anı FE эт RAAT = жй SATA | 
<< Кы UNDE 
; ers grant us here the mos a yes i sd. i 
auspicious essence that you possess. Bi op “a si ш: a 
d. To this may we suitably come, to whose чш а! ; 
power you impel us. Waters, propagate us! AAT AL TATA Sp ае arp] Fredu | 
(cf., above, page 282) ат! TAA = 9: N 


and subdivided into three smaller portions with: 
quet чї ә: | 


The pratiprasthātā rubs bits of mud on the base of the ukhà pot while the 
adhvaryu addresses the Vasus; on its middle while he addresses the Rudras; 
on its top while he addresses the Adityas; and all over while he addresses the 


m. You are the two feet of the ritual. 


He adds four substances to the mud: some pebbles (Sarkara), some brick dust, 


All-gods: 


some hair from the black antelope, and some hair from a goat, reciting: n. May the Vasus prepare you HUI яча 
T ! | with the gāyatrī meter TANT GFA сач, 

е. Mitra, uniting earth and ground with light; fira Ns чічат in the fashion of the Айрігаѕеѕ! F IR ds 
Agni, well born, all knowing, ft a SHAT az | You aie the earth. ihe 
common to all men, all pervading. galā aradzaafi 

f. I join you for well being, ята Rega u May the Rudras prepare you TAI тает 
for children. эттен кат 9% EL CE inj Gets fa 
May the Vi$vedevas common to all men dak 5 » : in the fashion of the Angirases! zanga й 
unite you with the anustubh meter aot E You are the sky. 
in the fashion of the Angirases! ķi ` ER pA May the Adityas prepare you эт тєсяї чат 

(TS 41.52) F sardi ith the jagatī a Ён 
.1.5.2e-f) E with the jagati meter sit беспа 
MA. Ж И іп the fashion of the Angirases! atte = 

He mixes it thoroughly, reciting: You are heaven. 

g. The Rudras brought together the earth SED ung ufadi May the Vi$vedevas, common to all men, ВОГ car хат апае: poa- 
and kindled a great light. аз: aif | prepare you with the anustubh meter ag sedasie 
Their undying ray shines чї ru = in the fashion of the Angirases! Ра: S. 
bright among the gods. Sauda You are the directions. E 


CLOSE RUM Kx 
TSE CAL TAT N 


Three times the adhvaryu hands some mud to the pratiprasthata : 


296 


! In the alphabetical order introduced in Weber's text, and followed by Keith, the 


letter “j” is always omitted. 


297 


PLATE 42 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 
At the end of each of these four verses he adds: 


gars этет att sms 
cea чеч FAK 
ANAL AAMT | 


You are the unchanging direction. 
Make unchanging in me children, 
abundance of wealth, 
abundance of cattle, heroism, 
and similar things for the yajamana. 
(TS 4.1.5.3-4n) 


RITUAL PREPARATION OF THE UKHA POTS 


May Visnu make you smoke in the fashion of the Preece чачса че | 
Angirases! "— qaa | 


May Varuna make you smoke in the fashion of 
the Angirases! 


(TS 4.1.6.la) 


The group moves a little further north, and the adhvaryu marks the ground 
and digs a trench, saying: 


The pratiprasthātā touches the rim with a stick, reciting: 


You are the waist band of Aditi. за uatsfā | 
(TS 4.1.5.40) 
He hollows it out by pounding inside, reciting: 
al + 
р. May Aditi grasp your hole экеа Ré Weg 
with the pankti meter Wes сезет URS 1! 


b. May Aditi, the goddess, | а кеп aft 
in union with the All-gods, {изат 
dig you, trench, in the realm of earth ah с. cadi 


in the fashion of the Aügirases! 
He places the ukhā there with: 


c. May the wives of the gods, the goddesses, 


panel) 
рач, «чнч | 


жапай сат чей: й- 


in the fashion of the Angirases! 


and places it on the khara, reciting: 
| gara єп Beat 
q. Having fashioned the great ukha а alan | 
made of clay as a womb for Agni, Ēd. et 
Aditi gave it to her sons saying, S ST 
“Fire it!” RR: stern n 


The adhvaryu makes two spare ukhā pots in a similar manner, as well as 
five bull (vrsabha) bricks and three circle (mandala) bricks. Then he gets a 
small dish (catti) with some smouldering sticks of firewood inside. Some 
dried horse dung is put in it and catches fire, so that smoke arises. The ukha 
pots and bricks are dried one by one by holding them in this smoke and 


united with the Višvedevas, ата: 
put you, ukhā, in the realm of earth йат: gast- 


in the fashion of the Angirases! t 
(TS 41.62, З ERI 


Burning chips of firewood, cow dung, and dry grass are placed in the trench. 
The ukhà pot is placed over these, sideways, and with its opening facing east 
(see above page 217). The two spare ukhà pots are also placed there in the 
same manner, together with the five “bull” bricks and the three "circle" 
bricks. Everything is covered with more dry grass, chips of firewood, cow 
dung, and finally a layer of mud. Four openings are made in the four direc- 
tions. Fire is put through these openings: from the east, addressing the 
Dhīsaņās; from the south, addressing the wives of the All-gods; from the 
west, addressing the protecting goddesses; and from the north, addressing 


slowly turning them round. While drying the pots, the adhvaryu recites: 


a. May the Vāyus make you smoke with the gāyatrī 
meter 


T с чо. 

in the fashion of the Angirases! li cM o 

May the Rudras make you smoke with the Se SAHEN 
tristubh meter area Tg 

in the fashion of the Aügirases! Aga оттеп, | 

May the Adityas make you smoke with the эт ате учат 


jagati meter 
in the fashion of the Angirases! 
May the Vi$vedevas, common to all men, 


sir ееп fügen, | 
RA сап tat arent ya- 


— ts 1 чач. 
fumigate you with the anustubh meter A ST 
in the fashion of the Aügirases! TERN WIAA | 


May Indra make you smoke in the fashion of the 
Angirases! 


298 


the mothers: 


fasain gA- 
d. May the Dhīsaņās, the goddesses, fissura: 
united with the Vi$vedevas, тиза: arel- 
fire you, ukhā, in the realm of the earth sfircenftedangàt 
in the fashion of the Aügirases! m 
: areal gA- 
May the wives, the goddesses, HE 
united with the Vi$vedevas, Eo 
fire you, ukhā, in the realm of the earth giant: queer 
in the fashion of the Angirases! этерча | 
May the protecting goddesses, the women, ABA элеп Жай- 
hear you, ukha, in the realm of the earth аата: 
in the fashion of the Angirases! чїй ere 
(TS 41.620) цыш dares и 


In order that the pots and bricks will dry and not break, the adhvaryu recites: 


299 


PLATE 42 
Ritual Preparation of the Ukha Pots 


“You are the waistband of Aditi!” | 
(TS 4.1.5.40) 


— o 
— — 
— — 
— — 


The pratiprasthata rubs mud around the rims of the ukhà pots. 


— — — = 


300 301 


PART П THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 
Ragai cet ar HE | 


web um gratia 


e. Mitra! Fire this pan! Do not let it break! 
f. I place this around you to prevent breaking. 


The adhvaryu brings several items from the Old Hall: a big basket, a 
pair of tongs (samdanša), goat’s milk, and cow's milk. This is accompanied by: 


g. Mitra, spreading out, endet чїёат fad 
encompassed this heaven with his might, RS PE E 
and the earth with his fame. um E Е 

h. The fame of god Mitra, ape зіма u 
supporter of the people, fru adaa: 


sat tat атаба 1 
wet Raa || 


is rich, majestic, and brilliantly glorious. 
(TS 4.1.6.3g-h) 


Ashes and mud are removed from the pot with a stick made of vikankata 
wood, while the adhvaryu recites: 


i. May god Savitr with beautiful hands, Zacal ERAK 
beautiful fingers, beautiful arms, garm: agh: | 


dig you up with his strength! Sene EET 


The pot is lifted up by placing the stick inside, reciting: 


афаатат giren- 


at far sr uer | 


Rise up! Become lofty! 
Stand upright and remain firm! 
(k, second half; cf. BSS 10.7:7.10) 


The pot is put down so that the stick stands upright. The adhvaryu recites: 


stu geet Aar- 
vit Rie gat ert и 


Without breaking, earth, 
fill the quarters, the directions! 
(k, first half; cf. BSS 10.7:7.11) 


Goat's and cow's milk are poured into the pot. While the goats’ milk is 


poured, the adhvaryu recites: абатства 

1. May the Vasus fill you with the gāyatrī meter TAA GKS PAT | 
in the fashion of the Aügirases! BARA SEIT ET 
May the Rudras fill you with the tristubh meter ELS зета | 
in the fashion of the Angirases! этат == 
May the Vi$vedevas, common to all men, anata sdas | 


fill you with the anustubh meter 


ALN = ` 1 
in the fashion of the Angirases! Feat car Bar aera grz- 


KALAT SAASTEET, || 

The same procedures are gone through in connection with the two spare 
ukhā pots (accompanied by mantras), and the bull and circle bricks (with- 
out mantras). The ukhā pots have now been fully prepared and are placed 
inside the big basket. 


302 


ANIMAL SACRIFICE FOR VAYU 


First Day: April 12, 1975 
EPISODE 2 


Animal Sacrifice for Vayu and Preparation of the Five Heads 
(Vayavyam Pasu) 


THE ANIMAL SACRIFICE of a he-goat for Vayu (vāyavyam pašu) is the first 
of the fourteen animal sacrifices that characterize the Agnicayana. Its de- 
dication to Vayu, “wind,” is fitting since Vayu, the swiftest deity, plays an 
important role in the Agnicayana: the first, third, and fifth brick layers of the 
bird-shaped altar are connected with earth/fire, atmosphere/wind, and sky/ 
sun, respectively, so Vayu is the intermediary. 

The paradigm of the animal sacrifice has been described several times, 
notably by Schwab. Here an outline will be given without specifying any of 
the usual mantras. Mention will be made of the modifications that the 
paradigm undergoes in the Vàyu sacrifice. The sacrifice is combined with 
rites pertaining to the five heads. 

Following a great deal of publicity, popular sentiment, and official 
pressure, it had been decided on April 11—one day before the beginning of 
the ceremonies—that no goats would be sacrificed during the performance. 
For the first time in the history of the Nambudiri tradition, the animals 
would be represented by cakes made of a paste of rice flour (ata), folded in 
banana leaf in the same manner in which this is done at šrāddha or funeral 
ceremonies. This manner of folding leaves is called paitrkam, “for ancestors," 
and it is regarded as a representation of meat (mamsapratinidhi). It con- 
trasts with the way banana leaves are folded when a similar offering of ata 
is made in temples. This is called daivikam, “ог gods." The two methods аге 
illustrated in Volume II (Exhibit inside Back Cover). Ghee (clarified butter) 
is sometimes added to the rice paste, which makes it easier to remove it 
from the leaf. 

When such a deviation from the tradition occurs, it may affect the ritual 
acts, but not the mantras, which are recited in the same sequence and without 
modification. The events that led up to the decision to resort to this sub- 
stitution are more fully described in Part IIL, pages 456-465. 

At the beginning of the animal sacrifice, the three fires and churning 
blocks are carried by the yajamāna and his helpers toward an area to the 
northwest of the Old Hall, where three altars have been prepared and a 
mahavedi has been outlined (Figure 22). 

The fires are installed on the altars.. After several other rites and obla- 
tions, a butter oblation for the sacrificial pole (yūpāhuti) is prepared at the 


domestic fire. The pole has already been cut in the forest and put up in its. 


place, immediately east of where the new sacrificial altar (uttaravedi) will be 
situated, but it has not yet been cut to size. Now it is cut off its stump with 
an axe. The stump is left in its place. The first chip of wood (svaru) is caught 
on a palmyra sheath. The tree felled, a libation is made on the stump. The 


303 


PLATE 43 


PLATE 43 
Recitation by the Maitravaruna 


During the animal sacrifice, the maitravaruna priest has to assist in 
the recitations. When reciting he faces east and holds a staff. The 
plate shows his recitation during the animal sacrifice for Vayu on 
the first day of the ceremony. A helper happens to accompany the 
recitation with hand movements (see Part II, pages 359-381 in the 
second volume). 


— 
B _— —À 
— 


304 


305 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 
N 


е [1 [n] 
ОА з 7 
y и 


Figure 22—Ritual Enclosure for the Animal Sacrifice for Vayu 


branches of the tree, which is now lying on the ground, are cut off sym- 
bolically (since they have already been removed), and the pole is measured, 
one span of a hand (for the piece that will go in the ground) and five aratni 
lengths, keeping a piece for the cap (casāla). 

The yajamāna recites vows and tyāga formulas of renunciation for Agni 
Vratapati (Agni, Lord of Vows), Vayu Vratapati, Aditya Vratapati, and 
Vratanam Vratapati (TB 3.7.4.7-8). 

Next the area for the mahāvedi is marked with darbha grass and the 
wooden knife (sphya). The cātvāla pit and the utkara heaps are prepared 
near its northern boundary. Inside the mahāvedi, at its eastern end, the 
uttaravedi or new offering altar is prepared. Fire is then carried (agniprana- 
yana) from the old to the new offering altar along the northern boundary of 
the mahāvedi. After it has been installed, four libations are made by the 
adhvaryu and two by the yajamāna. 

The adhvaryu orders the āgnīdhra to bring sprinkling waters (proksani), 
fuel (idhma) and grass (barhis), clean the implements, and fasten a girdle 
around the waist of the wife of the yajamāna. Then the adhvaryu orders the 
pratiprasthātā to fetch the five clay heads of a horse (a$va), man (purusa), 


306 


ANIMAL SACRIFICE FOR VAYU 


bull (rsabha), ram (vrsni) and he-goat (basta), which have been made by the 
potter. The pratiprasthātā does this, and also brings an anthill (Sanskrit: 

valmika, Malayalam: puttumannu) with seven (i.e., at least seven) holes in it, 

a palāša branch with two leaves at the end, and twenty-one grains of black 
gram (Malayalam: uļunnu). The pratiprasthata puts seven grains in the seven 
holes of the human head and wipes them off with the palāša leaves, whilst 
reciting the first death stanza (vamagāthā): 


Day by day carrying off a cow, a horse, a man, oe 
any living being, te gad эн! 
death, son of the brilliant sun (Yama Vaivasvata), чача st есаб 
is not satisfied with the five races of man. _ чата: || 
(ТА 6.5.36) 


He repeats this a second and third time, without mantras. | 
The pratiprasthātā goes through the same routine for a second time, 
reciting the second death stanza: 


PLATE 44 


Nīla Al > | э R 
In King Yama Vaivasvata those people go asunder азая Е aH mi « gūt: | 
who truly strive here and who speak untruth. a Че demo ч з HEUTE: N, 


(TĀ 6.5.3с) 
And a third time, reciting the third death stanza: 
Those go asunder here, King, they go to you, a їтїк fafdesersu aa cam | 


who worship the gods and respect brahmins. 
(TĀ 6.5.34) 


Then he makes the human head and the anthill touch each other. Nothing is 
done with the four animal heads. After these rites, the pratiprasthata places 
the five heads in a large clay pot that is kept to the east of the new offering 
altar. 

The yajamāna anoints the upper half, and his wife the bottom of the 
sacrificial pole, after which it is erected, a rope is tied around it, and the 
first chip of wood (svaru) is inserted in the rope. Fire is made with the help 
of the two wooden churning blocks and is added to the fire on the new 
offering altar. The sacrificial victim, represented by the package of rice 
flour, is tied to the pole. Then the hota, ordered d the adhvaryu, recites 
thirteen firewood verses (samidheni): 


1 
1. Your rewards, shining with libations, 2 akti aria 
will come forth with the butter ladle. ERIS garai | 
Agni goes to the gods, seeking their favor. хатні seg: u 
2. Agni, come to the banquet; being extolled, эти ап atl dat 
come to the gift of offerings. garā raga i 
Sit down as hotā on the sacrificial grass. ft Sat аба athe и 


307 


zarar у duafa manaa N 


PLATE 44A 
Wiping the Human Head 
*Day by day carrying off a cow, 
a horse, a man, any living being, 
Death, sun of the brilliant sun, 


is not satisfied with he five races of man." 
(TA 6.5.3b) 


After putting seven ulunnu grains in the seven holes of the human 
head, the pratiprasthata wipes them off with palāša leaves. 


PLATE 44B 
The Five Heads 


From left to right: the head of a horse (a$va), a he-goat (basta), 
a bull (rsabha), a ram (vrsni), and a man (purusa). 


PART П THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


3. We make you grow, Aigiras, & eal ята 
with firewood, with butter. Feet aiaa 1 
Flame up, you youth! qedar абя u 

4. You god Agni reguest for us > а #: IANA- 

a vast renowned and lofty heroism. E 
High! wsgl ža fares 

5. Worthy to be invoked, to be honored, ge яа, Ш 
visible through the darkness, Socal aea. 
Agni, the male, flames up. SM ee 

6. The male Agni flames up, «rifā йч: | 
Who conveys the gods like a horse. =н UE. 
With offerings they invoke him. aa aft: after 

7. You male, we other males will make you sat ч Хач: | 
flame up, a facta зач I 
Male Agni, flaring up! gdo car ad daa- 

8. We elect Agni as messenger, TERMS ar м 
as omniscient hota of this rite, TUE SU dis | 
rich in spiritual power. эти en eq | 

9. Agni, flaming up for the rite, pure, ala ua Ясах 
is to be invoked, flame-haired. zu Ваа | 
We entreat him. VE { 

(RV 3.27.1; 6.16.10-12; 3.27.13-15; 1.12.1; Esp uu 
3.27.4; also in TB 3.5.2.1-3) «tam таа. 
10. Of vast shape, immortal, clothed in butter, B WE b i 
with butter poured over him, Sp acest U 
Agni conveys the ritual offerings. STU «ei 
11. They have persuaded that Agni with ready ladle, is | 
offering with proper thought, AMIE 954912 |! 
to render assistance. & ач gadu 
(RV 3.27.5-6 in TB 3.6.1.3) zen биш qae: 1 
12. Having flamed up, Agni with butter poured over you SIT чаттан Ш 


13. 


sacrifice to the gods, you excellent ritualist, 
for you are the conveyer of the offerings. 


Bring the offering for Agni! 
Benefit Agni when the rite is under way! 
Elect him to convey the offerings! 
(RV 5.28.5-6 in TB 3.5.2.3) 


че Na gaT 
зага aT | 
wa fg белата n 
эп SEND зача. 
sti daar _ 
quite сдаче і 


These thirteen sāmidhenī verses are prescribed for the paradigm of the 
animal sacrifice. In the isti of the full- and new-moon ceremonies there are 
eleven. Baudhāyana Srauta Sūtra 10.11 (see below Volume П, pages 503) 
prescribes twenty-four sāmidhenī .verses for the sacrifice of the Vayavyam 
Pašu, which include those of the paradigm of the animal sacrifice, just as the 
latter includes those of the full- and new-moon ceremones (see Table 4). 


310 


ANIMAL SACRIFICE FOR VAYU 
THE SAMIDHENI VERSES 


a e MM————————————— 


Full- and new-moon Animal sacrifice and  Vayavyam Pašu 


ceremonies 1975 Vayavyam Pašu according to 
Baudhāyana 
RV 3.27.1 RV 3.27.1 RV 3.27.1 
RV 6.16.10-12 RV 6.16.10-12 RV 6.16.10-12 
RV 3.27.13-15 RV 3.27.13-15 RV 3.27.13-15 
RV 1.21.1 RV 1.21.1 RV 1.21.1 
RV 3.27.4 RV 3.27.4-6 RV 3.27.4 
TS 4.1.7.1a-4i 
RV 3.27.5-6 
TS 2.6.11.1a 
RV 5.28.5-6 RV 5.28.5-6 RV 5.28.5-6 
| TS 4.1.7.4 k 
TOTAL 11 13 24 
TABLE 4 


This is one of the first major differences between Baudhayana and the 1975 
performance! 

In the sámidheni verses (as in the šastra recitations), the hotā recites the 
first and last verse thrice, so that the total numbers become in fact fifteen, 
seventeen, and twenty-eight, respectively. At most verses, the adhvaryu puts 
a stick of firewood (samidh) on the fire. The hotà observes numerous other 
rules in his recitation. The verses are recited uninterruptedly, without taking 
breath at the end of each verse. Breath is taken at the caesura between the 
second and third quarter (pada) of each verse. At each caesura, the final 
vowel or nasal is lengthened, except in the first and third rc of the initial and 
final triple repetitions. Of the final syllable of each verse, only the initial con- 
sonant(s) are retained; the remainder is replaced by a lengthened om. These 
same rules apply to all šastra recitations (cf. Staal 1961, 50-52, where the 
sāmidhenī verses for the full- and new-moon ceremonies, erroneously called 
Sastra, are transcribed). 

The hotà generally recites Rgveda, and the samidheni verses generally 
consist of Rgveda only. This may explain why the Nambudiris, in the Vaya- 
vyam Pašu, do not add samidheni verses from the Taittiriya Samhita unless 
there are corresponding verses in the Rgveda. 

! As mentioned before (page 274) such differences will not generally be mentioned. The 
reader can discover them for himself by comparing the description in Volume I with 
the Srauta Sūtras published and translated in Volume II, Part IV. 


311 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


Many subsequent rites of the animal sacrifice for Vayu are identical with 
those for the paradigm animal sacrifice, and correspond to the full- and new- 
moon ceremonies (cf. pages 46-49). The sāmidhenī verses are followed by two 
āghāra oblations of clarified butter. Then there are the election (pravara) of 
hota and of maitrāvaruņa, and eleven fore-offerings (prayāja), as against five 
in the full- and new-moon ceremonies. The sacrificial victim is anointed. 
The five heads are placed between the victim and the sacrificial pole. Three 
times fire is carried around (paryagnikriyā) the victim, the five heads, the 
sacrificial pole, and the shed of the samitā, “pacifier” or “slaughterer,” situated 
to the north of the enclosure. The šamitā is a Nayar whose services have been 
engaged for this purpose only. Then the victim-package is taken from the pole 
to the shed, and the šamitā symbolically kills it. The adhvaryu takes out its 
omentum (vapā) by opening the package and taking out a part of the rice cake. 
This part is put on the vapašrapaņī, a two-pronged fork, roasted, and offered to 
the gods. This is followed by ājyabhāga offerings, preparation of paSupurodasa 
rice-cakes, cutting up of the victim, and offering of its various parts. 

Of the three offerings of vapā, pašupurodāša, and havis, the first and 
third are for Vayu Niyutvat, “Wind drawn by horses," while the second is for 
Prajāpati. The hotā's *'invitations” (yājyānuvākya: page 47), which are pre- 
ceeded by the recital of the praisa by the maitravaruna (who must participate 
because it is an animal sacrifice), are the following three: 

At the offering of the vapa: 


The insightful white master of horses Фаіат wage: gru: 
follows those who have fat foods and abundant aa: fake аабай: | 
riches. ч spe Gamat fa «е. 


They are always ready to serve Vayu, 


ot 1 6 
QU | аа: Aga TR ll 
these men have done everything in their good care. = šā 


Vausat! an 
(RV 7.91.3) 
At the offering of the pašupurodāsša: 
He by whom the sky was fixed, and the terrible "mp Shen derit s qu 
earth, "rp gd: «н 4 ят: 1 
by whom heaven was established and its vault, dt аға wat fart: 
who metes out the space in the atmosphere— жей wan gial Aaa | 
р | 
to which god shall we offer with oblations? RE 
Vausat! SS 
(TS 4.1.8.45 = RV 10.121.5) 
At the havis offering: 
For Vàyu is my foremost thought, я agaat ggdt date 
with his great riches, numerous boons, full chariot. geet (йж изиң | 
With brilliant pace, drawn by horses, soaring, qaam (аа: чейии: 


312 


ELECTION OF THE PRIESTS 
Жазба sast u 


worthy of an early offering, poet, you long for the 
(human) poet. 


Vausat! 


© 


F 


(TB 2.8.l.lc = RV 6.49.4) 


After the ida and the after-offerings (anuyāja), the svaru chip is placed 
in the juhū ladle and offered in the fire. The remaining rites correspond to 
the full- and new-moon ceremonies. 


First Day: April 12, 1975 
EPISODE 3 


Election of the Priests and Making Fire 
(Rtvigvaraņa, Agnimanthana) 


To THE EAST of the Old Hall, in the area where later the sadas will be 
constructed, the priests and helpers are now officially selected by the yaja- 
mana. The yajamana addresses the helpers (parikarmi) in Malayalam: 
sagnikam atirātrattinnu parikarmam ceytu tareņam, “You must assist (lit. 
you must do the parikarma) in this atirātra which is accompanied by Agni 
(cayana).” Then the yajamāna addresses the chief priests, first the adhvaryu 
with: ādhvaryavam ceytu tarenam, “You must do the ādhvaryavam,” then 
similarly brahman (with brahmatvam), the hota (with hautram), the udgata 
(with audgātram), and the sadasya (with sādasyam). Yajamāna, adhvaryu, 
and sadasya recite TS 4.1.5.lb-d (Waters! You are the givers . . . " see 
page 282) and sprinkle their faces, reciting “earth, sky, heaven." | 

The yajamāna, facing north with his wife to his right, has assembled his PLATE 45 
chief priests around him and worships a small brass lamp. From his left, 
they sit in a semicircle: adhvaryu, brahman, hotā, udgātā, sadasya, and the 
chief parikarmi. Cherumukku Vaidikan joins them, sitting between yajamana 
and adhvaryu. All recite benedictory stanzas: 


OM! Let (our) mind be collected sit arama | 
! Let (our) mind be collected, w 
we are of collected mind. «атаа: єн: | 


We are serene. ITG ward: | Nem 48: 1 


Let there be peace, «т 1 

let there be wealth, : SIE | 

let there be growth, RTT | 

let there be no obstacle, erre | 
let work be auspicious! frd єй weg | 


OM! Let Prajapati be pleased! 


May he be pleased, Prajapati! st й И 

OM! Welfare you must say. saat somata 1 

OM! Growth you must say! off заба мад garg | at aa | 
OM! May it grow! sip RIE мағ arg | S Са | 


313 


PLATE 45A 
Election of the Priests (Rtvigvaranam) 
The yajamāna, facing north with his wife to his right, has assembled 


his chief priests. From his left, they sit in a semicircle: adhvaryu, 
brahman, hota, udgātā, sadasya, and the chief helper. 


Cia = Э q 
| | 
| | 
—— | 
| | ; 
| | 
| S) 
em 
PLATE 45B 


The Wife of the Yajamana (Yajamanapatni) 


The ceremonies can only be performed on behalf of a yajamana who 
is married and whose wife is present. On a few occasions, she parti- 
cipates actively in the rites or recitations. A high-caste Nambudiri 
lady (antarjanam, "inside person") she is hidden from view by a 
parasol. 


314 315 


PART П THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


This is followed by a verse addressed to the divine sun-horse Dadhikravan: 


MHEG 
I have sung of Dadhikravan, d eder «пй: | 
swift victorious horse. = = iig 
May he make our mouths fragrant, quit jit Gal Re 


may he lengthen our lives! яш =й «чч! 
(RV 4.39.6 = TS 1.5.11.4/) 


They continue with TS 4.1.5.1b-d and other verses. 

The yajamana makes another resolution (phala-samkalpa) similar to the 
one made before (pages 282-283). The recitations are prompted first by 
Cherumukku Vaidikan, then by C.V. Vasudevan Akkitiripad’s son (Cheru- 
mukku Vaidikan’s grandson). 


Now the chief priests are officially selected (in Sanskrit), beginning with 
the Adhvaryu, whom the yajamāna addresses as follows: “I, Nilakantha 
Sarma, come to you for the ādhvaryavam; may you perform it for me!” 
The adhvaryu replies: 

янса BM ӘМ wit Asatay 
pee о уоп have said to me, wail йаа асас red ru 
splendor, glory, praise, enjoyment, ; : : = 
everything you have said to me. sk Riks ai i 


May it help me, may it enter me, | 
May I enjoy thereby! жаттан 991551819 ta aferdita à 


OM! Let it be thus! эй em n 
(Tandya Brahmana 1.1.1: BSS 2.4:38.15-19) 


The yajamāna addresses each of the chief priests separately in this manner, 
Then he addresses the adhvaryu: “God Aditya is the divine adhvaryu; may 
he be my adhvaryu!” Similarly, the brahman is addressed as Candramas, 
the hota as Agni, the udgātā as Parjanya, and the sadasya as Ākāša. The 
wife washes the feet of the chief priests, while the yajamāna pours water into 
their hands, reciting: ““May I be uninterrupted in my offspring, may my 
juice not be spilt!’ 

The priests are given to eat. They sprinkle water with their right hand, 
moving it clockwise around the leaf, saying: “Truly I sprinkle you with or- 
der." Then, sipping water: “You are immortality, you are the resting place 
for immortality.” They take five grains of rice, reciting: “For breath— 
svaha!” and similarly for the other four breaths: арапа, vyāna, udāna, and 
samāna. They sip again, reciting: “You are the name of immortality!” They 
finish their meal and are given four pieces of cloth (vastram) each: two upper 
clothes and two lower clothes. 

After the selection of the priests, all enter the Old Hall. This is called 
adhyavasanam. New fire is made by friction from the fire-making blocks. The 
process begins at 6:15 p.m., with different priests and helpers taking turns. 
Fire is finally obtained on April 13 at 2:15 a.m., after eight hours of conti- 


316 


CONSECRATION OF THE YAJAMANA 


nuous labor. (At the other six occurrences of agnimanthana that occur in 
the Agnicayana, the process takes only a few minutes.) 


First Day: April 13, 1975 
EPISODE 4 
Consecration of the Yajamāna (Dīksā) 


BECAUSE OF THE delay caused by agnimanthana, several rites that belong 
to the first ritual day have to be performed during the night, in fact, during 
the early morning hours of April 13, the second ritual day. First comes 
Kūsmāņģī, а homa performed for the yajamana to free him from evil. This 
consists of numerous recitations from Taittiriya Aranyaka (2.3-6), Taittiriya 
Brahmana (3.7.12), Taittiriya Samhita (2.5.12), etc. This is followed by the 
consecration-in-water (apsudiksa). Some hair of the yajamāna is shaved and 
his wife undergoes a ceremonial shave on the back of her neck. Their nails 
are pared, they bathe, and change dress. Butter is applied to their bodies 
and collyrium to their eyes. Butter is applied to the hands first, and the 
yajamāna and his wife each put it on the front of their bodies. Then the 
adhvaryu applies it to the back of the yajamāna, and the pratiprasthātā to the 
back of the wife. Finally the Yajamāna is purified by a stroke of twenty-one 
blades of darbha grass, and the wife by a stroke of twenty-two blades. 

This is followed by a consecration isti called agni-diksaniyesti, which 
corresponds to the diksaniyesti of the Agnistoma, There are three offerings: 
a cake on eleven potsherds for Agni and Visnu (as in the Agnistoma), rice 
cooked in clarified butter for Aditi, and a cake on twelve potsherds for Agni 
Vaisvanara. The prastotā sings the two tārksya chants (JG 2.3.3.1-2 on 
JS 1.2.3.3.1). After the isti rites have been completed, the adhvaryu makes 
six butter oblations for Agni, related to the consecration. These are called 
diksahuti and occur also in the Agnistoma where the mantras, however, are 
different. The adhvaryu pours butter with the sruva from the ājyasthālī into 
the dhruva, and from the dhruva into the ājyasthālī again. In the Agnica- 
yana, the six butter oblations are accompanied by the following mantras: 


| ^ Р 
To intention, to Agni, to endeavor, svaha! pRa spark wel y 
To mind, to intellect, to Agni, to endeavor, svāhā! aa ната эзге. emet | 
To thought, to knowledge, to Agni, to endeavor, svāhā! Fri гта зя «mat | 
To arrangement of speech to endeavor, to Agni, svaha! arpa; бү TITY enel | 
aha! m pU ua co 
To Manu, lord of creatures, svaha! mamie таз ата | 


To Agni VaiSvanara, svāhā! 
(TS 4.1.9.1.) Э Serres emt i 


The adhvaryu fills the dhruva ladle four times with the sruva and makes a 
final oblation, saying: 


317 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


May all men choose friendship fl Raed меа 
of the god who is the leader! Р КРЕ 
May all pray for wealth! get fifi 

y ! a Заза 


May he choose majesty іп order to prosper, svaha! i " 
(TS 4.1.9.1b) 99 йч gest ener I 


Now the dīksā itself can begin. First fire has to originate within the ukha 
pot, which, in the Agnicayana, is considered part of the consecration cere- 
monies. While the yajamana and his wife sit south and west, respectively, 
of the offering fire, the adhvaryu sits to its northwest with the ukhā pot in 
front of him. After putting ghee with the sruva on the firewood that is al- 
ready in the pot, he holds it with two hands and recites: 


c. Do not break! Be not injured! S after m g RY: 
Be firm! Endure! «ta еле q 1 
Mother! Bold one! Show your valor! sred эгер dden- 
You and Agni will do this. & te Gear. i 

d. Goddess of the earth be firm for well-being! d t 

UN себе af чйр eren 

You were made by self-power, as an Asuric trick } - a 
May this oblation please the gods! Y ATT «ачат п з 
May you emerge uninjured at this sacrifice. gg dmi ваа 


(TS 4.1.9.1c-2d) after садр чу бач u 


More firewood, cowdung, and coconut fiber are put inside the ukhā pot, 
after which the adhvaryu places it on the fire reciting: 

Mitra! Heat the pot! Don’t let it break! feat «dar эп A | 
(TS 4.1.9.2) ч 


He puts in another chip of firewood, stands ир, and continues with: 


To prevent breaking I place this around you! чаї а чї murem n 

(TS 4.1.9.20) $e 

Helpers put in more firewood sticks. The adhvaryu sits down again and re- 
cites: 


Agni, your powerful body reposes in the plants. 
I propitiate it by means of this offering! 
(BSS 10.13:13.13—14) 


ят d aa б чач 
atiet at d пэт sarl 1 


after which he puts another chip of firewood in the pot. Inside the pot there 
is an appearance of fire. Putting in more chips of firewood, the adhvaryu 
engages upon a long recitation. At each svāhā! the yajamāna recites his 
tyāga formula of renunciation to Agni: 


This is for Agni, not for me! wna тё ч ад 
318 


CONSECRATION OF THE YAJAMANA 


The adhvaryu’s long recitation will result in fire flaming up inside the ukha 


pot: 
g. The ancient longed-for hota, feeding on wood, 
sipping ghee; 
the undeceivable son of strength. 
h. From a region far away 
come to these lower ones! 
Aid those who are where I am! 
i. You of the red stallions! Come here 
from a far distant region! 
Agni of the mud, dear to many, 
subdue the enemies! 
k. Agni, knowing all ways, sit down on the lap of 
this mother! 
Do not burn her with flame or heat! 
Shine within her with a pure radiance! 
1, Agni! Knower of everything! 
Agni! Within the middle of the ukha, on your 
own seat, 
firing with flame and light, 
be auspicious! 
m. Agni! Becoming auspicious to me, 
being auspicious, sit down! 
Having made all the directions auspicious, 
sit here in your own womb! 
(TS 4.1.9.2g-3m) 


a. Agni! Whatever logs we place on you, 
may those be ghee for you! 
Accept it! Youngest one! 

b. What the insect eats, 
what the ant crawls over, 
may all that be ghee for you! 

Accept it! Youngest one! 

c. Night after night carrying with care 
like fodder to a standing horse, Agni, 
don’t let us, your neighbors, 
rejoicing with an abundance of wealth and food, 
be harmed! 

d. For a great increase of wealth we invoke Agni, 
kindled on the navel of the earth, rejoicing in drink,- 
the receiver of great praise, worthy of sacrifice, 
the victor, Agni, mighty in battle. 

e. Agni! The armies that attack, the troops that 

wound, 
those who are thieves, and those who are robbers, 
I place them in your mouth. 
(TS 4.1.10.1a-2e). 


319 


da: aigi: 

Heat SAT ALIA: | 
яне aga: N 
iem ht gadt- 
SASAE a | 
«атин TNA || 
gai: wai 

Aga gaīssīft | 
чё: gea- 

sh ct da нч: 1 

wig cd итте sm 
Rah agal ara | 
З#тятаййчт ап ates at- 
seven, spear aif N 
SEU SIT a- 

Hay eds єї | 
TEAL Чч, 
aaa: Brat wg lu 
Re gar aga- 

sal dia frauen i 
тат: «яп faq: «at: 
wai dttūrarsssās; || 
чей ate af =п- 


су greir «ЕН | 


TAK Ub WET 
saira fade ата 1 
cent «бчт aN- 
5н ату. ап fara N 
arat ат: Ararata 
maala gee darat і 
ind quii asti 
Baa vang атаа v 
at: Gat mat- 
THAT Te | 

X =н A 9 atm 
waved ads garrgrāl u 


PART П THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


a. Spread out your countenance like a broad net! 
Come like a powerful king with your attendants! 
Following your swift net you shoot arrows. 
Pierce the Rāksasas with your burning darts! 

b. Your whirling flames fly swiftly. 

Follow them, glowing with daring! 

Agni! Heat and winged flames are released by your 
tongue. 

Spread your missiles of fire everywhere! 

c. Agni! Send out your spies! Undeceived, 
be the swiftest protector of these people! 

Who from far away and from near-by wishes evil 
upon us, 
may his evil not overcome us! 

d. Agni! Rise up! Extend yourself! 

With your piercing darts burn our enemies! 
Burning one! Consume like dry grass 
whoever has worked evil toward us! 

e. Agni! Rise up! Strike back! 

Agni! Reveal your divine power away from us! 
Loosen the strung bows of those incited by de- 

mons! 
Crush our enemies, be they relatives or not! 
(TS 1.2.14.la-2e) 


f. Blessed one! Chew up completely! 
The burglars with your tusks, 
the robbers with your teeth, 
the thieves with your jaws! 
g. I put into your jaws 
the burglars among men, 
the thieves and robbers in the forest, and 
those who do injury in the thickets 
h. Him who is hostile towards us, 
the person who hates us, 
him who reviles us, and 
him who wishes to harm us, 
grind to powder! 
(TS 4.1.10.2 f-3 h) 


The yajamāna joins the adhvaryu: 


i. Sharpened is my sacred brahman power, 
sharpened my valor, my strength. 
Sharpened is his victorious lordly power, 
whose domestic priest I am. 


320 


sea чтя: afta 9 quest 

arte aama ET 

quite пі qmi- 

esf “fred хатаа: а 

а gem ап еп ia- 

rag етт TIT aidera: | 
«ed gat EGELS 

«Раф б da federe N 

яй «йт fa dar «ай 

aat пай этеп TATA: | 

at al at этге at 

этге ти anf тб чт, 1! 


san fag яәпззЧфчса 
гат sitae, fret | 
ay яг эчи attrara 05 
т Чалай я ouem N 
зей мя яй reren- 
aga reae | 

ora Ваа tafe апач 
ARTIST ч AÈ TAA N 


Beat НЇфтө- 

gm hatasa | 

aan «ата чпа- 
меса TE TABATA і 

у wag ий: 

SESTHEGERHT аЗ | 

A а сачтаҹ- 

хит «гат TATA 1 

dt aneda- 

aa dt ЧЧ та: | 

Regent этен, facit 

99 d нент же h 


CONSECRATION OF THE YAJAMANA 


D In 
k. Iraise up their arms, their splendor, their strength. saat arg з 
With sacred power I destroy the enemies. ara эч AGT | 
I favor my own. {түй Semsa- 


(TS 4.1.10.3i-k) четт TER n 


By this time the ukhā fire burns inside the ukhā pot. The diksa conti- 
nues as in the Agnistoma. The krsņājina skin is spread on the ground, south 
of the sacrificial fire, its head pointing east, and in front of the yajamāna. The 
yajamāna touches the skin, with even attention to the black and the white 
hair, spreading and flattening it to the left and the right, while reciting: 


d. You are the Ornaments of the rc and the sāman. gran fred eA- 
I embrace you two. Protect me until the € ятат tt Ж нї чта- 
completion of the sacrifice! Ase ATCA N 

e, God Varuna! Sharpen the vision, the ability, and єнї fire: тате ач 

the intelligence | E ad: qu ere fateri | 

of him who is offering to you! 
Let us mount that safe ship ash fred gitar wa 
and thereby overcome all difficulties. зета: т я а. 


(TS 1.2.2.1d-2e) 


The yajamāna sits down on the antelope skin, facing east. Nellikat Akkiti- 
ripad helps the adhvaryu to put a rope (Sanskrit: mekhala, Malayalam: ama) 
around him while he recites: 


You are the strength of the Afgirases, soft as wool. sstenfirceqiterat 
Give me strength! Protect me! Do not harm me! sā wes ЧИК ur 
(TS 1.2.2.2f) m at В: i 


In the meantime the wife is sitting at the domestic fire, where the pratipra- 
sthata puts a mekhalā rope in her hand. She puts it around herself and recites, 
prompted by the pratiprasthātā: 


Hoping for favor, children, prosperity, amata у 

devoted to Agni, xm i БЫША 

I gird myself for good action. N а ачат 
(TS 11.10.1)) ЗІ чет 


© dar gpa mn d 
The pratiprasthātā addresses her: 
I gird you with milk. . 
I gird you with ghee. cat ren vim Tu 
I gird you with water, with plants. & cat яваач ATH à 
I gird you with children. © cal чепїй язічтосяа 
Today you are consecrated. ат хе dadī апай N 


You shall win strength for us! 
(TS 3.5.6.la) 


321 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


The adhvaryu ties a long piece of cloth around the yajamāna's head, and 
recites: 


g. You are the refuge of Visnu, the refuge of the frei: aati зт astma 
yajamàna. = ац 


Give me refuge! 
and together with the yajamāna: 


h. Protect me from the radiance of the Naksatras! agam WIS CARIES чї n 
(TS 1.2.2.2 g-h) 


Helpers tie the cloth into a turban (usnisa) that looks as if it has horns on 
four corners. At the same time the pratiprasthātā adjusts the headdress of the 
wife. While the tying of the turban is being completed, the adhvaryu recites: 


With beauty I clothe your head, for beauty, for fame, frat & fart Beak | 


for brahma-splendor! , Pd эй aaa п 
(BSS 6.5:160.22-161.1) 


Next the adhvaryu hands the yajamāna a horn of a black antelope, saying: 


You are the womb of Indra. тебеа СӘ 
(TS 1.2.2.20) 


Тһе yajamāna receives it with the ends of his cloth, saying: 


Do not harm me! ят al fest | 
(TS 1.2.2.2i) 


The yajamāna uses this antelope horn to scratch himself when he needs to. 
The pratiprasthātā hands the wife a pin made of udumbara wood tied to 
an upper cloth (uttariya) for the same purpose. The yajamāna digs up a clod 
of earth from the vedi with his antelope horn, folded in the ends of his gar- 
ment, reciting: 


To you, for ploughing, for good crops! 99 cat чает | 
(TS 1.2.2.3k) в 


and scratches his right sideburn with the horn: 


For you, for the plants with good berries! airera: | 
(TS 1.2.2.3] 2 z 


The adhvaryu gives the yajamāna a staff of udumbara wood, reciting: 
You are a divine tree firmly rooted and easy t : AS 
7 D quem tat чзгєчїй єзї: | 


approach! 
(TS 1.2.2.3m) 


322 


CONSECRATION OF THE YAJAMANA 
to which the yajamāna replies, practically at the same time: 
Protect me until completion of the ritual! UT grāres: | 


While the yajamāna remains seated on his antelope skin, the adhvaryu sits 
down north of the vedi and both recite: 
eel ast AAT 


Svaha! With mind the ritual! "A. 
Svaha! From heaven and earth! ut атайт * 
хагеган=а атта, 


Svaha! From the broad sky! 


| * het 
Svāhā! From wind I grasp the ritual! STET эр атат Xi | 


In the meantime a stool for the ukhà pot is placed on the vedi, between the 
yajamàna and his adhvaryu. Nellikat Akkitiri and Erkkara assist, twisting 
fibres into a rope. The rope is then tied to the stool. The adhvaryu gets ready 
to pick up the ukhà pot with leaves used as potholders (Malayalam: terika). 


He recites: 


Let the earth ukha carry Agni of the mud 

in her own womb like a mother her son! 

Let Prajapati, All-maker (Vi$vakarman) 

together with the All-gods and the seasons 

harness it! 

(TS 4.2.5.2e, with bibhartu for abhar and yunaktu 
for vi muficatu; cf. page 343) 


mima qd gri gae- 
анч ex dāt Ва ат | 
at Боаза: der: 
жэп чжи gars t 


The adhvaryu places the ukhā pot on the stool and recites: 


1. Shining like gold, he became resplendent all 
around, 
shining to glorify his immortal life. 
When fertile heaven gave birth to him, 
Agni became immortal by his powers. 
(TS 4.1.10.47) 


The yajamāna has been holding a small golden breastplate (rukma), about 
the size of a large coin. This is put around his neck whereupon he recites: 


m. The sage-poet displays all forms, 
he has produced prosperity for men and beasts. 
The desirable Savitr has illuminated heaven, 
he shines after the departure of the dawn. 
n. Night and dawn, of one mind 
but of different forms, suckle one child. 
The radiant one shines between sky and earth. 
The gods, who grant wealth, support Agni. 
(TS 4.1.10.4m-n) 


323 


бим ga sd gate Їй: 
пат 89% ag? | 

fa таста, «ат atrīt» 
si sata {аб |! 
aera «ачат fae 
aaa Вгадай? | 

апат ата krāt oath alfa 
Зат oft анаа Рат: и 


ParT II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


The yajamāna is tied to the rope, which is linked to the ukhā stool, and a 


CONSECRATION OF THE YAJAMANA 


He turns right, saying: 


PLATE 46 ape : : | " 
band of antelope skin is put around him while he recites: A азата а sr эп т 5991 
О. c. Agni, returner, return to us with life, with splendor, quet ge raat узат йа dM 
о. You аге а bird with beautiful feathers. gaūiistēr THÉ, with gain, with wishes, with children, with wealth! ait эй arā uet 
Your head is the trivrt, your eye the gayatra, Раа ч Вга а. Agni, Angiras, let your returns number а hundred, | Jig E 
) Baad ча: ней а gum | 
your breath the stoma, your body the vamadevya (chant), гї «et: «үң этш your movements a thousand! Ārā! F 
. . ToS == : : атат Фче quur c 
your wings the brhat and the rathantara, your tail the aub тай єй With their prosperity prospering, bring back to us = AE 
yajūāyajūīva, your limbs the meters, your hoofs дашт qt what is lost! seit «em dfi 
the altars, Ибат Bring back to us wealth! gaat «гат df || 
your name the yajus formulae. kt yes erar e. Return again with strength, Agni, return with great ft dāra 
p. You are a bird with beautiful feathers. Гарат: sar AKT ATA Н food, with līfe. ga gss 1 
Go to the sky! Fly to heaven! gis MESSER Agni, protect us again on all sides! ча: af ETE 
(TS 4.1.10.50-p) Pa Wes ga: TAN f. Agni, return with wealth, overflow with the ARA ae 
А stream нє чет ft agen- 
With the last verse the yajamāna gets up. Then, still linked to the ukha pot, expanding on all sides. Б fees Sr | 
he takes three Visnu steps toward the east, reciting: (TS 4.2.1.1a-3f) Ёге агае n 


He turns left and removes the band of antelope skin. After the rope that 
ties him to the ukhā is also removed, he recites: 


a. You are the step of Visnu. 


: o ту: sAm 
Overcoming hostility, 


alri BE MZ 


mount the gāyatrī meter! сыы зба ат NARA- 
3 Gas ga a 
Step along the earth! zadeg jā. a. g. Varuna, loosen from us the highest, the lowest, gali Ёї temas, skara | 
di h ! Fue: FY ТЕСЕ: | d th ; knot! — = Ч 
us CENE uz faut: жаса Гата ат A in S Ei SE we be without guilt be- чч я ra ciklā 
qrat aay «ата 


You are the step of Visnu. 
Overcoming curses, 
mount the tristubh meter. 


You are the step of Visnu. 


ādu oe эп EL 
rakta fa kaa 
Р: а a RR: 1 


fore Aditi! 


He holds it in his hand and goes to his customary place; 


Step along the atmosphere! a, ty А i 
Excluded is he whom we hate! hp n Ht Eat h. Ihave taken yer you are now within. Be firm and ni ai ats | 
[at the second step] dct & unmoving: HRS Dates: 
You are the step of Vigņu. Raag fü skata Let everyone desire you! In him establish the king- Aaen wal gesa- 
Overcoming the enemy, Ria: db pna , dom! | Rma agafi п 
ү X i feri: 0150 ча gear 1 i e a up erect and great in front of the ei ses ir at skarts, 
ep along the sky! Hen. y : "A LSO S. | 
ded is he wh ! SSJ Org WIE Out of darkness he has come with light. аата, aer sdtfies ssa t 
Excluded is he whom we hate! 2 à : І 
[at the third step] Rsg fa жия Agni with brilliant splendor and beautiful limbs, aiaiga etal «F aT 
fate: а 4 fgn: l from birth has filled every seat. эпе fut aaterat: n- 


Overcoming the foe, 

mount the anustubh meter! 

Step along the directions! 

Excluded is he whom we hate! 
[standing still] 


He sits down. While the ukha pot is put back in its place, he recites TS 
4.2.1.5k-m = 4.1.9.3.k-m (above page 319), followed by: 


n. 


The goose seated in its nest, 


вче: gRragywakeaa- 


the shining one seated in the sky, Frat "ied ача, E 
The yajamāna continues: the hota seated at the vedi, akaau niina- 
| й the guest seated in the house, MAS LU E dir 
b. Agni cried like heaven thundering, БАРН хаайа EIE seated among men, seated with the highest, sew SISTERE T 
licking the earth, consuming the plants. апат 1315: We, | seated in Order, seated in heaven and earth, avi 


born of the waters, born of cows, born of Order, 
born of the mountain, the great Order. 


ge smit fr dfi 
агл Ф taal этед: і 


As soon as he was born, he flamed up and shone. 
He blazes with his light on heaven and on earth. 


324 325 


PLATE 46 


The Yajamāna at his Consecration 


“You are a bird with beautiful feathers! 
Go to the sky! 


Fly to heaven!” 
(TS 4.1.10.5p) 


The yajamāna reciting at his consecration (dīksā), facing east with 
his stick, turban, the krsņājina skin folded over his right arm, the 
rukma breastplate on a string round his neck, and tied with a string 
to the stool on which the ukhà pot has been installed. The new fire 
burns in the ukhā pot. On the left is a large brass lamp, not a Vedic 
object, but characteristic of Kerala culture and prominent, for ex- 
ample, in temples and at Kathaka]i dance performances. 


327 


326 


Oo = 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


The yajamāna closes his fists and controls, i.e., 


retains his speech. 


Inside the Old Hall, the adhvaryu proclaims three times: 


This brāhmaņa has been consecrated, Nīlakaņtha 
Šarmā, ofthe Ka$yapa gotra, son of Vallabha Sarma, 
grandson of Vasudeva Sarma, great-grandson of 
Vallabha Sarma. We announce him to Indra, Indra- 
Agni, the Vasus, Rudras, Adityas, Vi$vedevas, and 
to the brahmanas who drink Soma. 

(BSS 6.5:161.14-162.1) 


aa smi Pearsall 
аач 

ягии: qut 
aglan: Фе 
аат чат! 
абден Иза agrat 
Tr ите Rae 
BTA AAA: TA ll 


Then the adhvaryu leaves through the eastern door and repeats the same pro- 


clamation thrice in a loud voice. 


Returning to the Old Hall, the adhvaryu instructs the yajamāna with 


the following praisa (command): 


You are consecrated; utter words that are proper 
for the consecrated to utter; speak only truth and not 
lies; do not smile; do not scratch yourself; do not 
uncover yourself; if you have to smile, you should 
smile with your mouth covered; if you have to 
scratch yourself, you should scratch yourself with the 
horn of a black antelope; if you have to release your 
speech, you should immediately recite the verse re- 
lating to the deity Visnu. Let not the sun rise or set 
when you are away from the abode of the conse- 
crated. With regard to the names of divinities, call 
them as they are. But regarding the names of not- 
deities, after pronouncing the names as they are, add 
(the word) vicaksana (“discerning”). Utter sentences 
with (the words) canasita (at the beginning) and vi- 
caksana (at the end). Do not separate yourself from 
the skin of the black antelope and the staff. 

(BSS 6.6:162.4-11) 


тазі аата az 
аач AZ ASTI c 

ят weer AT Hoga ASAT 
af Hari efter arā 

af argera желбата єт те 
ufa ата Rai- 

елни чөт; 

m єатғая аат, 
чазз атан ая 

nfà аататат 

аут ATAKA 

aq атха татат 

pim ATA AT 

чет чай Ute 

чябтая@ Raana ата az 
HOUTA ASAI IST !! 


After the praisa is given to the yajamāna in Sanskrit, Erkkara as a senior 
Nambudiri explains it to him in Malayalam in what is called praisārtham, 
“the meaning of the command.” In this part of the ceremony attention 
is given to meaning, and so it is in Malayalam. In the following translation 
by E.R. Sreekrishna Sarma, the Sanskrit quotes are printed in capital letters. 
The Malayalam text is given in the Appendix (pages 698—702). 


Erkkara instructs the yajamāna: 


In obedience to the injunction THEN (HE) DIRECTS HIM, the adhva- 


328 


CONSECRATION OF THE YAJAMANA 


ryu has just now directed you by the command (praisa) beginning 
with YOU ARE CONSECRATED; for you have now caused an unseen 
potency, called consecration, in yourself, which emerges from the 
isti of consecration (dīksaņīyā) and the performance of those acts 
that signify consecration. 

By the portion YOU ARE CONSECRATED, the state of consecration 
that is the cause for attaining the unseen potency is referred to. You 
are now consecrated. By the rites beginning with ablution and end- 
ing with the announcement of consecration, you are now con- 
secrated. 

For there is the direction that THE AGENT AT THE OUTSET IS TO BE 
PURIFIED BY ABLUTION, TOUCHING THE BODY WITH A BUNCH OF 
DARBHA GRASS, SIPPING WATER, AND SPRINKLING OF WATER UTTER- 
ING MANTRAS. 

Ablution, touching the body with a bunch of darbha grass, 
sipping and sprinkling water together with the utterance of mantras, 
at the beginning of any rite, are generally for the purification of the 
agent. There are many other acts (of purification), such as invoca- 
tion of the deity called Faith, announcing one’s intention, and as- 
piring for the result, etc. Here now what is begun is the Atiratra 
combined with Agni. The word agni denotes fire. By extension it also 
refers to the act of ritual and the particular place. 

It is recorded: THE WORD AGNI DENOTES, BY CONVENTION, FIRE; 
BY EXTENSION IT IS USED, AS AGREED BY THE LEARNED, TO INDICATE 
THE RITUAL CEREMONY AS WELL AS THE PARTICULAR LOCATION 
WHERE IT TAKES PLACE. THIS EXTENSION IS INDICATED BY THE RELA- 
TIONSHIP OF THE FIRE WITH THAT PARTICULAR LOCATION. THEREFORE 
THAT PARTICULAR PLACE, IN THE FORM OF AN EAGLE OR IN ANOTHER 
FORM, IS ACCEPTED AS THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE WORD AGNI. 

This piling up (of bricks), which is according to the injunction ONE 
SHOULD ARRANGE THE BRICKS IN THE FORM OF AN EAGLE, is a purifica- 
tion ceremony of Agni. According to the injunction WITH BRICKS THE 
FIRE IS PILED UP, this Agni is to be performed by piling up the bricks. 
As there is the injunction THEREFORE, IT IS TO BE PILED UP IN FIVE 
LAYERS, Agni is to be piled up in five layers. This piling up as des- 
cribed above is a purificatory ceremony of Agni, just like the rite of 
Ādhāna. 

In answer to the question in which manner the purified fire is to be 
used, it is said that the fire that is piled up now is to be combined 
with Atiratra; for, (the rituals) Agnistoma, etc., are laid down with 
the injunction THEN THIS FIRE IS COMBINED WITH AGNISTOMA. There- 
fore it becomes an Atirātra combined with Agnicayana. 

Jyotistoma, etc. That Jyotistoma has seven types of conclusion is 


329 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


well known. Gautama has enumerated them saying that THERE ARE 
SEVEN TYPES OF CONCLUSION OF THE SOMA (YAGA), NAMELY AGNISTO- 
MA, ATYAGNISTOMA, UKTHYA, SODASI, VAJAPEYA, ATIRATRA AND 
APTORYAMA. In these, Atyagnistoma may be included in Agnistoma ; 
Vajapeya in Sodasi, and Aptoryāma in Atirātra. Therefore, it may 
also be said there are only four types of conclusion. 

Among these seven, the first type of conclusion is Agnistoma. 

The regulations for the Agnicit do not take effect immediately 
after the consecration is completed; they take effect only towards 
the end of the ritual. This is said by the revered Jaimini. His words 
are THEY MAY BE ONLY TOWARDS THE END OF THE RITUAL, BECAUSE 
THERE IS NO MENTION OF THEIR PERFORMANCE (EARLIER). 

First, after filling up the ukhā vessel to the accompaniment of 
mantras, a goat without horns is to be sacrificed for the Wind deity. 
This is according to the injunction A HORNLESS (GOAT) IS TO BE 
SACRIFICED FOR THE WIND DEITY CALLED NIYUTVAT. According to 
the injunctions, BECAUSE THE GOAT IS OFFERED TO THE WIND DEITY 
(THE YAJAMANA) DOES NOT DEVIATE FROM THE WIND, AND BECAUSE 
THE CAKE IS OFFERED TO THE DEITY PRAJAPATI (THE YAJAMANA) DOES 
NOT DEVIATE FROM PRAJAPATI, the goat is to be given to the Wind 
deity and the cake related to the goat to Prajāpati. The isti called 
dīksaņīyā (of consecration) is to be performed with three oblations, 
because there is the statement THESE THREE ARE THE OBLATIONS. 

Before piling up agni, (the yajamāna) has to carry the ukhya fire. 
The fire is to be put in a pot, the pot placed in a sling with six or 
twelve strings, and that sling tied to his (i.e. the yajamāna's) neck. In 
this way the ukhya fire is to be carried by him for a whole year. For 
there is the injunction THEREFORE IT IS TO BE CARRIED FOR A WHOLE 
YEAR. There are also injunctions like THEREFORE IT IS TO BE CARRIED 
FOR THREE DAYS, THEREFORE IT IS TO BE CARRIED FOR SIX DAYS, THERE- 
FORE IT IS TO BE CARRIED FOR TWELVE DAYS, restricting the period to 
three, six or twelve days. 

According to the injunction THEN THIS AGNI IS TO BE PERFORMED 
WITH THREE UPASATS, SIX UPASATS, OR TWELVE UPASATS it is to be 
performed on the days of upasats. The present ritual, although there 
is option in the number of days regarding the consecration and 
upasats, was begun with a consecration for three days and having 
six upasats. As this happens to be the second ritual (after Agnisto- 


CONSECRATION OF THE YAJAMANA 


for consecration. This is according to the rule WHEN THE CAKE FOR 
AGNI AND VISNU IS COOKED, THEN ONLY IS HE SAID TO BE CONSE- 
CRATED. Consecration means control of the senses. But it is not the 
direct control (of the senses) that is the object of this injunction. 
Consecration is a transcendental state of elevation that emerges 
from the varied acts that are enjoined and that direct the deities like 
Agni, etc. presiding over organs like speech, etc. towards the habit 
of performing the acts laid down by the šāstra, after diverting them 
from the acts of their habitual disposition. Up to this time the deities 
presiding over the senses have been polluted by their contact with 
(external) objects, and were not therefore well disposed towards the 
acts laid down by the šāstra. But now, through the rites performed, 
they are divested of their impurity and are ready to adopt the acts 
laid down by the injunctions and the means that lead to the perfor- 
mance of such acts. This is what is expressed by the portion YOU ARE 
NOW CONSECRATED. As indicated by the mantra BY CONSECRATION 
SOMA (IS ATTAINED), THE CONSECRATION BELONGS TO SOMA, it is to be 
understood that consecration is a limb of the Soma ritual. But by 
the words YOU ARE CONSECRATED it is said here that you are now 
consecrated for the Soma ritual that has its conclusion in Atirātra. 

After referring to the state of consecration in the above manner, 
by the remaining part of the command, the properties of the con- 
secration are elaborated. 

SPEAK THE SPEECH OF THE CONSECRATED. Speech of the conse- 
crated means words that are purified. THE UNDEVIATING UTTERANCE 
IS INDEED THE SPEECH OF THE CONSECRATED AND THAT IS NOTHING BUT 
TRUTH. Undeviating means that which does not take another form, 
which means, in turn, that which does not change according to place 
and time. So the consecrated has to converse by using such purified 
words. By the sentence SPEAK TRUTH ALONE it is said that whenever 
purified words are used they should be true to their meaning. WHAT 
IS SEEN, WHAT IS HEARD, WHAT IS ACCEPTED, WHAT IS EXPERIENCED 
AND WHAT CONFORMS TO THE OBJECT EXPERIENCE—SPEAKING THAT 
ALONE IS SAID TO BE TRUTH, PROVIDED IT IS ALSO DEVOID OF INJURY 
TO OTHERS. 

Truth is what is defined above; the reverse of truth is lie. Lies 


! Deities preside over the two groups of organs. The organs of action (karmendriya): 
Agni presides over vāc “‘speech;” Indra over pani “hands;’’ Upendra over pada 
“feet;” Yama over pāyu “anus;” and Prajāpati over upastha “generative organs." 
The organs of sensation (jfianendriya): Sūrya presides over caksuh “sight;’’ Dik(s) 
over šrotra "hearing;" Ašvins over ghraga “smell;’? Varuna over rasana “‘taste;” 
and Vayu over sparsa “touch.” (E.R. Sreekrishna Sarma) 


ma), at the midday pressing, after the marutvatiya recitation, the 
brhat chant is permitted. Because there is the recitation of the sun- 
Sastra after the night, this ritual concludes in Atirātra. 

It is very well known that among the many vows to be observed, 
the işti in which Agni and Visnu are the deities is directly responsible 


330 | 331 


| Ке T ee Р eee eee О 


PART П THE 1965 PERFORMANCE 


should not be uttered. If a lie is uttered there is an expiation. For 
there is an injunction to the effect that IF THE CONSECRATED HAP- 
PENS TO UTTER A LIE, HE SHOULD IMMEDIATELY RECITE THE FOUR 
SACRED VERSES RELATED TO THE DEITY VARUNA. 

These four are those beginning with IMAM ME VARUNA, TATTVA YA- 
MI BRAHMANA, TVAM NO AGNE, and SA TVAM NO AGNE. In this way, 
after prohibiting the utterance of lies, in the same context of this 
prohibition, other prohibitions are also mentioned by the remain- 
ing portion (of the command) YOU SHOULD NOT LAUGH, YOU 
SHOULD NOT SCRATCH, YOU SHOULD NOT UNCOVER YOURSELF. The 
word smayana means to laugh. You should not do that because 
there is an injunction THE CONSECRATED SHOULD NOT LAUGH. 
Kandüyana means to scratch. That should not be done, for there 
is the injunction THE CONSECRATED SHOULD NOT SCRATCH. Apāvaraņa 
means avoiding the cover. That is with reference to the head. Be- 
cause there is the injunction that HE SHOULD NOT REMOVE THE 
COVER TILL THE PURCHASE OF SOMA, you should not remove your 
headgear before the purchase of Soma. After this, noting that con- 
trol of laughter, scratching, etc., are not possible for a person who 
has not total control of his senses, it is said by the remaining por- 
tion (of the command), that if they occur they should be only in a 
special manner. IF YOU LAUGH YOU SHOULD LAUGH UNDER COVER. 
If the consecrated has to laugh because he cannot control his 
laughter, he should cover his mouth with his hands, lest others 
should observe his teeth. IF YOU SCRATCH, YOU SHOULD DO IT WITH 
THE HORN OF A BLACK ANTELOPE. In the same way, if one has to do 
scratching because of lack of control, it should be done with the 
horn of a deer. IF HE (THE CONSECRATED) HAS TO RELEASE HIS SPEECH 
HE SHOULD IMMEDIATELY RECITE THE VERSE RELATING TO THE DEITY 
VISNU. In the context of injunctions relating to the control of speech 
like CONSECRATED, CONTROL YOUR SPEECH, YAJAMANA, CONTROL 
YOUR SPEECH, if you have to release your speech, you should recite 
the verse which begins with VISNO TVAM NO ANTAMAH. 

LET NOT THE SUN RISE OR SET WHEN YOU ARE AWAY FROM THE 
ABODE OF THE CONSECRATED. This means: When you are away from 
the abode that is intended for the consecrated, let not the sun rise or 
go down. Here the abode of the consecrated means your own seat. 
Whereas no injunction can be effected with regard to the sun, this 
sentence is to be construed as referring to the person (consecrated). 
Therefore the intended meaning is that you should not be away 
from your seat at the time of sunrise and sunset. 

WITH REGARD TO THE NAMES OF DEITIES, CALL THEM AS THEY ARE. 
Because there is a special rule with regard to uttering names other 
than those of deities, it is said at the outset that in uttering the 


332 


CONSECRATION OF THE YAJAMANA 


names of deities, there is no special rule. Whatever the names of 
deities like Visnu, Narayana, etc. they are to be pronounced only 
as they are. BUT REGARDING THE NAMES OF NONDEITIES, AFTER PRO- 
NOUNCING THEIR NAMES AS THEY ARE, ADD (THE WORD) VICAKSANA 
(“discerning”). Whatever names of the nondeities there are, such as 
Bhavadāsa, Bhavatrata etc., the person who utters them should 
(in addition) utter the word “‘discerning” after them. So it will be 
Bhavadāsavicaksaņa, Bhavatrātavicaksaņa, etc. UTTER THE SEN- 
TENCES WITH (THE WORDS) CANASITA AND VICAKSANA. When the 
occasion comes to speak sentences in ordinary parlance, first utter 
the word canasita and say whatever is desired, then utter the word 
vicaksana at the end. Do NOT SEPARATE YOURSELF FROM THE SKIN 
OF THE BLACK ANTELOPE. Do not be separated trom the full-body 
deer skin. The intended meaning is: the consecrated should not 
take away the skin of the black antelope from his body till the end 
of the consecrational bath. ALSO FROM THE STAFF. Be not separated 
from the staff either. Because there is the (command) GIVE AWAY 
THE STAFF TO MAITRAVARUNA, you should not be without the staff 
till you give it away to maitravaruna. By the word also, all those 
controls and constraints such as HE WHO IS CONSECRATED FOR THE 
SOMAYAGA SHOULD NOT GIVE, MAKE OBLATIONS, COOK, are included. 
Moreover, HE SHOULD HAVE DELEGATED ALL THOSE TASKS BEFORE- 
HAND. All the controls and constraints that are enumerated should 
be observed. This means that there should be a resolution for the 
controls and vows; only from resolution can they emerge. 

Because there is the rule VERILY, DESIRE HAS ITS ROOT IN RE- 
SOLUTION, RITUALS EMERGE FROM RESOLUTION. IN THE SAME WAY ALL 
OTHER CONTROLS. ETC., EMERGE FROM RESOLUTION. When you 
observe the aforesaid controls and vows, you must be invariably 
attentive to them. This is what the adhvaryu expressed by the 
command beginning with YOU ARE CONSECRATED. 


After the praisartha is over, fuel has to be added to the sacred fires. The 
adhvaryu, standing north of the offering fire, recites the sampraisa: 


Kindle the fires! Consecrated one control your mitra. Fea 
speech! Wife control your speech! 


ба ата weg qf ari gg |. 
(BSS 6.6:162.12-14) 


After a few more rites, the ceremonies of the first ritual day are completed 
at about 9 a.m. on April 13, 1975. 


333 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


Second Day: April 13, 1975 


EPISODE 5 
Adoration of the Ukhā Fire with the Vātsapra Hymn and Rites for Gain 
(Vātsapra-upasthāna, Sani) 


THE FIRST IMPORTANT rite of the second ritual day is the adoration of 
the ukhā pot, with the fire inside, by the yajamāna. This adoration consists 
in the vatsapra hymn, a Taittirīya arrangement, with few changes, of the 
first of the three vātsapra hymns of the Rgveda (10.45). These are called, 
after their composer, Vātsapri or Vatsapri. 


VATSAPRA HYMN AND RITES FOR GAIN 


and with sons yet to be born. 


. Agni! Those who daily sacrificed to you 


h. Po oun radiant one! God Agni! He who — ag re PARERA- 
made for you a cake rich with ghee, Eu E = 3 iE | ^ 
lead him forth to happiness, UMEN ee Bae 
to majesty shared by the gods, youngest one! f gua zane afre n 

. Agni! Allot to him a verse among the praises! . Ss 
Allot a verse in every recited hymn! ip МЫ draudu 
Let him (the sacrificer) be dear to the Sun and SESTA этчи stem | 

dear to Agni. faa: qi Bet эти dary: 
May he flourish with his son already born siet Prager: ou 


| 1 
етй ST ST чта 


Facing the ukhà fire, his hands folded, the yajamana recites: 


. From the sky Agni arose first, 

from us second as Jatavedas omniscient, 

third in the waters with lordly thought. 

The thoughtful man wakes to kindle this in- 
exhaustible being. 

. Agni! We know your three threefold forms. 

We know your seat distributed in various places. 

We know your highest name, kept secret. 

We know the source from which you come. 

. Agni, in the ocean, in the waters, 

with lordly thought and sight he kindled you 

in the udder of the sky. 

You who stand in the third region, in the womb 
of Order, 

the steers set you in motion. 

. Agni roared, thundering like heaven, 

licking the earth, consuming the plants. 

As soon as he was born, he flamed up and shone. 

He blazes. with his light on heaven and earth. 

. Priest, purifier, messenger, wise man, 

the immortal Agni has been established among 
mortals. 

He raises up and bears his reddish smoke. 

With clear flame he tries to reach heaven. 

. Banner of everything, embryo of the world, 

Agni, when born, filled heaven and earth. 

He split apart even the firm mountain, 

escaping when the five tribes sacrificed to him. 

. Noble among masters, bearer of wealth, promoter 

of thoughts, 

protector of Soma, son of radiant strength, king 
in the waters, 

kindled he shines before the dawns. 


334 


Ran? sent stir aR- 
vua Ray VE апаат: 1 
qiiae gamn arrg- 
feala чн sr ari: u 
fan & eit Prat 9910 
Вап ч ga Pras gaar | 
fran ят wei gar u- 
Rm «дса ad eset | 
ayy cal quet ea- 
Sut $8 Ray du =ч 1 
ЧЧ cat «эб afterared- 
ga snl frr эйе. | 
эзең Kaira е: 
атат єч: GATT | 
eat этчї бї dst wer- 
al Фа AT rege: [| 
fire iaat эгїї: gitar 
mAsa Ёт ater | 
тшк э ekaa u 
Roter gases ad 

мт Ф этаттит#ата: | 
aig чанба, way 
wat Agra qui И 
эйт эгет сайт 
riteni sia: «чт: | 
wal: 99: Ga org TT 
fr атая зча ата: n 


obtained all desirable wealth. | {аяп аҹ «fiv Әта | 
With you, longing for wealth, full of desire, eqal ae Airesa 
they uncovered the cow pen. AE ё 3 b 
1. Shining like a golden ornament, he became widely AAA Frag n 
resplendent, zm pu seat stata 
shining to glorify his immortal life. quium: fra wart: | 
Agni became immortal by his powers этїї] eraagatfar- 
when fertile Heaven gave birth to him. dā ĀRSTA, gat: n 
(TS 4.2.2) z PS 


This recitation is followed by a ceremony called sani “Gain.” The 
yajamana asks three of the helpers to beg for wealth for the performance. 
This is meant to be used for daksinà and other expenses incurred in con- 
nection with the ritual. The yajamàna addresses these three men: 


All the gods have surrounded me, faat Жат эгЁт атѕа999, 


Pūsan with gain, Soma with solicitude, чат eur AAT ача 
the divine Savitr, granter of every good. ta: Өег aatfaarat | 
(TS 1.2.3.2e) |." 7 = 


The helpers go out with a lighted sling lamp (a torch kept burning by swing- 
ing it) and return with a piece of gold called šatamāna, “weighing a hun- 
dred.” When they arrive, the yajamāna addresses them: 


Soma, give so much, bring even more. теча, Ass At AT 
Let him who grants not be omitted from your WI qum, тай 
granting. fa dfi «sapiat 1 


Don't separate me from life! 
(TS 1.2.3.2f-g) 


When they hand him the piece of gold, the yajamāna says: 
You are gold, «ratā ча aita ara n 


be for my pleasure! 
(TS 1.2.3.2h) 


335 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


Second Day: April 13, 1975 
EPISODE 6 


Ritual Preparation of the Pravargya Implements 
(Pravargyasambharaņam) 


BETWEEN THE CONSECRATION of the yajamāna on the first day and the 
Soma extraction on the tenth day are six Upasad ("preceding") days on the 
fourth through the ninth ritual day. On each of these days, there is a morn- 
ing and evening performance of the Upasad ceremony (see below, p. 368). 
These are optionally preceded by a morning and evening Pravargya. During 
the 1975 performance, the twelve Pravargya ceremonies were included. The 
Pravargya implements are ritually prepared on the second day. 

The ritual preparation of the Pravargya implements (pravargya-sambha- 
ranam) on the second day is in many respects similar to the ritual pre- 
paration of the ukhā pot (ukhāsambharaņam) on the first day. The im- 
plements, which have already been physically made by the potter, are 
ritually prepared by the adhvaryu, assisted by the pratiprasthata. 

The Pravargya implements are the mahāvīra (“great hero”) pot, with 
two spares; two milking ladles (pinvana), made of clay; two potsherds for 
the preparation of rauhina cakes (connected with the lunar sign Rohini), 
and a butter dish. In the area east of the Old Hall, the adhvaryu starts the 
ceremony by preparing clay. He uses mantras and the abhri, a wooden hoe, 
sharpened on both ends. The implements made by the potter are already 
in front of him. The adhvaryu hands clay to the pratiprasthátà, who puts it 
on them. The three great-hero pots are placed on a tortoise seat (kūrmā- 
sana). 

In the recitations that accompany these rites, the demon Makha figures 
prominently. The mahāvīra pot is regarded as the head of Makha, just as the 
Pravargya itself is called the head of the sacrifice (see pages 53, 63). 


Fourth Day: April 16, 1975 


EPISODE 7 
Construction of the New Domestic Altar 
(Garhapatyaciti) 


THE MENSES OF the wife of the yajamāna began on April 13. The rites of 
the third and fourth ritual day, planned for April 14-15, could not be ex- 
ecuted because of the ensuing pollution. Instead, expiatory rites (prāya- 
$citta) were performed on April 14 and 15. Some of the ceremonies of the 
third and fourth ritual day were combined and performed on April 16. Some 
of the ceremonies of the fourth day were gone through first. The first of 
these is the construction of the new domestic altar. 

In the place of the old offering altar a new domestic altar is constructed 


336 


CONSTRUCTION OF THE NEW DOMESTIC ALTAR 


2nd and 4th layers 


Figure 23—The Bricks of the New Domestic Altar 
337 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


from 105 bricks, equally distributed in five layers of three by seven rectangu- 
lar bricks. The long side of each brick is one-third, and the short side one- 
seventh of the size of the yajamāna measured to the top of his head (see page 
196). The bricks, which have already been prepared, are piled up in heaps 
outside the enclosure. They will be laid in one pattern on the first, third, 
and fifth layers, and in another on the second and fourth layers. The two 
patterns differ in that one results from the other by turning it 90°. In this 
way, the interstices between bricks are never above or under interstices be- 
tween bricks on the next layer. For each layer, the bricks are put down in 
any order, but consecrated in the order marked 1-21 in Figure 23. 

Some general principles underlie the order in which the bricks are 
consecrated.! Let us distinguish two kinds of bricks: Group A, in which the 
bricks are consecrated individually with specific mantras (nos. 1-8); and 
Group B, bricks that are all consecrated with the same mantra, or space 
fillers (nos. 9-21). In all layers the following rules are observed: in Group 
A, if a series of contiguous bricks is consecrated, the consecration moves in 
the directions of the east and north only; if the bricks are not contiguous, 
the direction may also be west or south. In Group B, the same rules apply, 
` with one exception: in one case the bricks, though contiguous, are con- 
secrated in the direction of the west (nos. 9-10 in the first, third, and fifth, 
layers; nos. 9-12 in the second and fourth layers). Contiguous bricks are 
never consecrated in the southern direction. 

As elsewhere in the ritual, therefore, there is a definite preference for 
the eastern direction, and avoidance of the south. In decreasing order of 
preference, the orientations are: 


east (contiguous only, and at the beginning); 
north (contiguous only); 

west (contiguous in one case only, in Group B); 
south (never contiguous). 


Before the construction can begin, around 5:30 a.m. on April 16, 1975, 
the sacrificial fire is removed by the adhvaryu from the old offering altar 
and kept to its south in a pot. The old offering altar itself is then re- 
moved and the ground leveled. Its center (above, page 253) is retained as 
center for the new domestic altar. The adhvaryu, touching his heart with his 
right hand, recites: 


а. In me I take Agni first for the increase of wealth, aR «get эй maata 
for good offspring and heroism. gaat 919 1 
1 These are not entirely in accordance with Baudhāyana Srauta Sūtra 10.20:19.4- 
10.21:19.8; see Volume II, page 521. 
338 


CONSTRUCTION OF THE NEW DOMESTIC ALTAR 


In me I place offspring, in me splendor. 
Let our bodies be uninjured, let us be real 
heroes! 
b. Fathers! The immortal Agni 
who has entered the hearts of us mortals, 
may we contain him within ourselves; 
may he not abandon us and depart! 
(TS 5.7.9.la-b) 


He continues with folded hands: 


Agni! Knower of everything! 
With your kindling sticks, your forms, your tongues, 
your flames, your cracklings, your drops, 
knowingly pile up yourself! 

(TS 5.7.8.1a) 


am sat afr aal gara- 
a ORAS 
fe: зата чат GARE 11 


aval эй: Чай ga- 
хаст ае enfe 1 
warned uuu wd 

ят Gt eremi Wu а, n 


grea ати würd ufu ara 
ат frat starā dp wf 1 
U U эги WEN ч gaa 
«атата fagfē пятая N 


A white horse and а black horse have been tied to poles outside the eastern 
gate of the Old Hall. The adhvaryu goes out, touches the white horse, re- 


turns, touches the soil and recites: 


Let Prajapati seat you. 
With that god, in the Angiras manner, 
sit firm! 
(TS 5.5.2.4) 


sarafeecat «тач 
«ul Жапан, gat «= || 


The yajamāna touches the adhvaryu's hand, and the latter puts pebbles 
(sarkara) along and inside the outline of the new domestic altar, which has 
already been marked on the soil. Then he puts ashes from inside the ukhà pot, 
some soil from inside the vedi (vedipurisam), dry mud (asa) and river sand 
on the soil inside the square, reciting: 


You are the ash of Agni. You are the dust of Agni. stream: gite 
You are harmony fulfilling desire. darf ата 


Let my desire for you be fulfilled! 


May your dear bodies be united, 
may your dear hearts be united, 


ALU aA HH | 


aad: Breq 
a far gin a: | 


may your dear breath be united, 
my dear body be united. 


Let heaven and earth agree! ve 
Let waters and plants agree! ача! =й 
Let the fires agree separately, but let them be of sarama ate: 
common ordinance. PAFTA: TAA VERI GATT: | 
Let the fires that are of like mind Яса: VASAT Marge 
between heaven and earth, 


339 


PART П THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 
Ala kr 
tolerating the winter months, аттатат, erf adatām 


submit to you, as the gods submit to Indra. зена war af & ag n 
(TS 4.4.11.lg, omitting the first line = TB 1.2.1.18a) 


After his hand has been touched by the yajamāna, the adhvaryu consecrates 
the pebbles that were placed in the foundation: 


You are piled up, piled up all around, Pra: a aff 


remain piled up high. KTS " 

: : M жага; age 
With that god, in the fashion of the Angirases, n TU 
sit firm! aat зачат чат 


(TS 4274) Заг ata ni 


Then he sprinkles water and makes the soil firm by pounding: 


П 1 ` 
Soma! Swell up! Gain strength on all sides. эп eaea 999 T 


Be strong in the gathering of booty. 
(TS 4.2.7.4m) 


Вота: dir ana 1 
мат апел 99 | 


CONSTRUCTION OF THE New DOMESTIC ALTAR 


united with those of the floods, 
enjoy the oblations offered, 
the rich healthy food! 
i. Agni! Grant to the entreating sacrificer as food 
the great and continuous gift of a cow. 
Agni! Let us have a son and productive lineage! 
Let this be your favor to us! 
k. This is your proper womb, 
born from which you shone. 
Agni! Knowing, ascend it! 
Make our wealth increase! 
l. You are piled up. 
With that god, in the fashion of the Angirases, 
sit firm! 
m. You are piled up all around. 
With that god, in the fashion of the Angirases, 
sit firm! 
(TS 4.2.4.2e-4m) 


mam: Ч: | 
darat LETITIA 
яаа gN нё: oa 
зіна gez t: 
IATA JAANA ATT | 
zara: ача fna- 
chat a quitter u 
эй 4 safe eai 

aai яте! TATU | 

& seu эт ET- 

at at ачап ға, n 
Britu | 
«ut Запас тө ат diz 1 
REUS 

«qui šadaisfķras gat als 


Each of the thirteen remaining bricks, nos. 9-21, is consecrated with the 


Helpers put down the bricks of the first layer inside the square and in 
the prescribed pattern, but without following a particular order. The bricks 
will be consecrated by the adhvaryu, together with the yajamāna, with se- | 
veral mantras, and in the prescribed order. The mantras—one, two, or 
three—are generally recited by the yajamāna and the adhvaryu jointly, while 
both touch the brick that is being consecrated. After each mantra a helper, 
often the pratiprasthātā, marks the brick with a dot of white paste from a 
small dish. When a second mantra is recited, a second dot is added, etc. In 
this way they keep track of the progress of the rites, and no brick will be left 
without consecration or consecrated more than once. 

Yajamāna and adhvaryu consecrate bricks nos. 1-8 by reciting the fol- 
lowing eight mantras, one for each brick: 


e. This is the Agni under whose direction 
Indra eagerly took the pressed Soma in his belly. 


way, ay RARA caa: 
чі ga wat атата: | 


Space-Filler (fokamprņa) mantra: 


Fill the space! Fill the hole! 
Then sit down in a friendly manner. 
Indra, Agni, and Brhaspati 
have placed you in this womb. 
(TS 4.2.4.4n) 


ela ge fz gm- 

dl еа far ax | 
Fa eat gaeuft- 
ха, dtatadtaga | 


Next all the twenty-one bricks are consecrated, in the prescribed order in 
which they were first consecrated, with a second mantra, called With That 


God (tayādevata): 


With that god, in the fashion of the Angirases, 
sit firm! 
(TS 4.2.4.41 without cid asi, “you are рей”) 


aat tadenserar gat = u 


Knower of everything! For winning booty a 


ЯМА and a ай” 
thousandfold 


i Finally all the twenty-one bricks are again consecrated, in the order in which 
ч чатчгсеца «пада: н 


they were first consecrated, with a third mantra, called Pouring Milk 


you are praised like a swift stallion. 
f. Agni! You go towards the sea of heaven. 
You speak to the gods of the hearth altars. 
The waters above in the sphere of the sun 
and those below attend you. 
g. Agni! Worthy of worship! Your radiance in heaven, ` 
in earth, plants, or waters, 
by which you spread over the wide sky, 
your dazzling splendor moves with lordly sight. 
h. Let the Agnis of the mud, 


at Ray ийат fama- 
zor arx afaa aRar | 
ят: RATA gia 
marrargafātea a: | 
ay аа, d ff ad: faai 
ачса at эгэ | 
tarakan — 

Aa: а запар ччы: di 
чаі энш 


340 


(sūdadohasa): 


The spotted cattle, pouring out milk, 
mix his Soma. 
At the birth of the gods, the tribes are 
in the three bright vaults of the sky. 

| (TS 4.2.4.40) 


341 


at deg tau: 


чира уза: | 


ama Жатат faa- 
Ra dam Ra: a 


The two mantras, With That God (tayādevata) and Pouring Milk (sūda- 


PLATE 47 


PART П THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


dohasa), are recited for all the bricks of the new domestic altar and again 
for all the bricks of the new offering altar, which will be constructed 
later (for their significance, see above, pages 158-159). The Space-Filler 
(lokamprna) mantras are used for all bricks that have not already a parti- 
cular mantra assigned to them. 

The bricks of the first layer of the new domestic altar have now been 
consecrated. The adhvaryu leaves the hall, touches the black horse, returns 
and spreads loose soil over the layer. While the yajamāna touches the layer, 
he and the adhvaryu recite: 


Z frfa get aft: ЧЇйөї 
get Pear erate БЇ | 
Spec абат et aà: 

a at Вага Ra: чїч ачса и 


Agni, sought in the sky, sought on earth. 
Sought, he entered all the plants. 
Agni Common-to-all-men is intensely sought. 
May he protect us from harm day and night. 
(TS 1.5.11.1d = RV 1.98.2) 


This is followed by tayādevata and sūdadohasa, and completes the con- 
secration of the first layer. 

Then the bricks of the second layer are put down. They are consecrated 
in the same manner: nos. 1-8 with TS 4.2.4.2e-4m, nos. 9-21 with lokam- 
prna, and each brick with tayadevata and südadohasa. After this, loose soil 
is spread and the second layer is consecrated with TS 1.5.11.1d, tayadevata, 
and südadohasa. 

The third, fourth, and fifth layers are similarly constructed and conse- 
crated. The entire construction of the new domestic altar, which started at 
6 a.m., has lasted for about one hour. 

After the fifth layer has been completed, and loose soil has been spread 
over it, the adhvaryu places the ukhà pot with its stool on the northeastern 
corner of the new altar. At the same time, the pratiprasthata places the pot 
in which the old sacrificial fire was kept on its southeastern corner. Both 
adhvaryu and pratiprasthātā, standing to the east of the altar and facing 
west with the pot in front of them, recite: 


a. Be united and harmonious with affection, aitas ct deperit 
radiance, and good disposition! Ріс garent 1 
You who clothe yourselves in food and strength, gaga ачата 
I have united your minds, commandments, and  ; at даје дй aat 

hearts. Ļu TARDES, 

b. Agni of the mud! Be our overseer! a au Ml oe 
Grant to the Yajamāna food and strength! ad уйт маг ed =: | 

c. Agni! You are of the mud, rich and prosperous. gum adaa af и 
Making all the directions friendly, gigas wars, granātu 
you sat down here in your own womb. a асар Вет: аай: 

а. Knowers of everything! Be of one mind towards us, ai affrasdz: А 

ne 


of one habit, without fault! is V I 
Do not harm the sacrifice or the lord of the sacri- Wad я: ННІ НІЧ НЯ! | 


fice! ATZĪS m азтчії паї 


342 


CONSTRUCTION OF THE NEW DOMESTIC ALTAR 


Be friendly to us today! Втат waaay ENT 


(TS 4.2.5.1a-d) 


Adhvaryu and pratiprasthātā turn their respective pots over, empty 
their fires onto the altar, and combine them by mixing them thoroughly. 
The adhvaryu lifts the ukhā pot together with its stool and addresses it: 


Let the earth ukha carry Agni of the mud ia dme i 

in her own womb like a mother her son. ama T TM WU 

Let Prajāpati, All-maker (vi$vakarman), harness it „faktā dtāt farre 1 

in agreement with the All-gods and the seasons! at йж: dfāgra: 

(TS 4.2.5.2e with bibhartu for abhār, and yunaktu for хаба FAT |) 
vi muficatu; cf. above page 323) 


He lifts the ukhā pot for a second time, without its stool, and recites: 


The earth ukhā has carried Agni of the mud 

in her own womb like a mother her son. 

Prajāpati, all-maker, has released it 

in agreement with the All-gods and the seasons! 
(TS 4.2.5.2e). 


The ukhā pot and its two spares are filled with sand. Some curd is added 
while the adhvaryu says: 


~ A 


I place yourself in your heat. arama a Tay | 
(1 cf. BSS 10.22:20.4) 


The adhvaryu, assisted by the pratiprasthātā, carries the three ukha pots to 
the northern wall of the hall and leaves them there. 
The adhvaryu takes the sling of the ukhā pot, reciting: 


Let the bright light born AeA UTC TAA: 

beyond the expanse of the sky, ah тїтє | 

convey us beyond our enemies! dowd: чае fied: || 
(TS 4.2.5.2f, omitting the last three words) pou 


He leaves the southern door of the hall with the sling, the ukhà stool, the cord 
with which the golden breastplate was tied round the yajamana's neck, a 
pitcher full of water, and three black square bricks of unit size (paticami: 
see Figure 9). These bricks are called “disastrous” (nairrti) because they 
are dedicated to Nirrti, Goddess of Disaster. The adhvaryu is not accom- 
panied by the yajamāna. 

Outside the southern gate, the adhvaryu puts the sling on the ground, 
pointing from northeast to southwest, reciting: 


Agni Common-to-all-men, svaha! FH Saray жапа N 
(TS 4.2.5.2f, last three words). 


343 


PLATE 47 
The New Domestic Altar 


The new domestic altar is constructed from bricks in the place of 
the old offering altar, which was made from clay. The new domestic 
altar consists of five layers, each consisting of 3 x 7 = 21 rectan- 
gular bricks. The first, third and fifth layers have the same pattern. 
The pattern of the second and fourth is created by turning it 
90 degrees. In this way, the interstices between bricks are never 
immediately below or above those in the next layer. The long side 
of each rectangular brick is a third, and the short side a seventh 
of the size of the yajamāna, measured to the top of his head. 


344 


345 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 
He places the three Disaster Bricks upon the sling and recites: 


ан: ч Ч Беке Gpqeq- 
saai її dat ягана | 
aaa са prat dfrarāt- 
ча amare доча, і 


g. Homage to you, Nirrti, of every appearance. 
Loosen this bond made of iron! 
Together with Yama and Yami, 
make it ascend to the highest vault. 
h. The rope that is not to be undone, Ya ч 
which Goddess Nirrti tied around your neck, ae тате 
I loosen that from you as from the midpoint of ara атаан, | 
life. «ч н afe A 
Freed and alive, eat the food! aeaa sita: faga wee: u 
i. In your cruel mouth I make the offering gaitā AM: БЕ THIS 
for loosening these bonds. NS үе лн 
Реор1е Кп *earth"— MN d 
p ow you as “ear MI | ers 
I know you from all sides as Nirrti. ARR ear эгат agitate 
| Rrd arsi ч Be Rad: tt 


He puts the sling and the ukhà stool south of the bricks, stands up and re- 
cites: 

agarana 
Dat aekrenedit 1 
зална 87 WI d щеп 

aab xf Ра grtatg u 


k. Seek those who do not perform the Soma rites! 
Follow the path of thieves and robbers! 
Seek someone other than us! 
That is your real path, Goddess Nirrti! 
Homage to you. 


L Saluting Goddess Nirrti like a father his son, tad frd aequ 
I weary her with words. faa qa чай aati: 
She who knows of everyone born fra at апае AE 
is the wise one who perceives each and every head. Rares fare: яй att fa че 


(TS 4.2.5.2g-4l) 


The adhvaryu leaves the Disaster Bricks behind and returns to the hall. 
Inside, hands folded and together with yajamāna, brahman, and pratipra- 
sthātā, he adores the new domestic fire: 

Frust атат ast 

frat ers fir UB alr: à 
ša ša ufrar aera 

FĒt a Че Mat defun, n 


Abode and collector of riches, 

she regards every form with her powers. 

Like god Savitr of true laws, 

like Indra, she stands at the confluence of paths. 
(TS 4.2.5.4m) 


These rites should be over—and are over—before dawn. 


346 


INTRODUCTORY OFFERING AND PURCHASE OF SOMA 


Fourth Day: April 16, 1977 
EPISODE 8 


Introductory Offering; Purchase of Soma; Guest Offering for Soma 
(Prayaniyesti; Somakraya; Atithyesti) 


THESE CEREMONIES ARE the same as in the Agnistoma. The Introductory PLATE 48-52 
Offering (prayaniyesti) is an offering of cooked rice to Aditi, Goddess In- 
finity. The offering takes place in the fire on the new domestic altar, since 
this includes the fire of the old offering altar. The offering to Aditi is made 
in the center of the fire. There are four more principal offerings: to Pathya 
Svasti, Path of Welfare," in the eastern part of the fire; to Agni, Soma, and 
Savitr in the southern, western, and northern parts, respectively. There are 
fifteen sāmidhenī verses and no ājyabhāga offerings. The prastotā sings the 
chant pravad bhargavam (GG 3.9.13 on JS 1.3.9.4). 

Yajamāna and adhvaryu leave the Old Hall by its eastern door for the 
purchase of Soma (somakraya). А Soma-cow (somakrayati, “with which 
Soma is purchased”) awaits them. It is caused to make seven steps toward 
the north, beginning on the east-west line (prsthyā). At its seventh step, a 
piece of gold is placed on the ground and an oblation is made on it. This piece 
is taken by the advaryu and some soil from that spot is handed to the yaja- 
māna, who hands it to his wife. The party moves further east, to where 
the uparava resounding holes will be made (at the southern havirdhāna). 
There Soma stalks are placed on a bullock skin and guarded by a helper. 

The adhvaryu stands to the west of the Soma bundle, and the Soma 
merchant to its east, facing each other. The adhvaryu asks the merchant: 


Soma merchant is your Soma pure? aaliahegger WIND | 


(BSS 6.14:170.15) 


The merchant answers: 
It is pure. (ibid.) ge: 1 


After the yajamāna has worshipped the Soma, the adhvaryu measures it, PLATE 51 
with different fingers, with and without mantras, touching the stalks with 

the piece of gold. A helper assists. The Soma is then folded in a cloth and the 
merchant places it on his head. The following dialogue takes place: 


Adhvaryu: Soma merchant, is your Soma for sale? абба ит з | 
Merchant: It is for sale. — 
Adhvaryu: Is it from mount Müjavat? : | 
Merchant: It is from mount Mūjavat. ОЦЕ 
жача R | 


Adhvaryu: I will buy it from you for this cow. 
Merchant: The Soma is yours. Tell me what you offer mat & жүл | 
for it. Эла: du 1 че saraga N 
(BSS 6.14:172.1-4) 


347 


PLATE 48 
Before the Introductory Offering 


“The sage has extended the ritual path, | 
on the back of the firmament, | 
beyond the light of the sky. 

As you convey the offering, 
you accomplish the message. 
Intelligent in this world, i | 
with more reward, in the other! 
Svaha!” | 
(TS 3.5.5.3f) 
Before the Introductory Offering (prayaniyesti) the adhvaryu makes 


a libation from the sruva ‘ladle, while Cherumukku Vaidikan fans 
the fire. 


348 | 349 


PLATE 49 
The Kindling Verses 


“Мау your offerings, oblations, directed to heaven, 
come forth with the butter ladle. 

Agni goes to the gods, seeking their favor. 

Having been called, Agni, 

sit down for the feast. 

As hota sit on the sacrificial grass 


p? 


(RV 3.27.1; 6.16.10) 


Before the Introductory Offering (prāyaņīyesti), the hotā recites 
fifteen kindling verses (sāmidhenī) from the Rgveda. During most 
of these verses, the adhvaryu throws a stick of firewood (samidh) on 
the fire at each verse. When the fire has been fully kindled, the ob- 
lations can begin. 


350 


351 


A 


| E \ 


|! 
| 


PLATE 50 
The Introductory Offering 


“We invoke to our aid 

great mother of the devout, 

spouse of sacred order, 

powerful, unaging, wide Aditi, 

who gives good protection and guidance— 
—Vausat!”’ 


(TS 1.5.11.5s) 


At the Introductory Offering (prayaniyesti), the principal offerings 
are for Pathyā Svasti, Agni, Soma, Savitr, and Aditi, Goddess Infi- 
nity. During the offering for Aditi, the hota recites the above offer- 
ing verse (yājyā) and is accompanied by the prastotā who will sing 
the chant pravad bhargavam, which contains the word pra. Nellikat 
Akkitiripad stands on the right, in a pensive mood, probably wait- 
ing for the prastotā to begin. The brāhmaņācchamsin sits in the 
back against the north wall of the Old Hall. On the left the large 
brass lamp that was visible on Plate 46. 


352 


P 


p 
CP An 


Sai пй. 


353 


ани + 


A . dt T 
| j ; 4 * 
AT. 


4i 


PLATE 51 
After the Introductory Offering 
When the Introductory Offering has been completed, the yaja- 


тапа folds his antelope skin and is ready to leave with his turban, 
staff, and other attributes. 


354 


355 


PLATE 52 
Measuring Soma (Somonmānam) 


“I sing for that god Savitar, within the two bowls, 
the sage of true impulse, 

bestower of treasures, wise friend. 

He at whose impulse the brilliant light shone, 

the sage with golden hand, 


has measured heaven with his form”. 
(TS 1.2.6.1b) 


Assisted by Vasudevan Akkitiripad, his eldest brother, who sits at 
his left, the adhvaryu measures Soma stalks with his fingers. 


356 


357 


PLATE 53 


PLATE 54 


PLATE 55 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


The adhvaryu offers gold, a goat, and a cloth, but the merchant is not 
satisfied. Finally, the Soma is taken from him and placed on the right thigh of 
the уајатапа. The adhvaryu turns to the merchant: 


Gloom over the Soma merchant! 
(BSS 6.14:172.19) 


The yajamāna stands up with Soma on his head and all go to the Soma cart, 
south of the enclosure. The Soma bundle is placed on the cart, and the yaja- 
тапа moves between the poles, reciting three times: 


Subrahmanyom! : gardu, | 


The party moves in the direction of the Old Hall, together with the hota, 
reciting mantras. The Soma cart is pulled by two oxen and driven by the 
subrahmanya priest. This priest also recites three times: Subrahmanyom! 
The adhvaryu, the yajamāna, and the brahman enter the Old Hall and start 
the Guest Offering (atithyesti) for King Soma. The other priests enter. In the 
middle of this isti they leave the hall and go to the Soma cart. Soma is 
taken off the cart, carried inside, and installed on a wooden stool or “throne” 
(āsandī) immediately south of the offering altar (i.e., the future domestic 
altar). The guest offering (Atithyesti) for King Soma continues. A cake on nine 
potsherds is offered to Visnu. New fire is made and mixed with the fire already 
there. There are seventeen samidheni stanzas, five fore-offerings (prayāja) 
and no after-offerings (anuyāja). The prastotā sings aušanam (JGG 1.1.9 
on JS 1.1.1.5). 

The Guest Offering is followed by several smaller rites. The first of these 
is tānūnaptra, called after Tanū Napat, Agni Self-Generating. The yajamāna 
and his priests, excepting the Sāmavedins, pledge not to harm each other. 
This is effected by taking clarified butter from the dhruva ladle and putting 
it an a plate, which is then touched by the priests. 

The next two rites are Apyayana, Swelling, and Nihnava, Hiding. These 
two rites are performed after each of the Upasad ceremonies of the fourth 
through ninth ritual days. In these rites all the priests, excepting again the 
Samavedins, take part in the following order: adhvaryu, brahman, hota, 
sadasya, pratiprasthata, brāhmaņācchamsin, maitravaruna, nesta, āgnīdhra, 
acchāvāka, unnetā, potā, grāvastut, and finally the yajamāna. 

At the Swelling Rite, the yajamāna and his priests wash their hands, 
stand west of the Soma throne facing east, and touch the Soma stalks in- 
side the Soma bundle with the following two mantras: 


IKI Wa атат 
Grade 

em grafie: aa- 

m aega UIT ssaa 
elec irat 


Stalk by stalk may you swell, god Soma, 

for Indra who possesses unique wealth! 

May Indra swell for you; do you swell for Indra! 
Make your friends swell with gain and wisdom! 


358 


SOMA OFFERING, SWELLING, AND HIDING RITES 


With good fortune may I accomplish your pressing, саба d җа ata чегинїї u 

god Soma! a 

(TS 1.2.11.1a-b) 

чает axsatarnēa 

al Cs Cr 
gatrrattraa: {Чаа | 
jet ат атап а gge- 
qaaa spe TI d 


The stalk that the Adityas make swell, 
the imperishable that the imperishable drink, 
with that may King Varuna, may Brhaspati, 
may the guardians of the world make us swell! 
(TS 2.4.14.1b) 


Adhvaryu, sadasya, pratiprasthātā, unnetā, and yajamāna recite only the 
first mantra. The adhvaryu recites at the beginning up to: tvam indrāyāpyā- 
yasva, “do you swell for Indra," and at the end joins the yajamāna with 
the remaining portion of the mantra. The other priests add in the first man- 
tra: asman(t) “ош?” before sakhin "friends", and: udrsam “finally” (?) 
before asiya “may I accomplish.” When the sadasya recites, the bystanders 
clap their hands; when the grāvastut recites, they snap their fingers. 

At the Hiding Rite, the yajamāna and brahman go round the altar SO pLATE 56 
as to reach the vedi from the north. There they place both hands on the 
prastara-grass bundle, which lies on its southern half. The priests understand 
this rite as a salutation (namaskāra) of earth (bhūmi), though originally it 
might have expressed the “hiding” of the movement in the inauspicious 
southern direction (Brough 1950). 

Since the Nihnava occurs after the Upasad, it takes place twice a day, 
in the morning and in the afternoon. There are differences in the positions 
of the hands, and further variations depending on which Nambudiri tradition 
is adopted. According to the Kausitaki tradition of the 1975 performance, 
the positions are as follows: 


left hand palm down; 
right hand on left hand 

with palm up. 
Afternoon Hiding: left hand palm up; 
right hand on left hand 
with palm down. 


Morning Hiding: 


According to the Taittirīya tradition, the positions are the other way round, 
i.e., as follows: 


left hand palm up; 
right hand on left hand 
with palm down. 
Afternoon Hiding: right hand palm up; 
left hand on right hand 
with palm down. 


359 


Morning Hiding: 


pj MT y AL 4 
vz JĀ TAI 
iW AS ds 
3 B AT 
dL ANS ss 


PLATE 53 
After the Soma Purchase 
After the Soma has been purchased, the yajamāna leaves with the 


Soma on his head. The Soma cart (sakata) is ready to transport 
King Soma to his throne. 


360 361 


PLATE 54 
Enter the Unneta 


“Мау Ida who invokes the gods, 
Manu who conducts the rites, 
and Brhaspati recite hymns and acclamations. 
The All-gods are reciters of hymns. 
May mother earth not harm me!” 
(TS 3.3.2c-f) 


The unnetā priest makes his first appearance. Standing on the 
utkara rubbish heap in the Old Hall, and facing the offering altar, 
he recites. 


362 


363 


PLATE 55 
Swelling Soma (Apyayana) 


“Stalk by stalk may you swell, god Soma, 
for Indra who obtained great wealth! 
May Indra swell for you; 
do you swell for Indra! 
Make our friends swell with wealth and skill, 
may I accomplish your pressing, 
with good fortune, god Soma!” 
(TS 1.2.11.la-b) 


55A The maitravaruna (right) and brāhmaņācchamsin (left) make 


the Soma swell by sprinkling it with mantras. 
55B The sadasya performs the same rite. 


364 


D 


PLATE 56 
The Hiding Rite (Nihnava) 


“Riches are desired exceedingly 
for food, for prosperity. 
Cosmic order for those who profess it. 


Homage to heaven, homage to the earth!" 
(TS 1.2.11.lc) 


The brāhmaņācchamsin performs the hiding rite (nihnava). As it is 
morning, and he is a Kausitakin, he holds his right hand, with the 
palm up, on his left hand, with the palm down. 


— 

— 
— — 

— === 


366 


367 


PLATE 57 


PLATE 58 


PLATE 59 


PLATE 60 


PART П THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


Fourth Day: April 16, 1976 
EPISODE 9 


(Similar on Subsequent Five Days) 
Pravargya, Upasad, and Subrahmanya Chant 


THE PRAVARGYA CEREMONY is performed every morning and afternoon 
(or evening) from the fourth through the ninth ritual day. It consists primarily 
in an offering of hot milk (gharma) or milk “‘to be heated” (pravargya), to 
the Ašvin twins, divine young men who ride the wind. Women should not 
witness it. The officiating priests are: adhvaryu, pratiprasthātā, āgnīdhra, 
hota, and prastotā, beside yajamāna and brahman. The ceremony begins and 
ends with a Peace Chant (Santi) by adhvaryu, pratiprasthātā, āgnīdhra, and 
yajamāna. 

At the first Pravargya, the one in the morning of April 16, a round 
mound of earth is prepared to the north of the domestic altar. One of the 
three mahāvīra pots is placed on it. Other mounds are made to the north 
of the sacrificial altar and the vedi. A cow with her calf and a she-goat with 
her kid have been tied in the cowshed (gošālā), south of the Old Hall. Two 
rauhiņa cakes are prepared for the lunar sign Rohiņī. Hot embers from the 
domestic fire are spread round the mahāvīra pot on its mound. The hot 
vessel is fanned by adhvaryu, pratiprasthātā, and āgnīdhra, who also per- 
form a dance with the fans, circumambulating the mound clockwise. Clari- 
fied butter is poured into the pot. The hotā recites in praise of the Pravargya, 
and the prastotā chants sāmans. 

Adhvaryu and pratiprasthātā go to the cow shed and milk the cow and 
she-goat, respectively. They return with cow and goat milk in the clay pin- 
vana ladles and pour the fresh milk into the great-hero pot. Since this pot, 
with the butter inside, has become very hot, a large flame flares up. The heat- 
ed pot is then lifted between two wooden poles (Sapham) and carried to the 
(old) offering fire. Oblations are made into the fire by tilting the poles. They 
are primarily for the Ašvins, but also for Vayu, Indra, Savitr, Brhaspati, 
and Yama. The ceremony is concluded with another Peace Chant. The 
Pravargya implements are then placed and kept on a stool or "throne" 
(asandi), immediately south of the throne for King Soma, south of the offer- 
ing altar. 

Next comes Upasad, which is an isti offering of clarified butter to Agni, 
Soma, and Visnu. There are nine sāmidhenī verses made up from three by 
triple repetition. There are no ājyabhāga, prayāja, anuyàja or svistakrt 
offerings. The Upasad is also performed every morning and evening from 
the fourth through the ninth day, but it is an obligatory rite, unlike the Pra- 
vargya, which is optional. 

When the Upasad is over, the yajamàna and his wife go out with the 
subrahmanya priest to the northwest corner of the enclosure (later to the 


368 


MEASUREMENT OF THE GREAT ALTER SPACE 


north of the Field of Agni, which at this time has not yet been consecrated). 
The subrahmanya priest chants the subrahmanya chant facing the yajamāna, 
with the wife crouched under her parasol behind him. This rite is obligatory 
and also takes place every morning and evening from the fourth through the 
ninth ritual day. 

The subrahmaņyā is an invitation to attend the Soma pressing, which is 
forthcoming. In this chant, Indra is reminded of his various adventures on 
earth and is strongly urged to be present: 


Subrahmanyom! Subrahmanyom! Subrahmanyom! gzermāta | Gaara | gaaTāta || 
Indra come! BAND | | i 
Possessor of bay horses, come! afta ames | 


‚ Каш of Medhatithi, wife of the Bull Horse Man, AnNa parent WAT 


cow impregnator, lover of Ahalya, 
Brahmin of the Kaušika family, 
usurper of the name Kausika, 
come to the Soma pressing, Generous One! 
Gods, brahmins, come, come, come! 
(cf. JSS 7) 


гта ъй TT | 
йө ПЛ 18859107 | 
GARS ATAT, 

зат AMIN ATIEGATTGANIEGA |i 


When the subrahmanya chants: *'lover of Ahalyā” the patni bends her head.! 


Third Day: April 16, 1977 
EPISODE IO 


(Mahāvedikaraņa, Citisthanakarana) 


ALL THE CEREMONIES which have so far been performed on April 16 are 
ceremonies belonging to the fourth ritual day. On this day, the Subrahmanya 
chant is generally followed by setting up the area for the main altar (Ksetro- 
padhāna), which begins with the determination of the places for the uparava 
resounding holes and the utkara rubbish heap. However, these rites can only 
be performed when the measurements of the Great Altar Space and the 
Field of Agni (agniksetra) have been completed. These two ceremonies are 
generally performed on the third ritual day. However, on the third ritual day, 
the ceremonies of measurement themselves are preceded by other rites, e.g., 
Procuring the Sacrificial Pole (yūpasampādana), Formal Occupation of the 
Ritual Terrain (devayajanādhyavasāna), and the special resolution called 
akrtiphala-samkalpa. The Procuring of the Sacrificial Pole is postponed to 


1 Before the tenth day, the subrahmanya does not insert tryahe “in three days”, dvyahe 
“in two days”, etc. before the phrase sutyam dgaccha “соте to the Soma pressing”. 
However, on the tenth or pressing day itself he inserts adya “today”: see below page 
596. 


369 


PLATE 61 


PLATE 57 


The Pravargya: Circumambulations with Fans 


The Pravargya ceremony involves an offering of milk “‘to be heated" 
(pravargya) for the Ašvin twins, divine young men who ride the 
wind. The milk is poured into the Great Hero (mahāvīra) pot, which 
has been preheated north of the domestic fire, using its embers. The 
hot vessel is fanned by the adhvaryu, the pratiprasthātā, and the 
agnidh, after which they lift the fans high and circumambulate 
the fire three times in the clockwise direction. 


370 


371 


WO E 
^" E E [ a 


ā 
Ek 


PLATE 58 
The Pravargya: The Oblation 
The offering of heated milk is made by the adhvaryu (on the left), 
assisted by the pratiprasthata (on the right). They tilt the pair of 
wooden poles (šapham) between which the Great Hero (mahāvīra) 


pot is tightly kept. This procedure explains the special shape of the 
Great Hero pot (Plate 5B). King Soma is on the right on his throne. 


— 
— 

—-— 
—— 


372 


373 


T M | 
ү 


PLATE 59 
The Pravargya: Peace Chant 


“Peace! Wind Matari$van must make us pure. 
Peace! The sun must warm us. 

Peace! May the days be ours. 

Peace! May the night be countered. 

Peace! May dawn open wide for us. 

Peace! May the sun rise for us.” 


At the beginning and end of each Pravargya performance, the 
adhvaryu, pratiprasthata, and agnidh recite a peace chant. These 
verses are from the evening peace chant (TA 4.42). 


— — —— 
— — 


— 
— 
— 
— —á 


374 


375 


PLATE 60A 
Drinking the Pravargya Milk 
Assisted by his brahman priest, the yajamāna drinks the remnant of 


the hot milk (gharma) from the cup of all herbs (sārvausadha- 
patram). 


PLATE 60B 


After the Pravargya 


PEN | 


After the Pravargya is over, two spare mahāvīra pots and other Pra- Ra va 
vala Vai 


vargya implements are put on their stool south of the stool or V ķi ' ү ү w 
throne for king Soma, south of the domestic altar. Nellikat Nila- . 
kanthan Akkitiripad sits nearby. е. 


at 


376 377 


PLATE 61A 
The Subrahmanya 


“Come to the Soma pressing, 
generous one! 

Gods, brahmins, 

come, come, come?" 


The Subrahmanya chant, an invitation to attend the forthcoming 
Soma festival, is addressed especially to Indra, and is chanted every 
morning and evening by the subrahmanya priest on behalf of the 
yajamana. The priest faces the yajamāna, while the yajamana's wife 
crouches behind him. 


PLATE ÓIB 
The Subrahmanya Priest 


— 
— — 
— — 


PLATE 62 


PLATE 63 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


the ninth day, as no animal sacrifice takes place before that day. The other 
two rites cannot be postponed and are gone through on April 16. 

For Formal Occupation of the Ritual Terrain, the priests leave the Old 
Hall through its eastern door. Immediately ouside, in the small strip between 
the Old Hall and the future sadas, they stand in a row: in the middle the 
yajamāna, with his wife to his right, facing east; to his left (or north) the 
adhvaryu, also facing east; and to their right the brahman, facing north, 
as (almost) always. 

The adhvaryu recites: 


We have come for the ritual of the gods on earth, чанага чаз! ufus 

in which formerly all the gods took delight. fay Зат azda qd 

Completing with Rk, Sāman, and Yajus, «Ksaravat WI grata? 

may we rejoice with abundance of wealth! Tata fur ata it 
(TS 1.2.3.30) 


Go off, depart, creep away, ade а fa 4 Чата 


you who are old here and you who are new! Asa N geo = adam: | 
Death has given a resting place here on earth; аі асаа эш 
the ancestors have made this world for him. erit бта! dante 1 


(TS 4.2.4.la) 


This is followed by ākrtiphalasamkalpa, a special resolution based on 
the general resolution taken on the first day (above, pages 282—286). The 
yajamāna, his wife, adhvaryu, and brahman sit in a row, in this order from 
south to north in front of the eastern gate of the Old Hall. They face east. 
The introductory rites that precede the samkalpa proper are the same as 
before, but when it comes to the actual declaration of intent, the yajamāna 
says, three times softly and three times loudly so that the gods will hear: 


Desirous of heaven I shall pile the bird-shaped altar! «адата: чарча ue | 


Afterwards he addresses his priests as before and obtains the same answers 
(above, page 286). Then yajamāna and brahman go to the extreme 
southeast and sit outside the Great Altar Space, south of what will be the 
Field of Agni (agniksetra). 

Now the measurements can begin. So far, the area east of the Old Hall, 
though used for several ceremonies that should take place outside that hall, 
has not been consecrated. The actual measurements have already been 
made: the outline of the Great Altar Space has been marked with a string 
on pegs. The ritual measurements, made with the extended vrddhaprakrama 
measuring stick (above, page 196), are therefore symbolic. They take place 
in silence, and only the adhvaryu can enter the area. He starts going east 
along the west-east line and then follows the outer boundary of the Great 
Altar Space, moving south and north along the western and eastern boun- 


380 


THE FIELD OF AGNI 


daries. He follows up his measurements with a string, tying it to the pegs and 
superimposing it on the old string that is already there. 

After measuring the Great Altar Space, the adhvaryu measures the Field 
of Agni, the area where the Agni altar will be built in the shape of a bird. He 
uses a Stick, five aratni long (above, page 196) and ritually confirms the actual 
measurements that have already been made. After tying a new string round 
the outline of the bird, he traces it with his sphya. Then he throws pebbles 
along the outline of the altar. These are brought in a clay dish by a helper 
(Vasudevan Akkitiri, the elder brother of the adhvaryu and the yajamāna). 
These are the pebbles called šarkara in Sanskrit and kolipparan, “chicken- 
fish,” in Malayalam. Afterwards the adhvaryu measures the northern boun- 
dary of the Great Altar Space and sweeps the entire area. 

Except for sweeping, which is accompanied by mantras, these move- 
ments are gone through in silence. The subsequent rites are accompanied by 
mantras, which are the same as in the corresponding ceremonies of the new- 
and full-moon ceremonies, the animal sacrifice, and the Agnistoma. The 
agnidh sits north of the northern boundary, and the adhvaryu puts down a 
darbha blade, strikes it with his sphya, picks up some earth, and places it 
next to the agnidh. This is done thrice with a mantra and once without. These 
rites involve the use of the mantra TS 1.3.1.1c (“Не who hates us and whom 
we hate, here I cut off his neck”; cf. above, page 104). 


Fourth Day: April 16, 1977 
EPISODE II 


Setting Up the Field of Agni 
(Agniksetropadhāna) 


THE CEREMONIAL SETTING up of the agniksetra or Field of Agni belongs 
to the fourth ritual day. As we have seen, the fourth ritual day regularly 
begins with the Construction of the New Domestic Altar (Episode 7), fol- 
lowed by Introductory Offering, Purchase of Soma, Guest Offering for Soma 
(Episode 8), Pravargya, Upasad, and Subrahmanya (Episode 9). This should 
be followed by Setting up the Field of Agni (agniksetropadhāna). However, 
since the Field of Agni cannot be set up unless it has first been measured, 
together with the Great Altar-Space to which it belongs, these ceremonies of 
the third ritual day had to be gone through first (Episode 10). 

As a result, ceremonies that, in the Agnistoma, are performed consecu- 
tively, but that are not consecutive in the Agnicayana, are also performed 
consecutively in 1975, but this time as a consequence of the menses of the 
wife of the yajamāna. The differences are illustrated in Table 5, which lists 
the rites of the Agnistoma (column T), of the Agnicayana (column II), and 
of the 1975 performance of the Agnicayana in which the third and fourth 


381 


4 ee 
šo RUSS ч 
“WSS FN M. 


w TS 


PLATE 62 
Breathing at the Special Resolution 
Before the Great Altar Space (mahāvedi) is measured, the yaja- 


māna takes a special resolution (ākrtiphalasamkalpa) in the boun- 
dary area between the Old Hall and the Great Altar Space: 


Desirous of heaven I shall pile the bird-shaped altar! 


Each resolution is preceded by certain recitations, e.g. prāņāyāma, 
“breathing”. The yajamāna recites without breathing: 


OM earth OM sky OM heaven! 
OM greatness OM people! 
OM austerity OM truth! 


OM water OM essence of light, 
Immortality, Brahman, 
Earth, Sky, Heaven, OM! (see page 283) 


Then he breathes out. Throughout these rites, the yajamāna faces 
east, his wife, the adhvaryu, and the brahman priests to his left. 


— —À 
— —À 
— — oe 


382 


PLATE 63 
Measuring the Great Altar Space 


On the third day of the ritual, the adhvaryu measures out the 
Great Altar Space (mahāvedi), where most of the important cere- 
monies of the Agnicayana will be performed. The measurement 
takes place in silence, and no one can enter the area. The actual 
measurements have already been made, and are marked with 
strings on pegs. The adhvaryu makes the ritual measurements, using 
his measuring stick with the extended unit (vrddha-prakrama: see 
Figure 8). After measuring the mahāvedi, he measures the Field of 
Agni, and the outline of the bird-shaped altar, using the aratni unit. 
On the plate, the right wing of the bird is traced in front, the head 
and left wing are in the background. 


384 


«V | 

v.a орасила LETRA NI 

рөк oo сс үп» ай, 
TASSE 


PLATE 72B 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


days were combined (column IIT). Rites that are specific to the Agnicayana 
have been italicized and the ritual days are put in parentheses. 


SEQUENCE OF RITES ON THE THIRD AND FOURTH DAYS 


THE FIELD OF AGNI 


Followed by the yajamāna, the adhvaryu picks up the bow, the arrow, and 
the four stones, and goes to the easternmost point of the Field of Agni. He 
aims and shoots at this point and puts down a stone on that very spot, to- 
gether with the yajamāna, reciting: 


You are the cudgel of Indra, destroying obstacles, 


protecting our bodies, lying in wait. 
Who from the east, full of malice, 


edet aisle ardem- 
жыят a: sērga: | 


I AGNISTOMA 


Introductory Offering 


II AGNICAYANA 
Measurement of Ma- 
havedi(3) 
Measurement of Agni- 
ksetra(3) 

Construction of New 
Domestic Altar (4) 
Introductory Offering 


III April 16, 1975 


Construction of New 
Domestic Altar 


Introductory Offering 


Чү а: чече дела: vagd- 
sugas ag || 


plots against us, 
let him fall upon this rock! 
(TS 5.7.3.1a) 


The same rite is performed at the southern, western, and northern points, 
replacing **east" in the mantra by “south,” “west,” and “north,” respectively. 
On these four stones yajamāna and adhvaryu recite the mantras With That 
God and Pouring Milk. 

In the meantime two helpers have carried a square brick to the tail of 
the outline of the bird. This is the aindri brick, the first brick of the first layer, 
called after Indra. The adhvaryu puts it in its place (see below, Figure 24). 
Yajamāna and adhvaryu touch it and consecrate it with: 


He who receives the Soma residue, triumphant, 
let him protect this! 
Who is full-cheeked, of virile thoughts, 


аф чВ ч аа «гй 
ч: Raag dt RATA | 


(2) (4) 
Purchase of Soma (2) Purchase of Soma (4) Purchase of Soma 
Guest Offering (2) Guest Offering (4) Guest Offering 
Pravargya, Оразай, and Pravargya, Оразай, and Pravargya, Upasad, 
Subrahmaņyā(2) Subrahmaņyā(4) and Subrahmaņyā 
Measurement of Mahāvedi Measurement of Ma- 
(3) hāvedi 


Preparation of 
Uttaravedi (3) 


Setting up Agniksetra 
(4) 


TABLE 5 


Measurement of Agni- 
ksetra 
Setting up Agniksetra 


Setting up the Field of Agni begins with the determination of the places 


for the uparava resounding holes and the utkara rubbish heap. This corres- 
ponds to the Agnistoma. Then a white and brown horse are tied to the east 
of the Great Altar-Space, on the southern and northern side, respectively. 
Adhvaryu, pratiprasthātā, brahman, and yajamāna put on sandals (upānah) 
made of the skin of a black antelope. They will also wear these when the 
layers of the altar are piled up. The adhvaryu takes a bow and arrow, four 
stones (ašman), a pitcher with water, a dish for clarified butter (ājyasthālī), 
and the sruva ladle. He recites TS 5.7.9.1a-b and 5.7.8.1a (page 339), touches 


dt тїйїнї eer 
a ex блят ии aa i 


who wields the cudgel and opens the cow pens, 
borne along by bay horses, 
let Indra procure marvellous powers for us! 

(TB 2.5.8.la) 


This is followed by With That God and Pouring Milk. 

Yajamāna and adhvaryu sit down at the center of the Agni field. The 
adhvaryu puts a peg in the middle and two others at equal distance to the 
east and the west on the east-west line. He ties a string from the eastern to 
the western peg, checks that the central peg is at the center, and then removes 
the central peg and the string. Since a fairly big hole 1s about to be dug and 
the hole for the central peg—marking the middle of the Field of Agni— 
would be lost in this bigger hole, the center is now marked with the help of 
the two other pegs. 

A helper (Vasudevan Akkitiri) digs a large hole immediately to the north 
of the center, and the adhvaryu puts a bunch of darbha grass with roots 
(Malayalam: darbhamola) in it, reciting: 


Language should put you in the ocean. 


anat aga 344919 | 


the white horse, and recites, together with the yajamàna: 


aade «тч cui ladat- 


May Prajāpati seat you. 


With that deity in the fashion of the Angiras, sit firm! 


(TS 5.5.2.4) 


386 


sree war а і 


(Kathaka Samhita 38.13:116.1-3) 


The adhvaryu makes five butter oblations on this darbha grass with the sruva 
ladle, reciting five mantras: 


387 


PLATE 64 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


The year united with the waning moons— 

with ghee, svaha! 

The dawn united with the ruddy cows— 

with ghee, svaha! 

The sun united with the stallion— 

with ghee, svaha ? 

The Ašvins united with miracles— 

with ghee, svaha! 

Agni Common-to-all-men united with food offer- 
ings— 

with ghee, svaha! 
(TS 5.6.4.1, with ghrtena svāhā after each mantra) 


anisat- 

yaa Tarēt | 

ATTA aaff- 

ea eet 1 

TR 99 чач 

чча met | 

amaia Praat- - 
Ser rel | 
яаа getfa- 
Seer erat | 


At each oblation the yajamāna utters his formula of renunciation: 


This is for Agni, not for me. 


мял Zå A ЯЯ 


Immediately after this, the adhvaryu places dūrvā grass in the hole, 


north of the darbha grass, reciting: 


In your course, in this way and that, let flowery 
dūrvā grow! 
Let either a fountain spring up there, or a pond rich in 
lotuses. 
(Atharvaveda 6.106.1)! 


wea x gar 

gat dara ЧГ | 
seat at ая alt 
&3t at quetiear || 


Each recitation is followed by two renderings of With That God and Pouring 


Milk. 


In the meantime, one helper has carried a triangular brick to the right 


wing of the outline of the bird, which points to the south. This is the Vibhakti 
brick, the second brick of the first layer. The helper places it in the southwest 
tip of the wing (below, Figure 24). Yajamāna and adhvaryu go there, touch 
the brick, and consecrate it with TB 3.5.2.1 = RV 6.16.10 (above, page 33) 
again followed by With That God and Pouring Milk. 

The Field of Agni is then ritually ploughed. A wooden plough has been 
made beforehand by the carpenter, its shape the same as is used by farmers 
all over South India. The adhvaryu touches the plough, reciting: 


Tie the straps! 


| 
Attach the buckets! i ча 
let us drain the well full of water, ferreae gett l : 
which is never exhausted, never dried up. fate эте ari 
I drain the inexhaustible well | Sams N 
with buckets attached and strong straps, Regagna 


1 According to Erkkara Raman Nambudiri, this mantra might have belonged to the 
Baskala recension of the Rgveda. 


388 


THE FIELD OF AGNI 


full of water, easy to bail. 
(TS 4.2.5.5п-о) 


{атчан | 
shoes after u 


Six assistants get ready to pull the plough, while the adhvaryu recites: 


p. Poets harness the ploughs, 
the yokes spread apart. 
The wise are in the grace of the gods. 
q. Harness the ploughs, 
stretch the yokes apart, 
sow seed here in the prepared womb. 
When our chant meets with ready response, 
the ripe grain will come close to the sickle. 
(TS 4.2.5.5p-q) 


Фі gaa sail 

amr їйї dedu vg | 

AT Bey gam і 

да # fa ат «tita 

ger dv quee ча, | 

{бта Чч я: ач чї 
Au ga gral TEAMS і 


The ploughing begins. The men pull the plough while Ше adhvaryu holds it 


and recites: 


r. The plough with pointed share, 
propitious and with shiny handle, 
turns up a cow, a sheep, 
a plump and lusty girl, 
a chariot frame with drive seat. 
s. Prosperity—let our ploughshares turn up the 
earth! 
Prosperity—let the ploughmen approach the 
draught animals! 


Let Parjanya rain prosperity with honey and milk. 


Šunā and Sira! Grant us prosperity! 
Looking back at the furrows, he continues: 


t. Milker of wishes! Milk our wishes 

for Mitra and Varuna, for Indra, for Agni, 

for Püsan, for the plants, and for our offspring. 
u. The furrow is annointed with ghee, with honey; 

approved by the All-gods, by the Maruts, 

full of power, swelling with milk. 

Furrow! Turn towards us with milk! 

(TS 4.2.5.5r-u) 


wide ЧЕЧ. 

gra gafe | 

зач $Чїт maf 

ses Ч Фада 1 

пета ANAR, | 

ga я: «тет dara fte 
gt aer aftr deg amer | 
ga тїгї agar wil 
TUT TAA ATF | 


were ЄТ yest 

fra aama = | 

sextam qum 

ачуз: уята: n 

gaa Фаг ds «ат 
aAA nef: | 
radi wir aam- 
SANA TARSAT N 


Three furrows are made from the tail to the head of the outlined bird, three 
from the northwest hip to the southeast shoulder, three from the southwest 
hip to the northeast shoulder, and three from the southern wing to the north- 
ern wing. The ploughing is always done in one direction, i.e., the men turn 
back to the next beginning point without ploughing. They always avoid the 
central point of the Agni Field. 


389 


PLATE 64 
Ploughing the Field of Agni 


“The plough with pointed share, 
propitious and with shiny handle, 
turns up a cow, a sheep, 
a plump and lusty girl, 
a chariot frame with drive seat.” 
(TS 4.2.5.5r) 


The adhvaryu, assisted by helpers, ploughs the Field of Agni, so 
that it will be fertile and provide food for the bird. The plough is 
of the common type used by farmers all over Kerala. 


390 


391 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


Then a mixture of “all herbs” (sarvausadham) is handed to the adhvaryu 
in the sarvausadhapātra. He strews seeds over the Field of Agni, following 
the furrows that have been ploughed. First he walks from the tail in eastern 


direction, reciting: 


a. The plants born 
three generations before the gods, 
I delight in these hundred and seven species 
of brown ones. 
b. Mother! A hundred are your species, 
a thousand are your shoots. 
Thus, with hundredfold wisdom, 
restore his health for me! 
c. With flowers and shoots, 
with and without fruit, 
like victorious stallions, 
the plants are fully effective. 
(TS 4.2.6.la-c) 


эп этет sirqerat 
rafa ча! 
пей азий 
ad чта get = || 
319 dt tea wed 
ясана ат жа: | 
атэ amat aa- 
Rrit N arg ga. ui 
gedtadt: aqad: 
«ет за | 
wat ga аба- 
ded: aria: n 


Then he walks from the northwest hip to the southeast shoulder, reciting: 


d. Mothers! Goddesses! I summon you plants who 
destroy disease, remove disease. 
e. In the a$vattha tree is your seat, 
in the parna tree your nest is made. 
You will surely have a cow as your share 
if you save this man. 
f. When I, restoring strength, 
grasp these plants in my hand, 
the spirit of the disease vanishes 
as before one who captures it alive. 
(TS 4.2.6.1d-f) 


ATA атаса gated gā | 


waster feft 

WATARA: d 

aad at (ача att at auf gar d 
йтитї ga Feeder 

ат AAA чїчң і 

mae arate Чес эп | 
BIA AEH ARAL 

gu эгїї at 


h 


He walks from the southwest hip to the northeast shoulder, reciting: 


g. When plants gather together, 
like princes at an assembly, 
the physician, destroyer of demons, 
remover of disease, is called a sage. 
h. Restorer is your mother called, 
and you are the preparers. 
You are liquids with wings. 
Restore whatever is diseased! 
i, Let one help the other! 
Assist one another! 
All you plants, in close accord 
make this speech of mine come true! 
(TS 4.2.6.1g-i) 


392 


FAI: aga 
qata: «атая à 
Aa: a sega fuu 
{айтат<айячпая: || 
Rrezferafst ar aa- 
sal ux tu dzī: 
am: Чаї: era 
aurae faka u 
SUD al AAAA- 
eqiSeneaut чі | 
ar: dat эчә: батат 
z4 н ина adi jj 


THE FIELD OF AGNI 


And lastly he walks from the southern win g 
in the northern direction, saying: 


k. Powers emerge from the plants 
like cows from their pasture, 
from those who shall save your wealth 
and your life, man! 
l. They have climbed beyond all obstructions, 
like a thief over a fence. 


The plants have removed every disease of the body. 


m. Those who have mounted your self, 
who have entered every limb, 
may they drive away your disease 
like a powerful intermediary. 
n. Disease! Fly off at once with the eagle, 
with the blue jay, 
with the rush of the wind! 
Perish at once with the whirlwind! 
о. All the plants, with stallions 
and with Soma, 
full of vigor, full of power, 
I have assembled for his recovery. 
(TS 4.2.6.1k-o) 


sega dtdeftai 
arai тїгїн | 
маҳ afrad- 
AI чї WEN Od 
ata Rat: attur: 
© ga Asari | 
sqm: maag- 
aq, h = guru: Н 
amd апае етй 


‘at іб аа: TETE: d 


«ie agh fü aaa- 
sui Яана и 
a "uH п Ча 
заа Вера аяі 1 
ah ardt4 иті 
ah аза [AZIEN | 
чапа Ataa- 
ysig | 

эп ба gal Att- 
vum экеа? || 


Next the adhvaryu flings clods of earth in the four directions, saying: 


a. Let him not injure us who created the earth, 
who with true principles created the heavens, 
and who created the great shining waters! 
Which god shall we worship with oblation? 

b. Barth! Turn to us 
with milk, during the ritual! 

Let Agni, aroused, creep over your mantle. 

c. Agni! Whatever of you is pure, 
shining and bright, 
suitable for offering, 


we carry to the gods. 
(TS 4.2.7.1a-c) 


He takes two clods of earth, saying: 


d. From here I take food and strength, 
from the abode of order, 
from the womb of immortality. 


He puts one on the Agni field: 


Let it enter us, in cattle, in plants! 


393 


fL 


at al хатха а: trea 
a ят Bax aada sent | 
aatan зеп 

ай tart чі ta N 
ELI RES (069 

ая TA HE | 

aut t afRigātsd adg |! 
эй aL d ys weder 

=ч, Чё TATA 1 

аата иий | 


zapina эп 44 
RIEL чт этиет citēt: 1 


эп al aig бате 


PLATE 65 


PART JI THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 
and flings one away: 
à | te a at e 
I abandon exhaustion, weakness, and disease. тетін ARACTIR | 
(TS 4.2.7.24) 


Then the adhvaryu addresses the yajamāna: 


Come Yajamāna! qè ачат | 


This is followed by the tracing and digging of the cātvāla trench north of the 
northern boundary of the Great Altar Space (see Figure 19). The adhvaryu 
takes some earth trom there, carries it to the uttaravedi, puts it there, and 
makes a small elevation, called the uttaravedi’s navel (uttaranabhi). This is 


done three times with mantras and once without. The mantras are: 


a. You are the home of wealth for me. 
You are the home of the afflicted for me. 
Protect me when I am oppressed! 
Protect me when I am afflicted! 
b. May Agni named Nabhas know! 
c. Agni Angiras! You who are in this earth, 
come with the name Long Life! 
Whatever your unblemished name, ritual, rele- 
vant, 
with that I deposit you. 
d. (Similar, for the second and third deposition, 


with “second” and “third” earth, respectively.) 


e. You are a lioness. You are a buffalo. 
f. (flattening the ground) Extend wide, 


let the ritual patron extend wide (in power) for 


you! 
g. (striking the ground with the sphya) You are firm. 
h. Be pure for the gods! 
Be bright for the gods! 
(TS 1.2.12.1a-2n) 


€. Van 


tamai Asa- 

qarat mfra- 

waaay єтї | 
байн ата | 

ad эй Asat dea 
жетт «т 

ач, tsalgē ата аба 
I assa | 


бтен aft | 


Sg Hae- 
< аз: wera | 


aas 
Ad: печга 99:9: IFA | 


In the Agnicayana, the adhvaryu follows this up by scattering sand over 


the Field of Agni, and reciting: 


e. Agni! You have glory and power. 
Your rays shine powerfully, you splendid god! 
Poet! With your lofty beams you give 
praiseworthy strength to your worshipper. 

f. Agni! As ruler spread among the creatures! 
Immortal One, extend riches to us! 
You are resplendent with a beautiful form. 
Scatter splendid riches. 


394 


ah ча dr aži ARR 
are баата | 
ART! атат AT- 
arch qur gr чо! 
течій sa sregfit- 
хен TA AAC | 

а quer agar lā «їнї 
gut arfas «ба n 


FOUNDATION OF THE ALTAR 


g. Son of strength! Knower of everything! wat augadāz: =з 
Honored by our prayers, take delight in our best fede МЇ ТЇЇ: | 
praises! d em d зач : 
Those who possess wonderful protection and ex- ауа ara ine | 
cellent birth ‘a ат 


speeds: getai 

agaaa За эта | 
qa: (tavi ragga- 

әй defin азе ui 

Kaati ated Radir- 
mrs gari gA gā зга: | 


have placed food in you abounding in seed. 
h. With pure splendor, with bright splendor, 
with undiminished splendor, you come to light, 
Like a son attending to his parents 
you protect and fill up both worlds. 
i. For favor men have honored Agni, 
the rightous bull, common to all men. 


You Divine One, ready to hear, pervading, akis sie сат Rra 
generations of men invoke with their song. sey mga AN I 

k. You provide the discerner arranger of ritual, {їзжайёнхатея nad 
master of great solicitude, OFT 


the winning priest, wise in rites 


Wet э] sl kd 
who is the gift of the Bhrgu tribe. sā cue mAy 
(TS 4.2.7.2e-3k) З" aa ga n 


Finally the adhvaryu puts pebbles (Sarkara) in the trenches. He consecrates 
them together with the yajamāna, reciting TS 4.2.7.4/ (as above, page 
340). While the adhvaryu pours water from a pitcher around the outline of 
the bird, the Ignorant Priest (avidvān) appears, the yajamana holds his hand 
and hands him a cloth (vastram) in payment for his forthcoming services. 
The adhvaryu scatters sand over the Field of Agni, reciting TS 4.2.7.4m 
(above page 340). It is now 2:45 p.m. and the setting up of the agniksetra is 
complete. 


Fourth Day: April 16, 1975 


EPISODE [2 
The Foundation of the Altar 


YAJAMANA AND ADHVARYU leave the Field of Agni and go to the Old 
Hall to fetch a number of things that will be buried under the first layer of 
the altar: bunches of darbha grass and dūrvā grass; milk, ghee, and curds 
mixed with honey; twelve small pots, six male (kumbha) and six female 
(kumbhī); rice for Brhaspati, god of wisdom; thirteen pieces of gold; a 
pitcher of water; a lotus leaf; the golden breastplate (rukma) that was used 
at the consecration (page 323); two ladles made of karsmarya wood; 
avakā plants; a wooden representation of a tortoise (karma: 1975 was the 
first time that no live tortoise was used); mortar and pestle; the all-herb 
mixture (sarvausadha); the three ukhà pots; and the five animal heads. They 


395 


we ee S A 


PLATE 65 
Putting Earth in the Center 


“Agni Angiras! You who are in this earth, 
come with the name Long Life! 
Whatever your unblemished name, ritually relevant, 
with that I deposit you.” 
(TS 1.2.12.lc) 


After digging the catvala trench on the northern boundary of the 
Great Altar Space (mahāvedi), the adhvaryu returns to the center 
of the Field of Agni with the wooden sword (sphya) and some earth 
from the cātvāla. He deposits the earth in the center, while the ya- 
jamāna touches it. He does this three times with the mantra, and 
once without. The agnidh sits on the left, and in the foreground is a 
peg, used to mark the location of the center. 


396 


397 


PART П THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


return with all these items in large clay pots which they put down in the area 
north of what will be the bird-shaped altar. Some of the objects are referred 
as istakā, “brick” (e.g., the avakā); all are regarded as Agnis, "fires." 

The adhvaryu dips twenty-two bundles of darbha grass in milk and 
sprinkles all the Agnis, reciting: 


I sprinkle the lovable Agnis with Agnis чта а gersītatēt | 
(BSS 10.27:26.8-9) 


He then dips them in ghee and sprinkles the Agnis, reciting: 


Agni is kindled with Agni, tanh: ача 


the wise young lord of the house Ee n 
bearing the oblation, иг тй: |! 
with the ladle in his mouth. zaag Jaler: I 


(TS 1.4.46.3/) 


A helper (actually, the brāhmaņacchamsin) brings the white horse. The 
adhvaryu leads it onto the Field of Agni from the tail’s side, reciting: 


He has overcome every battle, every enemy, зау: gear wtdi- 
so says Agni and so says Soma. = az ata og e 


Brhaspati and Savitr say that of me. 


£e A 
Pūşan placed me in the world of good action. аат v 
(TS 4.2.8.la) Чат aisar зае STF l 


The horse walks across, being pulled by the same assistant, now from the 
other side in the eastern direction, while the adhvaryu recites: 


When first you cried at birth, sume: чий sum 

arising from the ocean, or from the earth; eL 

: : А > sugas 

like the wings of the eagle, the limbs of the gazelle. Em SS SI giam i 
get чеп dive sm 


that birth of yours is praised, stallion! чет ЧЕП ķi 
(TS 4.2.8.lb) зчеза Waa ww SU d 


The adhvaryu, touching his heart with his right hand, recites TS 5.7.9.1a-b 
and 5.7.8.1a as at the beginning of the construction of the new domestic 
altar (page 339) and at the beginning of the setting up of the Agni Field 
(page 386). Then he touches the white horse, steps on the aindri brick, 
and recites: 


à ; Wat enm. 
l. This the gathering of the waters, muiza =т 


the abode of the ocean. Le ича | à 
Let your darts burn somebody else! ara W opera, agg ad: 
Purify us, be friendly to us! чта згадзі Brat зіч il 


398 


FOUNDATION OF THE ALTAR 


m. Homage to your heat, your radiance! aue gi sif 
Let there be homage to your flame! wae атаа | 


Let your darts burn somebody else! 


Purify us, be friendly to us! ant d oraa, deg Ead: 


(TS4.6.1.2i-m) 91 wavy iret a y 


The items that have been brought are now about to be buried under the altar, 
all within the area of the ātman or "self," the largest square within the bird- 
shaped altar (see Figures 7, 24, and 25). In the meantime, helpers have al- 
ready put down some of the bricks of the first layer, especially in the out- 
lying areas, away from the ātman. This is not the ritual piling of the first layer: 
it is merely the physical deposition of the bricks. They are “piled” later when 
they are consecrated ritually and in the proper order by the adhvaryu to- 
gether with the yajamana. ; 

In order to obtain an idea of the various spots where the Agnis will be 
buried, it is necessary to know where the bricks are going to be piled, for 
the adhvaryu obviously has this in mind. The bird-shaped altar will be piled 
from five layers (Sanskrit: citi; Malayalam: patavi), the first four of two hun- 
dred bricks each, and the fifth of two hundred and five bricks. The bricks 
are of various sizes and shapes, as we have seen before (Figure 9). On the 
fourth through the eighth ritual day, each day one layer of bricks will be con- 
secrated. From the second layer onwards, the bricks will be physically de- 
posited, in any order, by helpers on the day preceding the day on which they 
will be ritually consecrated in the specified order. Because of the combination 
of the third and the fourth days on April 16, the bricks of the first layer are 
deposited and consecrated on that same day. The bricks of the first layer 
could not be deposited earlier in any case, as there are so many items to be 
buried under it. 

There is one pattern of bricks for the first, third, and fifth layers; and 
another for the second and forth layers. In this way, bricks are made to 
cover the boundaries between bricks on the lower layer. With the exception 
of the vertical passage at the center, the interstices between bricks are never 
above or under the interstices between bricks in the next layer. The same prin- 
ciple underlies the piling of the domestic altar, without exception, as we have 
seen (page 338). 

On each layer, some bricks are consecrated with individual mantras and 
in a specific order; they fall into groups with specific names, and after each 
group has been consecrated with the specific mantras, the bricks are con- 
secrated іп the same order for a second time with With That God (tayade- 
vata, TS 4.2.4.47) and for a third time with Pouring Milk (sūdadohasa, TS 
4.2.4.40). The remaining bricks are space fillers (lokamprna), and are con- 
secrated in any order, and each with the mantra Fill Space (TS 4.2.4.4 n). 
Afterwards, the space fillers are consecrated for a second time, with With That 
God, and for a third time, with Pouring Milk. To keep track of this threefold 
consecration, each brick is marked by a helper, generally the pratiprasthata, 


399 


PART П THE 1965 PERFORMANCE 


N 
\ 


84/85 


Kīza 
Kia 


ч 


a 
ЖЕШЕТ 
Q | 0 lp N J N 
HEHBESERERERES 
HE E 


o о 
J N 


ЕЕ 
ЕЙ 
N 


Figure 24—Order of Bricks in the first Layer 


400 


FOUNDATION OF THE ALTAR 


with a dot of white paste, for each mantra, so that the brick first has one, 
then two, and finally three dots on it. 

In the first layer, the first one hundred and sixty bricks are consecrated 
with specific mantras and in a specific order; the remaining forty are space 
fillers, but the first and the last are also fixed. Figure 24 gives the prescribed 
order, the shape, and the location of the bricks of the first layer. Table 6 pro- 
vides their names, either individually or of the groups they belong to. 

In principle, each brick is consecrated by the adhvaryu on behalf of the 
yajamana. Actually, both yajamāna and adhvaryu touch the brick and recite 
the prescribed mantra together. 


NAMES OF BRICKS IN THE FIRST LAYER 


Number Name of Bricks Number of Bricks 

1 Aindrī, “for Indra” 1 

2 Vibhakti, **share” 1 

3 Mandala, “circle’’ 1 

4 Retahsic, “‘seed discharging” ` 1 

5-16* Skandhya, “shoulder” | 12 
17—36 Apasya, '*watery" 20 
37-86 Prāņabhrt, “supporting exhalation” 50 
87-98 Samyat, “‘stretch”’ 12 
99-148 Apānabhrt, “supporting inhalation" 50 
149-153 Mukham, “асе”? 3 
154-158 Angam, “limb” 5 
159 Prājāpatya, “ог Prajápati" 1 

160 Rsabha, “Ыш” 1 
161-200 Lokamprna, “space filler" _40 
200 


* 15-16 are called Samyāni, “way.” 


TABLE 6 


There are five types of bricks used in the first layer (and also in the third, 
and, with slight modification, in the fifth). We һауе already seen their names 
and numbers (Table 3, page 202). With the help of Figure 24, the reader 
may verify the distribution of these types (paficami, sapada, adhyardha, 
paficamyardha, and adhyardhārdha) over the layer (which is relatively 
simple, unlike the second or fourth layer). A hint for those who wish to un- 
dertake this exercise: the two sapāda bricks are in the neck of the bird. 

The area of the bricks, and the total area of the layer, are given in Table 7. 


401 


PLATE 66,70B 


PLATE 66 
Keeping Track of the Consecration 


All the bricks of the altar will be consecrated with specific mantras, 
generally three for each brick: the first mantra is a specific mantra, 
in general different for each brick; the second and third are the 
same for all bricks, viz. With That God (tayādevata) and Pour- 
ing Milk (sūdadohasa), respectively. The order in which most 
bricks are consecrated is complex, as a glance at the diagrams in 
Figures 24, 26, 37, 38 and 39 will show. To keep track of the con- 
secration, a helper puts a dot of white paste on each brick for each 
mantra. Each brick will therefore receive first one, then two, and 
finally three marks on it. 


402 


403 


PLATE 67 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 
AREA OF BRICKS IN THE FIRST, THIRD, AND FIFTH LAYERS 


Number Area Per Brick Area 


paficami 38 1 38 
sapāda 2 1.25 2.9 
adhyardha 56 1:5 84 
paficamyardha 60 .5 30 
adhyardhardha 44 75 33 
187.5 
TABLE 7 


The total area of the altar (viz., of its first, third, or fifth layers; but 
also of its second or fourth, as well shall see: page 453) is 187.5 sguare 
aratnis, which is 7 1/2 times 25. So in spite of the complex sizes of their 


bricks, the Nambudiris preserve the tradition that the altar area should be 


7 1/2 times a square purusa (cf. pages 65-66; and Seidenberg in Volume 
II, page 96). 

As will be seen from Figure 24, the ātman, “бойу” or “self” of the bird 
consists entirely of squares and half squares. The Agnis will be buried under 
this ātman in specific spots, as illustrated in Figure 25. 

The first Agnis that are buried are the male and female pots. The adhvaryu 
takes a kumbha in his right hand, a kumbhi in his left, and puts a piece of 
gold in each. Then he goes with the yajamāna to the spot marked “А” in 
Figure 25 and buries them in a hole in the ground, which was made before- 
hand. He takes care that the male kumbha pot is closer to the center of the 
altar and the kumbhi pot further away from it. Yajamāna and adhvaryu 
then touch the pair with their hands and recite a pair of mantras: 


a. Those of a golden color, pure, and purifying; fetoqant: grilu: ure 
in whom Ka$yapa was born, in whom Indra; are эта: audi ағ: 1 
who of many forms conceived Agni as an em- CRIT 


чїй at at zu eur 


bryo— AEN 
let ne waters be gentle and pleasant to us! SR IM 
b. Among whom king Varuna goes WATS UAT а wee Wed 
observing the truth and falsehood of man; RTI RITUS | 
who, dripping honey, are pure and purifying— agaa: gar en: war 


let these waters be gentle and pleasant to us! 


(TS 5.6.1.1a-b) ko wt: opener v 


They bury the second pair at “В”, touch them, and recite: 
404 


FOUNDATION OF THE ALTAR 


Figure 25—“‘Agnis” Buried under the Atman 


c. Out of whom in heaven the gods make food, 


ERES cy . 
who аге іп many places in the sky, 4191 Хат fate grafa мн 


who wet the earth with their milk— at Waa agar эта | 
let these pure ones, the waters, be gentle and at: Эі vadrafa gar 
pleasant to us! жат. ATT: AWA VATA siue N 
d. Waters! With a friendly eye, gaze on me! = dā) б є) 

With a friendly body, touch my skin. Тач ит agat Uzuarssu: Braat 
I invoke all the Agnis who sit in the waters. agit gara tad R | 
Grant to me radiance, strength, and power! «sis зіч! gu dr 

(TS 5.6.1.1c-d) аі «i зөнїш бү dan 

405 


PLATE 67 
Burying Male and Female Pots 


In general, pots are female. However, under the altar of the Agnica- 
yana six pairs of male and female pots are buried. The unmarked 
pots are male; the female pots are marked with two breasts each. 
Here a helper, outside the outline of the bird, hands the adhvaryu, 
who sits within, a piece of gold. The adhvaryu is about to put this 
in one of the pair of pots in front of him. The male pot in front of 
him is partly visible, the female pot is hidden behind a much larger 
vessel. The other five pairs are awaiting their turn, also outside the 
outline of the bird altar. To the extreme right is the ukhā pot, which 
will also be buried under the altar. 


406 


407 


Part II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


They bury the third pair at “C,” touch them, and recite: 


e Since formerly going forth together 
you roared (anadata) when the dragon was slain, 
therefore you are named roarers (nadyah “‘rivers’’). 
These are your names: Rivers! 
f. Since sent forth by Varuna, 
you quickly leaped together, 
therefore Indra obtained (apnot) you as you were 
going. 
Therefore you are waters (āpah). 
(TS 5.6.1.2e-f) 


дея: dugdt- 
adaa gU | 

TATA dal ATA ew 
ат at araifa fama: || 
aa Чап чёт 

а: эй, gue | 


аат dt adt- 


1815191 #9 ETA || 


They bury the fourth pair at “D”, touch them, and recite: 


g. Flowing against your will, 
Indra restrained you (avivarata) by his powers. 
Divine ones! Therefore the name water (vār) 
is proper for you. 
h. One god stepped into them, 
flowing as they desired: 
“The great ones have exhaled (uddnisuh).”’ 
Therefore they are called water (udaka). 
(TS 5.6.1.3g-h) 


ATH «тг 
adaa ат RET | 
wal a: aher d- 
RAEI at aa, N 
mat way забие, 
QA ANTAR | 
зайчик 
асдієз= чач di 


They bury the fifth pair at “E,” touch them, and recite: 


i, The waters are excellent. The waters are ghee. 
These waters bear Soma and Agni. 
May their strong satisfying juice, mixed with 
honey, 
come to me with breath, with radiance! 
k. Then I see or hear. i 
To me comes a roar; to me voice. 
I believe I partook of immortality, 
when, gold-colored ones, I enjoyed you. 
(TS 5.6.1.3i-k) 


эпчї wat чанач ag- 
wheal ANT чч, at: | 


dist «3t ачччія&та 


aral mad ак ачат AT II 


aad Чалгыга: af goea 
нг A Wess ятка эпти, | 


ad Fat wader ale 


тааст add 41 d: al 


They bury the sixth and last pair at “F,” touch them, and recite: 


1. Waters! You are the granters of health. 
Grant us strength to see great joy! 
m. The most auspicious essence that you possess, 
grant to us here, 
like eager mothers! 
(TS 5.6.1.4/-m) 


408 


emit fē vr AAT 
etd SH Taras | 
ag vnbp cue on 
dt я: Gradāt Ta- 
«а эпик A 
sada art u 


FOUNDATION OF THE ALTAR 


They bury the rice for Brhaspati, adding a piece of gold, a small distance to 
the east of the center, at "G,” reciting: 


Repose in heaven! Array yourself in the sky! fr starent 
: а siue qu 
Flourish across the earth! S V 


You are holy splendor. For holy splendor, you. im š wa eee 
(TS 5.6.1.50) паччааіч sra mari eat ur 


The twelve pots and the Brhaspati rice are then further consecrated with 
With That God and with Pouring Milk. 

The Agnicayana sequence is now interrupted for some rites that belong 
to the animal sacrifice, and that also occur in the Agnistoma. They are con- 
cerned with the uttaravedi. Standing at the center, the adhvaryu sprinkles 
the altar ground with waters called indraghosavati (“having Indra’s roar”), 
toward the north on the eastern side (1), toward the east on the southern 
side (2), toward the north on the western side (3), and toward the east on 
the northern side (4), with the following four mantras, respectively: 


Let Indra's roar, together with the Vasus, Ferien 986: 
protect you in the east! grata ura | 


Let the swift one of mind, together with the Fathers, 
protect you in the south! 

Let the sage, together with the Rudras, 

protect you in the west! 


яаїзгатегат бә 
sama: ag | 
aaea є: 


Let Vi$vakarman, together with the Adityas, чапа, чї | 
protect you in the north! маат carssfērī- 
(TS 1.2.12.2i) SATA: WT | 


This is followed by five āghāra oblations of ghee, diagonally across the 
uttaranabhi, and accompanied by five mantras: 


we EYES А 
You аге a lioness destroying enemies, Іа TIAA 


svāhā! arā! | 
You are a lioness granting beautiful children, Тихо gaaaf: 
svāhā! sar | 
Hor a lioness granting increase of wealth, бача алєїч=йїг: 
svaha! т 
А a Ө «Izm 
You are a lioness winning the favor of the Ādityas, Bs b | " 
svaha! Бүктөп даи: 
5 1 
You are a lioness. Bear the gods to god-minded mare | 
yajamāna! тах хат dz tam aga 
Svāhā! asama 
І 
(TS 1.2.12.2k) sim 


At each svāhā, the yajamāna pronounces his tyāga: 
This is for the uttaravedi, not for me! TWA g a au 


409 


PL ATE 68 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


The adhvaryu removes the juhū, with a piece of gold that was tied to its end, 
reciting: 


For beings, you! жйгйт | 
(TS 1.2.12.2/) Е 


The rites near completion when the adhvaryu places three paridhi “en- 
closing” sticks on the west, south, and north side of the uttaranābhi, reciting: 


You possess all life. Make the earth firm! 
You rest solid. Make the sky firm! 
You rest unshakeable. Make heaven firm! 
(TS 1.2.12.2m) 


Penge gadi eg | 
afdrtgarattei Xe | 
мезана fad exe u 


Finally he throws some grasses and hair on the uttaranabhi, reciting: 


You are the ash of Agni, aidata- 
you are the mud of Agni! я: gilan à 


(TS 1.2.12.2n) 


During all these rites, helpers continue to place bricks on the outlying areas 


of the Agni field. 
We return to the Agnicayana rites. The adhvaryu places the lotus leaf 


in the center, at “Н” point of Figure 25, reciting: 


erat чаён яй: 
dagatia: fader | 
AAA AE мт = gūst 
feat таат абет sever || 


You are the back of the waters, the womb of Agni, 

the ocean overflowing on both sides. 

Growing to greatness like the lotus, 

spread out in breadth over the expanse of heaven! 
(TS 4.2.8.lc) 


This is followed by With That God and Pouring Milk. 

At this point the udgātā enters the picture, and with him the chants of 
the Sāmaveda. He stands west of what will be the tail, against the northern 
post of the eastern door of what will be the havirdhāna shed. From this 
position he will sing many of the Jaiminiya chants that characterize the 
Nambudiri Agnicayana. All references are to the manuscript that Itti 
Ravi Nambudiri placed at our disposal (see the note on the Jaiminiya, 
above, pages 276-278). This is the first chant: 


huve ha yi huve hà yi hesāyāļ brahma jajūānām prathamam purāstāt] 
vi simatas suruco vena à vat] sa budhnyā upamā asya vayisthah| 
sataš са yonim āsātāš ca vivah| huve ha yi huve ha yi hesaya au ho 


và] e rtam атат e rtam amrtam e rtam amrtàm]] 
(GG 33.9.2) 


410 


FOUNDATION OF THE ALTAR 


This chant is characterized by meaningless stobhas such as: huve hà yi hu ve 
ha yi hesaya (though have means "I call") and auhovà; as well as meaningful 
stobhas such as: rtam amrtam, “immortal order.” It is based upon a cryptic 
mantra from the Atharvaveda, which also occurs in the Taittiriya Samhita: 


Born as brahman first in the east, 
Vena has shone out of the glimmering horizon. 
He has revealed its highest and lowest positions, 
the womb of being and nonbeing. 
(AV 4.1.1 = TS 4.2.8.2d) 


The udgātā continues with another chant: 


ae чапа sere grama 
fa daa: meal da ata: | 
a абі чит eter Гарт: 


ача чача (ҹа: |) 


satyom|satya ho yi satya ho yi satya hà à vu và] г suvar jyotih 


(AG 25.24) 


This consists entirely of stobhas, including satyam, "truth," and ends: 
suvar jyotih, “heaven light" (see Table 15, page 533). 
At the same time, the adhvaryu has placed the golden breastplate 


(rukma) north of the lotus leaf, reciting the same mantra (TS 4.2.8.2d) upon 
which the first chant was based. This is followed by five ghee oblations, 
which occur also in the Agnistoma, but which the Adhvaryu makes on the 


breast plate, in the Agnicayana, as he recites five mantras: 


a. Assume your countenance broad like a net! 
Come like a powerful king with his retinue! 
Casting your swift net, you shooter, 
strike the demons with your burning arrows! 

b. Your whirling flames fly swiftly. 

Follow them with daring, glowing. 

Agni! Shoot winged flames with your tongue. 

Unrestrained, release your missiles of fire every- 
where! 

c. Send out your spies! Swift, 
be the undeceived protector of our clan. 

Who from far away and from nearby wishes evil 
upon us, 
Agni, let him not dare your course. 

d. Agni! Stand up! Extend yourself! 

You of piercing light! Burn down our enemies! 
Burning one! Who has done evil to us, 
burn him down like dry grass. 

e. Rise up! Drive them away! 

Reveal your divine power away from us! Agni! 
Loosen the strung bows of those quickening 
sorcery! 


41 I 


ga чт: aaa ч фоя 
gt Raa EAA | 
я=йня ЯН аот 
saisti fret serere: u 
ча ama эл Yar- 
SET AAT AINA: | 
quU Tel Tay 
vated Pr da Reames N 
ate єчїїї бг Өз чїйчнї 
маі mage эта erimus | 
at at zx чачат at e- 
a ft єлїгї, 1 
заң fau педзѕчч‹а C 
eafirats sitara, frase | 
ү ат alas «чта «rt 
ет & aera ч лең, | 
se da чїй fremere 
атса Zala | 

ad rt dft ята 


PLATE 68 
The Bricks of the First Layer 


While other ceremonies take place, the bricks of the first layer con- 
tinue to be put down. Afterwards they will be consecrated. 


412 


413 


PART П THE 1975 PERSORMANCE 


Crush our enemies, be they relatives or not! sarah ч 80: arka N 
(TS 1.2.14.1a-2e) | 


At each svāhā the yajamāna says his renunciation: 
This is for Agni, not for me! ай gå я Na 


The adhvaryu then places the golden man (hiranmayapurusa) upon the 
lotus leaf. This is accompanied by: 


The gold in the b x i ap 
e. The golden germ rose in the beginning. мае ята: uns 
Born, he was the single lord of creation. E «ічн E Hr erant i 
He supported the earth and the sky. ad x IT E 
What god shall we worship with oblation? ESI Peg i 
f. A drop fell on the earth and the sky, gadeg garag ut 
on this womb of his and on his first one. fet a їн аяг чї: | 
A drop wandering over his third womb, ada ud аз 
I offer for each of the seven priestly functions. ga dt gu баі: | 


(TS 4.2.8.2e-f) 


This is followed by two recitations of With That God, and two of Pouring 
Milk: one each for the golden plate and one each for the golden man. At 
the same time, the udgātā chants a long seguence of sāmans, which continues 
throughout some of the subseguent rites. There are four parts: 

I. The first is called the Great Chant (mahāsāman); 


ha bu ho ha yi (3 x) | antariksat suvar divan jaganma (3 x) parāt 
paramair ayantā (3 x)/ au ho va ha vu và] г yajūo divo mūrddhā 
devam ādano gharmo jyotih/ ha bu ho ha yi (3 x)/ antariksāt suvar 
divan jaganma (3 x) parāt paramair ayantā (3 x)/ au ho va ha vu val 
ē prthivy antariksandyaurāvah kanikradāt sindhur āpo maruto māda- 
yantam gharmo jyotih/ ha bu ho ha yi (3 x)/ antariksat suvar divan 
jaganma (3 x) parat paramair ayanta (3 x)/ divomūrddhānam samai- 
rayaddho ye ho và] yašo gharmo jyotih/ ya$as samairayaddho ye ho 
và] tejo gharmo jyotih/ tejas samairayaddho ye ho và] suvar gharmo 
Jyotih] suvas samairayaddho ye ho val jyotir gharmo jyotih/ jyotis 
samairayaddho ye ho уа] gharmo gharmo gharmo jyotih/ ha bu ho 
ha yi (3 x)/ antariksat suvar divan jaganma (3 x) parāt paramair 
ayantā (3 x)/ au ho va ha vu và] e ilā yacchahas krti yaccha] @ mano 
mahimanam yacchaļ ё tvisimojo yacchal г āyuh prana yācchaļ г 
caksušrotram yaccha] г prajām varco yācchaļ г pašūn višam yācchaļ 
ё brahmaksatram yācchaļ г suvar jyotir yaccha] ha bu ho ha yi (3 x)/ 
antariksāt suvar divan jaganma (3 x) parat paramair ayantā (3 x)| yaj 
jāyathā apürvaya] maghavan vrtrahathāya/ tat prthivim aprāthāyah/ 


414 


FOUNDATION OF THE ALTAR 


tad astabhna uta dayivam| hà bu ho ha yi (3 x)/ antariksat suvar divan 
jaganma (3 x) parāt paramair ayantā (3 x)/ au ho và ha vu val г tejo 
gharmas samkrilante šišūmatir vayu gopās tejasvatīr marudbhir 
bhūvanāni cakraduh] il ila] 

(AG 25.7, based upon JA 107.50; cf. RV 8.89.5) 


Apart from stobhas, this chant contains recurrent phrases such as “we have 
gone from sky to heaven, from the high to the higher." 

II. The next is a series of seven songs, based upon the Purusa Hymn, 
but with changes in the order of verses, and some unexpected changes in 
the text: 


и hu và hà bu (3 x) sahasrasirsa purusah/ sahasrāksas sahasrapat/ 
sa bhümim sarvato vārtvā/ atyatisthad dasāmgulām/ и hu và hà bu 
Q x) u hu và hà vu va] il ila] 
(AG 9.1, based upon JA 107.26; cf. RV 10.90.1) 


и hu vau ho và (3 x)/ tripad ūrdhva udait purusah/ pado syehābhavat 
punah| tathā visvan vyakramat/ ašanānašane abhi] и hu vau ho và (3 x) 
au ho và] i 12] и hu vau ho và (3 x) au ho va] sūvāh/ и hu vau ho va 
(3 x) au ho vāļ a] | 
(AG 9.2, based upon JA 107.27; cf. RV 10.90.4) 


i hi yau ho và (3 х)/ purusa ēvedam sārvām] yat bhütam yacca bhava- 
yam] pādosya sarvā bhütani] tripadasyamrtan dayivil i hi yau ho va 
(3 x) au ho và] i là] i hi yau ho và (3 x) au ho va] jyotih] i hi yau ho va 
(3 x) au ho và] iJ] 
(AG 9.3, based upon JA 107.28; cf. RV 10.90.2,3) 


ūrghā bu hà bu ha bu (3 x)/ tavanasya mahayima] tato jyayamsca 
pūrusah/ utamrtatvasyesanah/ уай annenàtirohati] ūrghā bu ha bu ha 
bu (2 x) argha bu hà bu ha vu va] il ila |] 

(AG 9.4, based upon JA 107.29; cf. RV 10.90.3,2) 


hà bu (3 x) tato virad ajayata] virajo adhi pūrusah/ sa jāto atyari- 
ccyata] pascat bhūmimatho purah/ hā bu (2 x) hà vu va / ī || 
(AG 9.5, based upon JA 107.30; cf. RV 10.90.5) 


hà bu (3 x) yat purusena havāyisā] devā yajfiam atanvata] vasanta ésam 
āsīdājyām] grisma idhmas $araddhavayih| ha bu (2 x) ha vu vali || 
(AG 9.6, based upon JA 107.31; cf. RV 10.90.6) 


hà bu (3 x) saptasyasan paridhayah| tris sapta samidhah karttah] devā 
yad yajfian tanvānāh/ abadhnan purusam hāvāyih/ ha bu ha bu ha 
vu và] ī]/ 
(AG 9.7, based upon JA 107.32; cf. RV 10.90.15) 


415 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


III. The next piece consists of nine forest songs, full of magnificent 
stobhas: 


u ha ha ha ha һай ha u ha ha ha ha ha ü (3 x)/ yad itas tanvo mama] 
dogà rasasya bhāyijīre/ narasamsena somayina] ahan tat punar adade/ 
yusmad apsarasas parayil] u ha ha ha ha ha à ha u ha ha ha ha ha ū (2 
х) и ha ha ha ha һай hà u ha ha ha ha hà vu và] ё suvar jyotih// 

(AG 12.1, based upon JA 107.35; cf. Staal 1961, 78—79) 


һа bu (3 x) hā ū (3 x) kā hva hvā һуа Буй һуа (3 x) ha ū (3 x) kā hvā 
һуа hvà һуа hvā ū (3 x)/ yasyedamarajoyujah] tuje jane vanam suvah/ 
hà bu (3 x) һай (3 x) ka Буй hvà hvà hvā hvà (3 x)/ һай (3 x)/ kā hvā 
пуд hvà hvà hvā ū (3 x) indrasya rantiyam brhāt/ namasvar i lāļ/ 
(AG 12.2, based upon JA 107.36; cf. Staal 1961,79) 


hà bu (3 x) ho (3 x) ho (3 x) ve ho (3 x)/ prajā dūtam ajijane il ilāj/ 
(AG 12.3) 


hà bu (3 x) i [a (3 x) suvas suvas suvar jyotir jyotir jyota au ho va] гі 
là suvar jyotih// | 
(АС 12.4) 


hà bu (3 x) i mā (3 x) prajāh (3 x) prajapate ho yi (2 x) prajapate hà 
vu và] e hrdayam (2 x) e hrdaya à vu và] prajā rüpam ajījane il ilā// 
(AG 12.5) 


udyam lokanaro cayo ho imam ļokānaro cayo ho yi] divam süryam 
arocayo ho yi visvam dütam arocayo ho hà au ho va] ghārmo rocīt// 
(AG 12.6) 


hà bu (3 x) phat phat phat phat phat phat (3 x)! ha bu (3 x) yo no 
vanusyann abhidati mārtāh/ ugana và manyamanas turo và] ksidhi 
yudhà šavasā và tama yindra/ abhi syama vrsamaņastuvo tah] hà bu 
(3 x) phat phat phat phat phat phat (3 x)| hà bu (2 x) ha vu va] mana- 
svar iļā// 

(AG 12.7, based upon JA 35.5) 


hà bu (3 x) ha bu hau hau hau hau hau (3 x)/ hà bu (3 x) indran naro 
nemadhitā havāntā yilyat pāryā yunajanta yi dhiyās tah] šūro nrsātā 
šravasaš cakāmā yi/ à gomati vraje bhaja tuvānnāh/ ha bu (3 x) ha bu 
hau hau hau hau hau (3 x)/ hà bu (2 x) hà vu va vayasvar ilāļ/ 

(AG 12.8, based upon JA 33.6; cf. RV 7.27.1) 


ha bu (3 x) bhā bham bham bham bham bham (3 x)/ ha bu (3 x) brah- 
ma jajfiànam prathamam purāstāt] vi sīmatas suruco vena à vat/ sa 
budhniyā upamā asya và yi sthāh/ sata$ ca yonim asataš ca và yi vahj ha 


INote that these final consonants written as “t”? are pronounced as “I” (see above, 
page 173). 


416 


FOUNDATION OF THE ALTAR 


bu (3 x) bhā bham bham bham bham bham (3 x)/ ha bu (2 x) ha 
vu vā/ brahma devānām bhati parame vyoman (2 x) brahma devānām 
bhati parame vyoman]/ 
(AG 12.9, based upon JA 33.9; cf. Staal 1961, 79; TS 4.2.8.2d, above page 
411) 


IV. The fourth and last group of these songs consists of a single chant, 
similar to the chant for the lotus leaf (page 411), but with purusa as the 
main stobha: 


purusom/ purusa ho yi purusa ho yi purusa hà а vu và] г suvar jyotih// 
(AG 25.25; cf. Table 15, page 533) 


These chants last, obviously, for a long time. In the meantime bricks continue 
to be put down. The adhvaryu has filled one of the kārsmarya ladles with 
butter and an udumbara ladle with curds. He places both a little to the north 
of the center. Adhvaryu and yajamāna twice recite With That God and Pour- 
ing Milk for these two ladles. A helper recites the snake formula (sarpayajus), 
while it is recited mentally by adhvaryu and yajamāna: 


g. Homage to the snakes ча! этет atri 
that are on earth, EP тпа | 
those in the sky, in heaven, * меа и ffr 
to those snakes, homage. E vd SIEM 

f. Those that are in the sphere of heaven, des ls] 


or that are in the rays of the sun, Ast їчї Rat 
those whose seat is made in the waters, A at qiie {Зи | 
to those snakes, homage. lig d: qd 

i. Those that are the arrows of sorcerers, ted: atrīt ad: | 
or those that are among the trees, Wt stay — Á 


or those that lie in holes, 


to those snakes, homage. Ta TIMES 
(TS 4.2.8.38) Я aisg ug 
з: атай ян: ц 


The udgātā continues his chants. 


Fourth Day: April 16, 1975 
EPISODE I3 _ 
The First Layer 


THE RITES FOR the Naturally Perforated Ones (svayamātrņņā) are about 
to take place, which indicates that the piling of the first layer has begun. 
This also provides an opportunity to survey some features of the structure of 
the entire construction. Actually, rites continue without a break. There is 


417 


PART П THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


no sharp boundary between the ceremonial foundation of the altar and the 
construction of the first layer. Not only have the helpers already physically 
deposited many of the bricks for the first layer, but the first and second 
brick, aindri and vibhakti, have been ritually consecrated some time ago 
(pages 387, 388). Moreover, several of the “Agnis” that have been brought 
(including the avaka plant, the tortoise, mortar and pestle, and the ukha 
pots) will only be buried after other bricks of the first layer have been con- 
secrated. 

The “naturally perforated" pebbles are šarkara pebbles (or “‘chicken- 
Fish") with holes in them. The rites for the “naturally perforated ones" on 
the first, third, and fifth layers form part of a larger sequence. The chants of 
the udgata illustrate this. Five times they are of the same structure and end 
in suvar jyotih “heaven light": when the golden breastplate is put down, the 
chant revolves around satyam, “truth” (also: “ritual correctness") (page 411); 
when the golden man is put down, the chant revolves around purusa, “тап” 
(page 417); when the “‘naturally perforated ones” are put down in the first, 
third, and fifth layers, the chants revolved around bhū, "earth," bhuvas, 
"air," and suvah, “sky,” respectively. The adhvaryu’s recitations on these 
three layers are also concerned with earth, air, and sky (see Table 15). 

On the first layer, the naturally perforated pebble has three holes 
(dvārā), and the adhvaryu breathes out (Sanskrit: anuprānyāt, Malayalam: 
puram nokki); on the third layer, it also has three holes, and he breathes out 
and in (vyanyāt; akam puram nokki); and on the fifth layer, it has five holes, 
and he breathes in (apānyāt; akam nokki). Of course, it is not easy to find 
pebbles with a specified number of holes. As in all such contexts, three holes 
means: at least three holes, etc. As for the different deities invoked in the 
recitations, a survey has already been provided (page 159). 

The first, third, and fifth layers are not only characterized by earth, air, 
and sky, but also by tejas, “glow,” jyotis, “light,” and suvar, “sky,” re- 
spectively. The adhvaryu, after completing his oblation into the eastern hole 
of the pebble, places a piece of gold on its western hole: on the first layer he 
addresses it as "glow" and asks to restrain earth; on the third layer he ad- 
dresses it as “еһе” and asks to restrain air; on the fifth layer he addresses 
it as Ку,’ and asks to restrain heaven (div). 

We shall now continue with the description and return to the first layers. 
The adhvaryu addresses one of the svayamatruna pebbles: 


You are firm, supporting, invincible, gas чела 
well made by the All-maker (Višvakarman). аяал ggu | 
Do not let the ocean dash you, or the eagle! ur eal agg Жый gmi- 
Unshaking, make the earth firm! saaa fadi exe h 
(TS 4.2.9.1 a) 5 


He carries the pebble clockwise around the Agni field, makes the white 
horse sniff at it, returns and is joined by the yajamāna and the Ignorant 


418 


THe First LAYER 


Priest (avidvan). The yajamana overtakes him and the three sit down at the 
center, facing east: the adhvaryu in the middle, the yajamāna to his right, and 
the Ignorant Priest to his left. Touching the pebble that has been placed over 
the golden man, they recite: 


Earth (bhūh): T: : RE 
Let Prajāpati seat you on the ridge of the earth! aaie zag SUIS: qe 
You who are wide and extending. You are broadness sated avei seitsfer 

You are the earth (prthivi). член adīt айбай 
You are earth (bhū). You are the ground. frat Ērdtu gde usi 
You are Aditi the all-sustaining, supporter of the Фо des fadi deg 


every being. И | 
Hold fast the earth; make firm the earth; ate et чайна NUIT 


x N ` 
do not harm the earth; sarilgrart а] Rala- 
for every breath, for every inhalation (apāna), бєз wg неп vaca 


for every diffused breath (vyana), aar wedaa dal hads ET 
for every exhalation (udāna), for support, for motion! wat az tl = 
Let Agni protect you with great welfare, a safe cover! 7 
With that god in the fashion of Angiras, sit firm! 
(TS 4.2.9.1b) 


At the same time the udgata chants his siman, which is composed on 
bhū, “earth”: | 


bhoromļbhūr ho уі bhūr ho yi bhar hà à vu vale suvar jyotih|| 
(AG 25.21; cf. Table 15, page 533) 


The adhvaryu breathes out. The avidvan gives him a goldencoin (panam), 
which he passes on to the yajamāna. The latter returns it to the avidvan. 
After the avidvan has left, the adhvaryu makes an oblation of ghee into the 
eastern hole of the pebble, reciting: 


Pate gait ачат чая 


To thought I offer with mind, with ghee, 
mat Yap FSSA d 


so that the gods will come here, 


delighted by the offerings, increasing the order. Пат area: 
On the path of the moving ocean wgaed IJAE чейя 


I offer to the All-maker (Vi$vakarman) "чүй Grado 


every day the immortal oblation—svaha! zi 1 BM, 
(TS 5.5.4.3) Газзан gf жп N 


The yajamāna renounces: 
This is for Vi$vakarman, not for me! fua gd ип 


The yajàmana and the adhvaryu put their thumbs (angustha) on the pebble 
and recite: 


419 


PLATES 11,69 


PLATE 69 
The Ignorant Brahmin on the First Layer 


This is the same event as was pictured on Plate 11 but more of the 
setting is visible. Many bricks of the first layer have already been put 
down, and the shoulders of the bird can be seen. Cherumukku Vai- 
dikan watches the trio of yajamāna, adhvaryu, and ignorant bra- 
hmin. In the background, Itti Ravi Nambudiri, the udgata, chants his 
sāman composed on the word bhū, “earth.” He stands at his usual 
spot, west of the tail of the bird, against the northern post of the 
eastern door of what will be the Soma Hall or havirdhāna. 


420 


421 


Part II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


I have mounted the earth, тумат 
let not breath abandon me! a at at alee. T 
(TS 5.6.8.la!) 


They place a piece of gold on the western hole of the pebble, reciting: 


You are glow, give me glow! walsh B EE gg 
Restrain the earth, protect me from the earth! gira des чб ні чїй | 
(TS 5.7.6.1c!) 


When these rites are completed, the brick consecration continues. The 
adhvaryu consecrates the Circle Brick (mandala), no. 3, with: 


(You are) the earth filled with food, a reservoir of gRredaqem Вет 


water. | p пре насле тыта сеат 

Меп are your guardians. Agni is placed in this. -— d ата da 
To this I resort, let it be my protection and refuge! Чен ч нен чоян чту 
(TS 4.4.5.1с) 


At the beginning of this recitation, the adhvaryu looks at the udgātā and the 
latter intones his chant, simultaneously: 


à te agna idhimahayi| dyumantan deva ājaramā] yāddhāsyātāyi paniyasi| 
samiddidayatayi dyaviya] isam stotr| bhyayabharo| ha yil| 
(GG 41.1.1) 


This chant is based upon: 


Agni, let us kindle you, эп X an еа 


radiant, unaging god, 4: 
so that this famous kindling stick, 2 чыч M 
ag van 4 wert 


most admirable, shines in the sky! ; 
Bring food to the singers! aiia adt- 
(RV 5.6.4 = TS 4.4.4.6t) — , 4% saara 9m aT n 


(This mantra will be used on the fifth layer to consecrate the first Pankti 
brick, one of the Meter Bricks: no. 113; page 335). The adhvaryu then 
consecrates the Seed-Discharging brick (retahsic), no. 4, reciting: 


May earth with seed discharging give me seed, чй taR А Фай gara 
may my seed procreate! oe noe 
(В$5 10.31:29.12-13) T Я tā: STR а 


This is followed by With That God and Pouring Milk, each four times, for 
the pebble, the piece of gold, the Circle and the Seed-Discharging bricks. 


422 


THE FIRST LAYER 


The adhvaryu then consecrates two Shoulder Bricks (skandhya), nos. 5 and 
6, with: 


You are Madhu and Mādhava, months of spring. Aya AMAA апаз, 
| (TS 4.4.11.1a) 

You are the internal composition of fire. atradis fà 

Let heaven and earth agree! zat arataa 

Let waters and plants agree! жеўктита AA: 


(etc.: see above, page 339) 
He adds the avaka plant with: 


You are Agni’s womb! ЭЕ Еч 1! 
(BSS 10.32:29.17-18) 


The adhvaryu consecrates the Dūrvā Brick (called after the dūrvā grass), 
no. 7, with: 


c. Rising up from every stem, from every joint, akava яд 
dūrvā, extend to us a thousandfold, a hundred- чё: Tea: ЧЇЎ | 
fold. wal 9 qu я dy 

d. You who extend with a hundred, Sean gad a 

arise with a thousand! at ata ag 


To you, goddess brick, - 3 
may we offer with oblation. Sue Bae | 
(TS 4.2.9.2 c-d) TENET dde 

frārt кїїчї яаа u 
At the beginning of this recitation the adhvaryu looks again at the udgata, 
who intones his chants at the same time: 


ayāmāyām (3x)/ svadisthaya madāyisthāyā/ pavasva soma dhārāyā! 
indrāya pātavāyi sūtah/ ayamayam (Зх) au ho val ī]/ 
(AG 15,7, based upon JA 49.2) 


This chant is based upon: 


Soma, clarify yourself, хаті ват аяг 
with a flow most tasty and inebriating! vānu SRM 
pressed for Indra, that he may drink! | oos S 

| уэл 9 E gen 


(This mantra, called pavamāna after the purified Soma, occurs also in the 
evening chant [arbhavapavamanastotra] at the third Soma pressing, page 646). 

The adhvaryu consecrates the Golden (hiranya) or Golden-Headed 
(hiranyamürdhni) brick, no. 8, upon which a piece of gold was put at the time 
of consecration: | 


423 


Part II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


n. Agni! These flames of yours which rising up in 
the sun 
spread over the sky with rays, 
with all of them, 
lead us to splendor, to men! 
o. Gods! Those rays of yours which are in the sun, 
in cows, in horses— 
Indra! Agni! Brhaspati!— 
with those grant us splendor! 
(TS 4.2.9.4n-o) 


qed эй Gy wd saat 
£d £e N 
Ваатағаіга aN: | 
1_ с, 
ar: «атай 
K Ц re 
Fa Ad SEEDT ll 


зт at 89: qu Tat 


A os 


wu Al IA gada N 


Again he has signaled the udgātā who sings his chant: 


hà bu (3 x) candram (3 x) | hà bu hà bu hà vu уд] abhratrvyo ana tvam 
anāpir indra janusa sanād asi yudhed āpitvam icchase] ha bu (3 x) 
chandram (3 x)/hā bu hà bu hà vu va | г candram (3 x)// 

a (AG 24.10, based upon JA 45.1) 


This chant is based upon: 


Indra, you are without brother, without friend 
ever since you were born. 
Seek your friendship in war! 
(RV 8.21.13) 


aair wat санан 
agai Baste | 
этан N 


The adhvaryu consecrates the Sovereign brick (virāj), no. 9: 


Brilliance bore the light! 
(TS 4.2.9.4p) 


Al 


Бе stAT. | 


and he consecrates the All-light brick (visvajyotit), no. 10, reciting: 


Let Brhaspati seat you on the back of the earth, 
All-light, for every breath, for every inhalation! 
Offer all light! Agni is your lord. 

(TS 4.4.6.1a) 


He consecrates the Companion brick (sayuk), no. 


I join you in bonds of companionship 
with Indra and Agni. 
(TS 4.4.5.1а1) 


течат aag wheat: qu 
sadi Ader uritur 
{зї зарлаа: и 


11, reciting: 


geatfueal ear agai gar ааба и 


and the Invincible (asādha), no. 13, which has three lines drawn on it, reci- 


ting: 


e. You are invincible when you attack. 


424 


зет AZAT 


. : THE FIRST LAYER 


Conquer our enemies! 
Conquer those who practice enmity! 
f. Conquer the battles! 
Conquer those who attack us! 
You possess a thousand heroisms. 
Impel me! 
(TS 4.2.9.2 e-f) 


Next comes the Gharma brick, no. 13: 


It has come forth like a ray from its hissing sound, 
it supports its burden like earth the soil. 
May pure divine inspiration come forth from me 
as a well-built chariot wins the trophy. 
Some have composed the great chant with concentra- 
tion, 
thereby causing the sun to continue, 
thereby causing the sun the shrine. 
That Agni is the dharma head. 
You are the mud, well liked by people and beasts. 
May Prajapati seat you! 
With that god, in the fashion of Angiras, 
sit firm! 
(TA 4.17) 


The Invincible brick receives three strokes. 


agang 

я тїш: d 

aed TAA: 
бя THAT | 

пеела 

ат al беа и 


su gratgrdssd ТИГ i 
ate З 9 я | 

= ang eal Heiter | 
AMAA CH A atrīt | 
чет wa Als amt menu 
ая Quay | 

ач gH RT, | 

sir: irragafā: |, 

gia citā asai чач | 
attdfiKar arzag | 

алі gadaas 

gar «= н 


The Adhvaryu consecrates the Nest brick (kulāyinī), no. 14, with: 


Your damp abodes, Agni, your nests, 
your drops, Agni, your navels, 
your bodies, Agni, truly powerful; 
with each of those two you are united. 
Agni, bestowing wealth, sit here with your offspring. 
May Prajapati seat you! 
With that god, in the fashion of Angiras, 
sit firm! 
(TA 4.18) 


ara ати art aay an geal 
dd зи 929] этэ arta: | 

qe эй aga жай ATA | 
aifrtagaditt: ааят: | 

яза zhane az t 

aatia HITS | 

qut зачат 

нат fia I 


Then he consecrates the two Way bricks (samyānī), nos. 15 and 16, with: 


You are the path of Agni, 
you are the path of Agni for the gods 
(TS 4.4.6.2e) 


lf 


wear waraiaienedía i 


Signaled by the adhvaryu, the udgātā sings six Way chants, which are long, 
and are comprised of many stobhas. They all belong to the Grāmageyagāna: 


425 


PLATE 70B 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


I. au ho ho hà yi vrsà | pavasva dhārāyā mārutvātā yi/6 yi ca mà cà 
matsarah | au ho ho hà yi vi$va | dadhana ējasā au ho và | 6 yi 
jvarà || 

(GG 49.3.8, based upon RV 9.65.10) 


П. vrsā bu ho ho hà yi/ pavasva dhārāyā mārūtvātā yi | ca ma 6 
ca matsarah | vi$va bu ho ho hà yi | dadhānā ојаѕа au ho va | 6 
yi jü va || 

(GG 49.3.9, based upon RV 9.65.10) 


III. hà vu và (2 x) hà hà vu vo và hà yi | pūnānās soma dharaya | аро 
` yasano ārsāsi | à rātnādhā уона yi mārtāsyā sidasi | ūtso dà yi vo 
hà yi ranyaya | hà vu và (2 x) hà hà vu vo va hā au ho уа [гай 

višvāni duritā tarema || 
(GG 53.1.16, based upon RV 9.107.4) 


IV. yad indro hà yi | citra mā i hānāsti tvādā ho yi | tam адга yi vo 
rādhas tan no vidā ho yi / vasā ubhayāhāsti yā vu vā / bhāro / 
hà yi [| 

(GG 36.4.1, based upon RV 5.39. 1) 


V. agne vājāsya gomato và | isanas sahaso yaho asme dehi jatavedo 
maha yi áravà vu và | šrodhiyā ē hi уа | о yi lāļ/ 
(GG 11.3.1, based upon RV 1.79.4) 


VI. ašvan na tvà bu ho hà yi | varavantam | vandadhyo hà yi | agna 
yin namā au ho và i ho hà yi / u hu và bhih | sam mrājantām 
adhvārā au ho và i ho hà yi | à hū va na mehiyà ha | ho yi là |! 

(GG 2.7.3, based upon RV 1.27.1) 


During this chant, the adhvaryu recites thirteen times With That God and 
thirteen times Pouring Milk, to complete the consecration of bricks nos. 
5-6, the avakà plant, and bricks nos. 7-16. 

The adhvaryu takes the wooden tortoise, smears it with the mixture of 
curds and honey, and recites: 


g. Honey the winds (blow), and honey the streams ag ani Kargā 
flow, ag «ala Arta: | 
for one who follows the cosmic order. яте: adm и 
Honey-sweet be the plants to us! OERE 
h. Sweet is the night and sweet ilu bis 


ad 5 D . 
the earthly realm at dawn. янт MAAK ха: | 
Sweet be our father the sky to us! ay deg se flat 

i. Sweet be the trees to us! agaa dr aaea- 


Sweet be the sun! 


Sides, ака gÀ: | 
Sweet be the cows! JA ает SD 


DN a: 4 
(TS 4.2.9.3 g-i) шагатат Wary Я: N 


426 


THE First LAYER 


At the same time the udgātā chants: 


pra mitraya prahabu| aryammnayi sacāho thiyauhu mārttāvasābuļ varauho 
thiyauhuvayi varuņe cchandiyam vacah] stotram hoyi rājauhūvāsu gayata à vu 
val ū pa 


(GG 27.3.1) 


This chant is based upon: 

Гая Gan 
Sing forth a friendly word to Mitra and Aryaman, is 19919 cdd 
you who follow the cosmic order, quedar l TN 
safe and pleasing to Varuna! чех i gēli шей qu 
Sing a chant among kings! RANA UAT WAT i 

(RV 8.101.5) 


The adhvaryu wraps the tortoise in the avakā leaf and places it at I" (see 
Figure 25), facing west, while he recites: 


May the great ones, sky and earth, CU a: wart sts БШ 


prepare for us this ritual! ae (легата | 
May they sustain us with support! frat At efiam i 
(TS 4.2.9.3k) 2 


ada SEIS N APTA 
яй A яш Aag Wu | 


Let the fires advance to the four quarters! 
Discerning may he lead this ritual for us, 


as he swells the ageless butter that brings good ыч edis ае 
heroes. = Gone tao 
яш абгкасата «та, t 
Brahman is the kindling stick of the oblation. EL E x 
(TS 5.7.8.1b) 


followed by With That God and Pouring Milk. 
The adhvaryu pounds the mixture of herbs (sarvausadha) with the pestle 
(musala) in the mortar (wlakhala), reciting: 


You are a powerful share, ssi ASET- 

a powerful filter. з: qT- 

Power food for food! ] Aaamara || 
(BSS 10.33:30.11-12) 

He places the pestle at “J,” reciting: 

That highest step of Visnu аброй: чєй чех 

the sages always gaze upon, азі waufea att: | 


spreadout like an eye in the sky. (2 
RAA «етая, | 
(TS 4.2.9.31) COURSES 


and the mortar at “J” with the space-filler mantra (above page 341): 


427 


PLATE 70A 
The First Layer 


“From the pankti meter 
the concluding verse (of a chant).” 
(TS 4.3.2.3e) 


Yajamāna and adhvaryu consecrate brick no. 81, one of the In- 
halation-Supporting bricks (prāņabhrt) in the southern wing, which 
will enable the bird to breathe. The brahman sits at his usual place, 
south of the altar, on his wooden turtle seat (kurmāsana). 


PLATE 70B 
Marking Bricks 
The marking of bricks with dots of white paste continues through- 


out the consecration. Brick no. 15 receives its third mantra (Pour- 
ing Milk) and is immediately marked. 


428 


WE 
Ux 
Ne Г fi 


d rj 
VIX AT T 
j Lu 

A 


= 
24 
ү ry 
M ^ 
PY 
Q 1 b 
\ | 


429 


PLATES 71,72A 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


Fill the space! Fill the hole! 

Then sit down in a friendly manner! 
Indra, Agni, and Brhaspati 

have placed you in this womb. 


are da fax qui- 

dt dite Brat aa 

zer err get 
(TS 4.2.4.4n) etna, Matah n 


This is further followed by With That God and Pouring Milk, each twice, 
one for the mortar and one for the pestle. 

The adhvaryu takes the ukhā pot and makes two ghee oblations with 
the sruva: 


q. Harness, God Agni, aN qgar f£ 9* aa- 
your excellent stallions, aay Wa QN | 
the swift ones that correctly bear—svaha! AE челт: MI 

r. Agni! Harness like a charioteer азап & Fagans 
the stallions that welcome the gods! ane aen 
Sit down as the ancient Hota—svaha! ND SL 

(TS 4.2.9.5q-1) Ft 941 qui: 4:1 


At each svāhā, the yajamāna renounces to Agni. Helpers dig a large hole at 
“K,” north of the center, and another helper, Nilakanthan Akkitiripad, puts 
the ukhā pot in it while the adhvaryu and the yajamāna consecrate it: 


Earth! You are firm. waste зб 
Conquer the enemies! ada чакга: | 
Sewn together by the gods, елау Baht 


you have reached immortality 
(TS 4.2.9.4m) 


Akkitiripad puts in the two spare ukha pots. The adhvaryu and yajamāna 
recite space filler for each and three times With That God and Pouring Milk. 

In the meantime, the human head has been placed in the first ukhā pot. 
The adhvaryu places pieces of gold in its mouth, its two nostrils, eyes, and 
ears, with the following seven mantras: 


TS 4.2.9.6s = 4.2.8.2f: see page 414 (for the 
mouth); 
t. This has become the strength of all the world 
and of Agni Vai$vanara (for the nostrils); 
Agni is light, full of light, 
a disk radiant with radiance (for the eyes); 
u. For the Rk, you! brilliance, you (for the ears). 
(TS 4.2.9.6 s-u). 


апаа апач a 
заг А 
BTA ааг AVANT, 1! 
Sr ral La eal | 


The adhvaryu makes two ghee libations in the eyes, each time reciting: 
The radiant face of the gods has arisen, fra жяпатазага 


430 


THE FIRST LAYER 


the eye of Mitra, Varuņa, Agni. fiat MID. 
He has filled heaven, earth, and air; p i TOME | 
Stirya (the sun) is the self of all that moves and 1511 aratgirdt aaar 
stands—svāhā! QA этед srlaeaegttar N 
(TS 1.4.43.lb) 


At each svāhā, the yajamāna renounces to Sūrya, the sun. The adhvaryu fills 
the mouth with the mixture of curds and honey: 


v. The offerings flow together like streams, 
purified within by heart and mind. 
I look upon the streams of ghee. 
A golden reed is in their midst. 
w. In it sits an eagle, making honey, 
nestling, apportioning honey to the gods. 
On its edge sit seven brown ones, 
freely milking forth the stream of immortality. 
(TS 4.2.9.6v-w) 


He addresses the head in the ukhā pot: 


a. Anointing the child Aditya with milk, 
the equal of a thousand, possessed of every form, 
spare him with your heat! Do not injure him! 
Make his life a hundred years, as you are piled! 
b. Do not injure this two-legged animal, 
you with a hundred eyes, piled for the ritual! 
I assign to you this manlike animal of the forest. 
With that, piling your forms, be seated! 
(TS 4.2.10.1a-b) 


айч ааа абат я Зай: | 
AISA AAA qanta: n 
qaa t aR aleà 1 
{етта ача wet ятата, и 
targa диз, желй 
startā Ad Wed 1 
ATT S SAR кїл: ан du 
zaai Tera agder IL il 


эй TA Wat WRA- 
Kadu пічні теча | 
Ч agha «ar ust du: 
атата жїк frate: n 

za ат Хеч ware 
adma er ar frate: | 
agalvaag & farti 

aa чейн ТИ az n 


He pauses briefly after “ritual.” He places a piece of gold on the forehead 


of the human head: 


Vi$vakarman is master of the directions. 
May he protect our cattle! May he protect us! 
Homage to him! 

(TS 5.5.5.la) 


He puts the horse’s head at “ЇЧ,” reciting: 


c. The rush of the wind, the navel of Varuna, 
born as a stallion in the midst of the waters; 
that golden child of the rivers in a base of rock— 
do not harm him, Agni! (Place him) in the highest 
heaven! 
d. Do not harm this one-hooved one among the 
animals, 


431 


Raka fert afar 
a vh чая чіт discum, Wa 
gem wd: 


alder HIT ате mi- 
A sre Әче RA | 
fari] adas gage- 
Rar eat: Tar euim N 
ai m атф varat 


PLATE 7I 
Burying an Ukha pot 


Nellikat Nilakanthan Akkitiripad puts a spare ukha pot west of the 
center of the Field of Agni. The first ukhā, blackened by fire, is 
already there. 


| 


432 


433 


PLATE 72A 
Consecrating an Ukha Pot 
Yajamāna and adhvaryu consecrate one of the spare ukhā pots. The 
human head has already been placed in the first ukhā. Only yajamā- 


na and adhvaryu can step on the altar or be within the outline of 
the altar space. | 


PLATE 72B 
The Sandal 
Whenever yajamāna or adhvaryu step, or are about to step, on the 


altar or within the outline of the altar space, they wear sandals 
(upānah, **under-tie") made of a piece of antelope skin (krsņājina). 


435 


434 


БЕА 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


neighing, the swift one in the races! 
I assign to you the buffalo of the forest, 
With that, piling your forms, be seated! 
(TS 4.2.10.1c-d) 


aft ana NAg 1 
rand ® anf 
aa frratacagāt (н da и 


He pauses briefly after "races." He places a piece of gold on the forehead 
of the horse, reciting TS 5.5.5.la (above), replacing *'Visvakarman” by 
"Prajāpati.” 


He puts the bull's head at “О,” reciting: 


. The unaging drop, red and spritely, 


I praise Agni at first thought with salutations. 
Arranging its joints according to the divisions, 
do not harm the cow, the radiant Aditi! 
This ocean, the spring of a hundred streams, 
pouring out in the middle of the world, 
which Aditi milks forth as butter for men— 
do not harm her, Agni! (Place her) in the highest 
heaven! 

I assign to you the steer of the forest. 
With that, piling your forms, be seated! 

(TS 4.2.10.2e-f) 


EI end) 2 
«stalta ung. 

Lo N S sal X N 
AAAS Чага AAA: | 
я wif: edant i 

Non ala a Y 

ят Beat Aaa u 
Za нк nargi 
этелніЯ ұічет A | 
q4 gaama aam- 
X m feed: чен AAT | 
Tagaltugad 3 feels 
ad Rearreraar fr 5 п 


y 


He puts a piece of gold on the bull’s forehead reciting TS 5.5.5.la, replacing 
“Уібуакагтап” by “Rudra.” Then he puts the ram's head at “P” with: 


g. Defender of Tvastr, navel of Varuna, 


born like sheep from the highest region, 

the great, thousandfold play of the demons— 

do not harm it, Agni! (Place it) in the highest 
heaven! 


h. This woolen trick of Varuna, 


skin of cattle, with two legs and four legs. 
the first birthplace of the offspring of Tvastr— 
do not harm it, Agni! (Place it) in the highest 
heaven! 
I assign to you the brilliant one of the forest. 
With that, piling your forms, be seated! 
(TS 4.2.10.3g-h) 


пах аге ATT * 
ee e - M 
Aa ят 16%: чїй up | 


саҹ qat figni genua | 
саб: жапай neni AR- 

au an ech: чей єчїн, | 
баттаа à xf 

Я баеятякнчат (9 я N 


S 
X 
q 


He puts a piece of gold on the ram’s forehead, reciting TS 5.5.5.la, replacing 
*Vi$vakarman" by “Varuna.” Then he puts the goat's head at “Q,” reciting: 


i. 


This Agni, born from the heat of Agni, 
from the burning of earth or of the sky, 

by which Visvakarman obtained creatures— 
him, Agni, let your wrath spare! 


436 


її arii У эта: 
mala збе sa at ае t 
x4 rat гдан! ez 

яни ts: чїй ч TOT U 


THE FIRST LAYER 


k. The goat was born from the embryo of Agni. 
She perceived her progenitor in the beginning. 
By her those worthy of ritual attained pre- 
eminence. 
By her the gods formerly attained godhead. 
I assign to you the deer of the forest. 
With that, piling your forms, be seated! 
(TS 4.2.10.4i-k) 


этап dust mata, 

ят qr ATT еН! | 
аят Wurm Wena- 
Ral War ЖЧ STU | 
mane Ч fran 
aa бчсатавтчат Fritz ut 


He puts a piece of gold on the goat's forehead with TS 5.5.5.1a, replacing 
*Vi$vakarman" by “Agni.” Finally the adhvaryu recites With That God and 
Pouring Milk, each ten times for each of the heads and the pieces of gold. 


Throughout these recitations, the adhvaryu is joined 


by the yajamāna. 


In the meantime, most of the bricks of the first layer have been put in 
place. While the last ones are placed in the center, the consecration continues. 


First come the twenty Watery bricks (apasya), no 


s. 17-36. They fall into 


four groups of five. The first group, nos. 17-21, are consecrated by adhvaryu 


and yajamāna, who recite: 


I place you in the flow of the waters. 
I place you in the rising of the waters. 
I place you in the ashes of the waters. 
I place you in the light of the waters. 
I place you in the course of the waters. 
(TS 4.3.1.1a) 


AT AREATA | 

ami catāttamgatfš | 

agi cal wesiecemzanfat | 
этчї car тл eruit | 
ami caisdā аттат tt 


The second group, nos. 22—26, are consecrated with: 


In your seat on the waves be seated! 
In your seat on the ocean be seated! 
In your seat on the stream be seated! 
In the dwelling place of the waters be seated! 
In the resting place of the waters be seated! 
(TS 4.3.1.1b) 


The third group, nos. 27-31, are consecrated with: 


I place you in the seat of the waters. 
I place you in the dwelling of the waters. 
I place you in the dust of the waters. 
I place you in the womb of the waters. 
I place you in the place of the waters. 
(TS 4.3.1.1c) 


The fourth group, nos. 32—36, are consecrated wit 


The gāyatrī meter. 


437 


any ae az | 
аң wes | 
ае ачи az 


812 | 
а 
= 

a 9 
eI 
4 
el 


smt car aza manfa. | 
aut car аз areata | 
aut сат gu «паат | 
seat car 919 атчан | 
erat cat чёт areata || 


h: 


apr Bee: | 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


The tristubh meter, 
the jagati meter, 
the anustubh meter, 
the pankti meter. 
(TS 4.3.1.2d) 


Each of the twenty Watery bricks is then consecrated with With That God 


and with Pouring Milk. 


Next come the 50 Exhalation-Supporting (pranabhrt) bricks, nos. 37-86. 


qefesaed: |. 


in five groups of ten. Nos. 37-46 are consecrated with: 


This one in the east is the existent; his is the breath 
of the existent. 

Spring was born of breath; gāyatrī born of spring; 

from gāyatrī the gāyatra (sāman); from gāyatra the 
upansu (cup); 

from upansu the trivrt (stoma); from trivrt the 
rathantara; 

from rathantara the seer Vasistha. 

With you taken by Prajapati, I take breath for off- 
spring. 

(TS 4.3.2.la) 


Nos. 47-56 with: 


This one in the south is the All-maker (Vi$vakarman); 
his is the mind of Vi$vakarman. 

Summer was born of mind; tristubh born of summer; 

from tristubh the aida (sāman); from aida the 
antaryama (cup); 

from antaryama the fifteenfold (stoma); from fifteen- 
fold the brhat; 

from brhat the seer Bharadvaja. 

With you taken by Prajāpati, I take mind for off- 
spring. 

(TS 4.3.2.1b) 


Nos. 57-66 with: 


This one in the west is the All-extending; his is the eye 
of the All-extending. 

Rains were born of the eye; jagati born of rains; 

from jagati the rksama (sāman); from rksama the 
$ukra (cup); 

from $ukra the seventeenfold (stoma); from seven- 
teenfold the vairüpa; 

from vairüpa the seer ViSvamitra. 


438 


wt чё уакты sp Alara 
чага: зіла nah іе 
maf nai manga Я- 
чта, Bradt creux 
taragrgtttu x 


эпіч аяг сач 


ant 4] МН эзел: || 


srt diam Raani 

чет нат dzagāvt 

ficit traf 
SAAT, dam: dune 
gzdt аата КЇЧ: i 
aan Agha еалт 

wil welt дәхи 


wt чап мел=п- 

чы делая | 
ЧТ aerator salt andi 
чает scd Tem: 
gare, deze: duced 
Зета апа RA: 


THE First LAYER 


With you taken by Prajapati, I take the eye for off- 
spring. 
(TS 4.3.2.2c) 


Nos. 67-76 with: 


This one in the north is the light; his is the ear of the 
light. 

Autumn was born of the ear; anustubh connected 
with autumn; 

from anustubh the svara (saman); from svara the 
manthin (cup); 

from manthin the twenty-onc-fold (stoma); from 
twenty-one-fold the vairaja; 

from vairaja the seer Jamadagni. 

With you taken by Prajapati, I take the ear for 
offspring. 

(TS 4.3.2.2 d) 


Nos. 77-86 with: 


This one above is thought; his is the speech of thought. 

Winter was born of speech; pankti born of winter; 

from pankti the concluding verse (of a saman); from 
concluding verse the āgrayaņa (cup); 

from āgrayaņa the twenty-seven-fold and the thirty- 
seven-fold (stomas); 

from twenty-seven-fold and thirty-three-fold the 
šākvara and raivata; 

from sakvara and raivata the seer Vi$vakarman. 

With you taken by Prajapati, I take speech for off- 
Spring. 

(TS 4.3.2.3e) 


язпчіча ааг саят 


аан ame: N 


«чч ga- 

wer did draw 
aaa ge wIe- 
agd: TARA emet 
afad cafe c 
"екп t 

м le, eal 
ARI fats: 
Ssmi RE RUIT аят 
AA qeu sume: n 


занч® afa- 

wey аттат 

Žardt uiam чеде 
чуй fradatradtae onm 
ааят, ача гї 
шта Rae arta таат 
«печатка srt: 
хата аят era 

are Wert amd: 11 


Next all the Exhalation-Supporting bricks are consecrated with With That PLATE 70A 


God and with Pouring Milk. 


Next are the twelve Stretch bricks (samyat), nos. 87-98. The adhvaryu 
consecrates them on behalf of the yajamāna, and sometimes accompanied 


by him, with twelve mantras: 


From life stretch to exhalation (prana). 

From exhalation stretch to inhalation (apana). 
From inhalation stretch to diffused breath (vyana). 
From diffused breath stretch to eye. 

From eye stretch to ear, 

From ear stretch to mind. 

From mind stretch to language. 


439 


Arga: HIN’ BAT | 
AMATAS 999 | 
agaaa AAT | 
"TAK | 
aga: Aas 999 | 
IEEE ES | 
«ddr arae dida | 


PART П THE 1965 PERFORMANCE 


From language stretch to self. 
From self stretch to earth. 
From earth stretch to air. 
From air stretch to sky. 
From sky stretch to heaven. 


(TB 1.5.7) 


ате aaas аҹ | 
aad: gras dus | 
qisar aaa way | 
arafa * ads 
Praeqaretds | 


followed by twelve times With That God and twelve times Pouring Milk. 
The adhvaryu then consecrates fifty Inhalation-Supporting bricks (apā- 
nabhrt), nos. 99-148, in five groups of ten. Nos. 99-108 are consecrated 


with: 


East among the directions; 
spring among the seasons; 
Agni the deity; brahman (priestly power) wealth; 
Trivrt the stoma; its fifteenfold path; 
the eighteen-month calf strength; 
krta! among dice throws, 
the east wind the wind; Sānaga the seer. 
(TS 4.3.3.la) 


Adhvaryu and yajamāna recite: 


May the fathers and grandfathers, near and far, 
protect us. 
May they help us in this brahman (priestly power), 
in this ksatra (military power), in this prayer, 
in this purohita office, in this ritual, 
in this invocation of the gods! 
(TS 4.3.3.2f) 


Nos. 109-118 are consecrated with: 


South among the directions; 
summer among the seasons; 
Indra the deity; ksatra (military power) the wealth; 
fifteenfold the stoma; its seventeenfold path; 
the two-year-old strength; 
treta among dice throws; 
the south wind the wind; Sanātana the seer. 
(TS 4.3.3.1b) 


gant 
NEN SN 1 1 
чёїатат ата: атат RA: , 


\ 


Rat: farmer sd? 

a a: qrq E silsaseq- 
fang, sarang A- 

зата теда giaa- 
яда piat аад u 


afan (gari 

їс kaar- 

{ней zaal at Рі 

аза: =н: at aganadafa- 
iāriamga- 

TAU SAAT 

zmz аге: galaa RA: d 


Adhvaryu and yajamāna recite TS 4.3.3.2f, as before. Nos. 119-128 are con- 


secrated with: 


West among the directions; 


1 The winning throw. 
2 The second best throw. 


440 


asi feat 
ME 


THE FIRST LAYER 


the rains among the seasons; 
The Višvedevas the deity; vis (agricultural power) 
wealth; 
seventeenfold the stoma; its twenty-one-fold path; 
the three-year-old strength; 
dvāpara3 among the dice throws; 
the west wind the wind; Ahabūna the seer. 
(TS 4.3.3.lc) 


qqt kaut 
fa gar šadi fag gids 


союл > 


ачах: «9: я sāgfākaaāta- 
Raad ad] gradsalat 


чапатат uds RTS: | 


Adhvaryu and yajamāna recite TS 4.3.3.2f. Nos. 129-138 are consecrated 


with: 


North among the directions; 
autumn among the seasons; 
Mitra-Varuna the deity; nourishment wealth; 
twenty-one-fold the stoma; its twenty-seven-fold path; 
the four-year-old strength; 
askanda among the dice throws; 
the north wind the wind; Pratna the seer. 
(TS 4.3.3.2d) 


чале Ba < 
zen 
тач à aal gt zA- 


Rafi: tala: а x» naaa- 


glag ad 
AREA SAAT 
Basta ard: sew RÑ: di 


Adhvaryu and yajamāna recite TS 4.3.3.2f. Nos. 139-148 are consecrated 


with: 


Zenith among the directions. 
winter among the seasons; 
Brhaspati the deity; brilliance wealth; 


twenty-seven-fold the stoma; its thirty-three-fold path; 


the draught-animal strength; 

abhibhū among the dice throws; 

the all-pervading wind the wind; Suparna the seer. 
(TS 4.3.3.2е) 


geal R S 
ханаа 
quI ast zat 
foen «а: а з яаа 
qgargal staret At 
faar ате: gadt R: 1 


Adhvaryu and yajamāna recite TS 4.3.3.2f. Each of the fifty Inhalation- 
Supporting bricks is consecrated with With That God and Pouring Milk. 
Five Face bricks (mukham), nos. 149-153, are consecrated with five 


mantras: 


This Agni is the head and peak of heaven 
lord of the earth. 
He gives life to the seeds of the waters. 
(TS 4.4.4.1a) 


You are the leader of the ritual and the region, 
where you resort with auspicious stallions. 


3 The third best throw. 
441 


gai AWA WAT AA 
чат (308: aaa Brant: | 


Part II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


AS 


You placed your head in heaven, winning splendor. Ё wala «fU gad 


Agni! You made your tongue bear the oblation. itary чәч SETA ! 
(TS 4.4.4.1d) 

Guardian of the people, vigilant and clever, ster ta sistat. safe 

Agni was born for new prosperity. tit: gad: garu яза! 


Face touched with butter, he shines brightly 
with great sky-touching flame for all the Bhāratas. 
(TS 4.4.4.2g = RV 5.11.1: see page 74) 


gander gear (атат 
gate wb aera: RN 1 


Agni! You, a radiant celebrity, eat Rasaan 
with flaming hair and dear to many, kadrā Ag araa: | 
men i i i EE LEER 

en invoke you in their homes asst gear- 
to carry the oblation. EET a 

(TIS4443) TESTS (| 

May we kindle you, God Agni, ят @ аги кч afer: 
radiant and unaging. SURE rea 1 
When this wonderful kindling stick of yours quem зеп Brad 


radiates in the sky, 


ESHHIZ wid We 
then bear food to the praisers. жЕ 


as 4.4.4.6) dar ae n 


This is followed by With That God and Pouring Milk, each five times. 
The adhvaryu then consecrates five Limbs (айрат), nos. 154-158, with 
five mantras: 


With the eastern direction I place you, with the ^ esL car Ray areata 
gāyatrī meter, EEUU starsat kadar- 


with Agni as the deity; ME ае ās 
with the head of Agni I put down the head of Agni. sin aoisi: fare st pu 
[AUC (eat «паат 


With the southern direction I place you, with the 7 CEN M 
tristubh meter, aga sadan kadar 
with Indra as the deity; St: чао: werd ga i 
with the wing of Agni I put down the wing of Agni. adeat гат fart atza 
With the western direction I place you, with the STET veiut fas badar- 
jagati meter ыо EE 
with Savitr as the deity; pu ur idi alā 
i ; | 4 SAIS car art AIZAN- 
with the tail of Agni I put down the tail of Agni. Н а= 
With the northern direction I place you, with the SES Ā 
anustubh meter, E Jau: SAGA gun 
with Mitra and Varuna as the deity; gaar гат eR «ач 
with the wing of Agni I put down the wing of Agni. Шат wear ge Zata- 
With the upward direction I place you, with the st: 919: gegd gary n 
pankti meter, р 
with Brhaspati as the deity, 
with the back of Agni I put down the back of Agni. 
(TS 5.5.8.2-3) 


442 


mata weder frataturrat Baar 


THE First LAYER 


followed by With That God and Pouring Milk, each five times. 
Next comes the Prājāpatya brick, no. 159, consecrated with: 


Senes чїїнї 


The equal of the year IB B 
at wal ает | 


that they worship in you, night! 


Making his children rich in heroes, FANS FA і grat. 
may he obtain a full life! rra 11 
(TS 5.7.2.1b) Ё 


and the Bull, no. 160, with: 


SS = ZM SRS 
To you, Agni, bull, clever one, CATHY TOT “фет 


I have come, creating you young again. яа sre ma quu | 

May our household rites not falter! ег maafi aa 

With pointed sacred power, sharpen us! {лүн aei aefa 1 
(TS 5.7.2.la) RITE QUE 


followed by twice With That God and Pouring Milk. 


The only bricks left on the first layer are the forty Space Fillers (lokam- 
prna). They may be consecrated in any order by reciting the mantras Fill 
the Space, With That God, and Pouring Milk. On the first, third, and fifth 
layer, they are consecrated in the eastern direction. The first Space-Filler 
brick (no. 161) is consecrated jointly by adhvaryu and yajamana. This occurs 
on all layers. Moreover, on the first and third layer, the last brick, no. 200 in 
Figures 23 and 25, is consecrated by the adhvaryu. 

The adhvaryu commands brahman and pratiprasthata: 


Cover this Agni with space fillers gaan Sim N: 
in the eastern direction! ачыта C 


The text of this praisa, command," is not found elsewhere (but cf. BSS 
10.36:34.8-9). While adhvaryu and yajamāna, assisted by pratiprasthātā 
and brahman, recite the three mantras over the space fillers as fast as they 
can, the udgātā sings his eight space-filler chants, all taken from the Ara- 
ņyegeyagāna and replete with stobhas: 


I. hà bu mahi (3 x) mahi mahi (3 x) mahye mam hye (3 x) | 
mahi trinàm avār astu | dyuksam mitrasyaryamnah | durādha- 
rsam varunasya / hā bu mahi (3 x) mahi mahi (3 x) mahye mam 
hye (2 x) mahi mahi mā au ho và | е mahy e mahy e mahi || 

AG 24.5, based upon JA 20.8;cf. RV 10.185.1) 

II. ha bu divi (3 x) divi divi (3 x) / dā yi ve (6 x) / au ho au ho va | 
mahi trinam avār astu | au ho au ho va | dyuksam mitrasyā- 
ryamnah | au ho au ho và | durādharsam varunasya | hà bu divi 


443 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 
(3 x) divi divi (3 x) / da yi ve (4 x) divi da yi va au ho va | e 
divy e divy e divi |/ 
(AG 24.6 based upon JA 20.8; cf. RV 10.185.1) 
III. agnom | agna ho agna ho agna hà à vu và | г jyotih |] 


(AG 25.32) 
IV. vayom / vaya ho yi vaya ho yi vaya ha à vu va | e raja |/ 

(AG 25.33) 

V. süryom | sürya ho yi sarya ho yi sürya hà à vu va | г bhraja || 

(AG 25.34) 

VI. candrom | candra ho yi candra ho yi candra hà a vu va] @ à 
bhraja || 

(AG 25.35) 

VII. nakom | naka ho yi naka ho yi naka hà à vu và | г prstham || 

(AG 25.36) 

VIII. sukrom / šukra ho yi $ukra ho yi $ukra hà à vu va | ē bhrala 
bhrājā |] 

(AG 25.37) 


The last six chants have a structure similar to the chants of AG 25.21-25, 
which occur elsewhere in the Agnicayana (see Table 15 on page 533). 
While these chants continue, adhvaryu and yajamana complete the con- 
secration of the Space Fillers. The adhvaryu sweeps the layer with a broom 
of palāša leaves and recites the space-filler mantra once more together with 
the yajamana. The adhvaryu touches the layer and recites: 


The wise (Agni) will distinguish good and bad 
thought, 
like the straight and crooked questions of men! 
For wealth and good offspring, god, 
grant us gifts and remove their absence. 
(TS 5.5.4.4 = RV 4.2.11, a difficult verse; cf. 
Renou 1964, 89-91) 


TS 4.4.4.1a (as above, page 441). 


May speech be in my mouth, breath in my nostrils, 
sight in my eyes, hearing in my ears, 
strength in my arms, power in my thighs. 
May all my limbs be uninjured. 
May your body be with my body! 
Homage to you! Do not harm me! 
(TS 5.5.9.2) 


You are giver of exhalation, giver of inhalation, 
giver of the diffused breath, giver of eyesight, 


444 


Raf SIE бичак Aga 
qud йат dāma g māla | 
ай «і я: ZEE 
aft a menage н 


XE E EL 
sea: 907: Ārā 
аен NAN- 

sit Веле 

ачгаяаі Ù az 

ян seg ar at 189: it 


ama ATT 
слізгае] 


THE SECOND LAYER 


giver of splendor, giver of freedom. dai”zi # апат: | 
Let your flames injure эло else! меб su dqeg tau: 
Be purifying and friendly to us! aay eren» Brat Ичи 


41 


(TS 4.6.1.4q) 


The first layer is now almost completed. The adhvaryu recites TS 5.7.9.1 
a-b and 5.7.8.la, as he did at the beginning of the construction of the domes- 
tic altar, of the setting up of the Agni field, and of the first layer (pages 
339, 386, 398). He touches the black horse and spreads loose soil over 
the first layer, reciting TS 1.5.11.1d, followed by With That God and 
Pouring Milk, as he did on all layers of the domestic altar (page 342). 
He makes two Piled Together (samcita) butter oblations, reciting: 


Agni, ocean! Your arrow is called young. AH gzū ата YA Wa 
Be gentle with it to us. aat dt we 
i 1 NN Ci 
= this ai of yours, homage! 2e amle aa ^ 
iving on it, may we prosper—svaha! » 
weed ST shan жагы 
ass S191 n 
This I request of you, praising you with brahman; аха] эй яётт ada 
this the yajamāna seeeks with offerings: тя alee astarīt = РРА: i 
Without anger, Varuna, be here! б, alsa aes Meg- 
Wide ruler! Don’t take away our life—svaha! асе e eii 
(TS 2.1.1.6w) Re En ees d 


At the first svāhā, the yajamāna renounces to Agni; at the second, to Varuna. 
At about 4:30 p.m., less than two hours after the fetching of the Agnis, 

the first layer is completed. All return to the Old Hall. After the evening 

Pravargya, Upasad, and the usual rites, the fourth ritual day ends. 


Fifth Day: April 17, 1975 
EPISODE I4 
The Second Layer 


THE FIFTH RITUAL day starts with the morning Pravargya and Upasad, 
and the accompanying ceremonies. As on the previous and following days, 
a brown and a white horse are tied to poles immediately east of the altar, 
to the north and south, respectively. The bricks of the second layer have 
already been put down on the evening before, not without expert guidance, 
for their shapes and pattern are very complex. They will now be consecrated 
by the adhvaryu together with the yajamāna. Though the pattern is more 
complicated than that of the first layer, the consecration procedure is simpler. 
The description will therefore be relatively brief. 

In the second layer, the first 57 bricks are consecrated in a particular 
order; the remaining 143 bricks are lokamprna, Space Fillers. The order 


445 


THE SECOND LAYER 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


paficamí 


Figure 27—Paficami Bricks in the Second and Fourth Layers 


Figure 28—Sapada Bricks in the Second and Fourth Layers 


Figure 26—Order of Bricks in the Second Layer 


447 


446 


THE SECOND LAYER 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


Figure 31—Adhyardhardha Bricks in the Second and Fourth Layers 


Figure 29—Adhyardha Bricks in the Second and Fourth Layers 


adya 


paīīcamipā 


dha 


райсатуаг 


Figure 32—Paūcamipādya Bricks in the Second and Fourth Layers 


Figure 30—Paiicamyardha Bricks in the Second and Fourth Layers 


449 


448 


THE SECOND LAYER 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


āmši 


ert 


Figure 35—Dīrghapādya Bricks in the Second and Fourth Layers 


Figure 33—Ettāmši (Astāmši) Bricks in the Second and Fourth Layers 


Figure 36—Ubhayi Bricks in the Second and Fourth Layers 


šūfapādya 


Figure 34—Sūlapādya Bricks in the Second and Fourth Layers 


451 


450 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


and shapes of the bricks are given in Figure 26. Ten separate figures illustrate 
the distribution of the ten types of bricks over the second (and fourth) layer 
(Figures 27-36). The names of the bricks are provided by Table 8. The 
area of the bricks and the total area of the second (or fourth) layer are given 
in Table 9. 


NAMES OF BRICKS IN THE SECOND LAYER 


Number Name of Bricks Number of Bricks 

1 Vibhakti, Share" 1 

2- 6 Skandhya, “Shoulder” 5 
7-11 Āšvinī, “Of the Ašvins” 5 
12-16 Rtavya, “Season” 5 
17-21 Pranabhrt, “Supporting Exhalation”’ 5 
22-26 Vrstisani, “Rain Bringing" 5 
27-30 Mürdhanvati, **Containing "Head”” 4 
31-45 Vayasya, “Vigor” 15 
46—50 Mukham, “Face” 5 
51-55 Anga, “Limb” 5 
56 Prājāpatya, “for Prajapati”’ 1. 

57 Rsabha, “Ви” 1 
58-200 Lokamprna, “Space Filler" .143 
200 
TABLE 8 


The reason for the complexity of the pattern of the second layer, and 
indeed for the more complex shapes of the paficamipadya, astāmši (ettāmši) 
Sülapadya, dirghapadya, and ubhayi bricks, lies in the principles that under- 
lie the entire altar construction. First, except for the vertical passage at the 
center, the interstices between bricks must never be above or under the inter- 
stices between bricks of the next layer. Second, each layer should consist of 200 
bricks. Third, the total area of the altar should be 7 1/2 square purusas. Once 
these principles are adopted and the pattern of the first layer is established, 
the pattern of the second must have been arrived at by trial and error.! 


1 The pattern of the second layer of the 1975 altar is almost identical with a pattern 
known to earlier commentators in the Baudhayana tradition (see Thibaut's edition 
and translation of the Baudhāyana Sulva Sütra, with excerpts from commentaries: 
The Pandit, February 1, 1876, p. 218). 


452 


THE SECOND LAYER 
AREA OF BRICKS IN THE SECOND AND FOURTH LAYER 


Number Area Per Brick Total Area 
paūcami 11 1 11 
sapāda 21 1.25 26.25 
adhyardha 67 153 100.5 
paficamyardha 12 19 6 
adhyardhardha 34. ‚75 25.5 
paūcamipādya 11 ‚25 2.75 
ettāmši 2 „125 225 
šūlapādya 6 .375 2.25 
dirghapadya 28 375 10.5 
ubhayi 8 3125 2:5 
187.5 
TABLE 9 


So let us return to the consecration of the second layer on April 17, 
1975. After yajamàna, adhvaryu, brahman and pratiprasthata have put on 
their sandals, the yajamāna sits down at his usual place south of the bird, 
the brahman on his right. The adhvaryu, standing west of the tail, again 
recites TS 5.7.9.1a, touching his heart with his right hand, and TS 5.7.8.1a, 
with folded hands. He touches the white horse, ascends the altar together 
with the yajamāna, and recites TS 4.6.1.3/-m, as before. The consecration 
of the bricks begins. The Share brick (vibhakti), no. 1, is touched, with: 


We chose Agni as our messenger, «alā ză FRÈ | 
as omniscient hotr of this ritual, "Erat їчїн 
rich in spiritual power. AE TAM gada | 


(TB 3.5.2.3 = RV 1.12.1) 


followed by With That God and Pouring Milk. At the same time, the udgata 
begins the chanting of his Way chants (samyānī), which continues over the 
next five bricks (same as above, page 426). 

Of the five Shoulder bricks (skandhya), nos. 2-6, the first two are con- 
secrated together with: 


You are Sukra and Suci, months of summer. 


Av j 
ama maar dr 
БЕКТИ. л: 


The adhvaryu adds an avaka plant, with: ~ 
| 453 


PLATE 72B 


PLATE 73 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


You are Agni's womb! 
(BSS 10.38:35.16; above page 423) 


Nos. 4 and 5 are consecrated with: 


I join you in bonds of companionship 
with two ghee oblations. 
I join you in bonds of companionship 
with brilliance. 
(TS 4.4.4.1a2; cf. page 442) 


No. 6 is consecrated with: 


You are the path of Vayu. 
(TS 4.4.6.2f!; page 425) 


aaah | 


arg! cat ази sen gata | 
чет сат agat spem aaa п 


amaA | 


followed by six times With That God and Pouring Milk for nos. 2-3, the 


avakā plant, and nos. 4-6. 


The five bricks for the A$vins (a$vini), nos. 7-11, are consecrated with: 


a. Firm your dwelling; firm your womb; you are 
firm. 
In your firm womb sit correctly! 
As first sign of fire in the ukhā pot, 
may the two Ašvins, adhvaryus, 
seat you here in the east! 
b. Under your own skill, you whose father is skill, 
sit here, 
as the great earth bountiful among the gods! 
Settle down with your body, 
kind, like a father to his son! 
May the two Ašvins, adhvaryus, seat you here! 
c. Nesting, rich in wealth, granting strength; 
increase our wealth, abundant and rich in heroes! 
Dispelling enmity and hostility, 
let the lord of ritual share in the increase of 
wealth, 
grant heaven as property to the yajamāna! 
May the two Ašvins, adhvaryus, seat you here! 


.d. You are the mud of Agni, leader of the gods. 


May the Višvadevas greet you as such! 

With stomas for your back, rich in ghee, sit here! 

Gain us wealth with offspring through ritual! 

May the two Ašvins, adhvaryus, seat you here! 
е. You are the head of heaven, navel of the earth, 

divider of the directions, supreme woman of the 

worlds. 


454 


за аата 

gat fru dz grari 
Sa mg пча geal- 
«бгаїзєчй atzara cal u 


d 4 
ram gaat ЖЕЧЇ wT | 
=паеп TAI A Raa 

Rf aaa эп gar- 
Рача alaan vat u 
жетй agah aita 

їй at ad ages аң | 
agntfā Tat atar 

wend aadar, 

дана asama Ad- 
aPratseay aaa cuta 

ai: gai Zaai 

at cat РР атат чіт Fat: | 
rangu gaadis diz 

татай я Ротар. 
Bratsea4 aera йе cat |! 

feat gatsfi gsm enfat- 
{йет Гета че. заетата, | 


THE SECOND LAYER 


You are the wave, the drop of water, 

Višvakarman is your seer. 

May the two Ašvins, adhvaryus seat you here! 
(TS 4.3.4.1a~2e) 


эїййсєп oraret 
(аяа а RR- 
qaasi ателие cat u 


This is followed by five times With That God and Pouring Milk. 
The five Season bricks (rtavya), nos. 12-16, are consecrated with: 


United with the seasons, with the ordainers, 
with the Vasus, establishing strength, 
you for Agni Common-to-all-men, 
may the two Ašvins, adhvaryus, seat you here! 
(TS 4.3.4.3f) 


N C СМ 
aka: ачат: 
нач: ga wa 
ATIRA: язга а: 

sek wad tly X 
1539: ATS Vaya st 
THA TAT aratai- 
fasat атчан cal 1 


and four more mantras resulting from this by replacing “‘Vasus” by “Ru- 
dras,” *Adityas," *All-gods" and “gods” ; followed by five times With That 
God and Pouring Milk. 

The five Exhalation-Supporting bricks (prāņabhrt), nos. 17-21, are 
consecrated with: 


Protect my exhalation! яй Haar 
Protect my inhalation! ча H afè S 
Protect my diffused breath! Sar Hate 
i my eyes и wide! augā seat fü чї 
ake my ears hear! mud 
ĀTĀ U HAM 
(TS 4.3.4.38) | 


followed by five times With That God and Pouring Milk. 

The five Rain-Bringing bricks (vrstisani), nos. 22—26, receive special 
treatment: each is lifted out of the layer where it had already been placed, 
and carried by two helpers clockwise around the altar, while the adhvaryu 
touches it. Each is consecrated after it has been put back in its place. The 
five mantras are: 


^ 
aqleqeay- 
Make the waters overflow! d еа = 
Bring the plants to life! A Tm 
fart uiti 


Protect those with two legs! 
Help those with four legs! ada 

From the sky produce rain! . ват ааа и 
(TS 4.3.4.41) 


followed by five times With That God and Pouring Milk. 

The four mürdhanvati bricks, “containing [the word] ‘head’ (mürdhan)," 
nos. 27-30, are consecrated with four mantras of which the fourth contains 
the word ‘head’: 


455 


PLATE 73 
The Second Layer 


“Nesting, rich in wealth, granting strength; 
increase our wealth, abundant and rich in heroes! 
Dispelling enmity and hostility, 
let the lord of ritual share in the increase of wealth, 
grant heaven as increase to the yajamāna. 
May the two Ašvins, adhvaryus, seat you here!” 
(TS 4.3.4.lc) 


Yajamāna and adhvaryu consecrate brick no. 9, one of the bricks 
for the Ašvins in the second layer, while the udgātā continues his 
Way chants (samyàni). The rsabha brick, no. 57, has a picture in 
white paste of a bull on it. 


456 


457 


PLATE 73 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


(You are) support in strength, overlord meter; 
military power in strength, delightful meter; 
Višvakarman in strength, paramestin meter; 
head in strength, prajāpati meter 


Rea aisg: 

ай adi add Trai 

S E Posts \ >. N 

fi ad: ч seat 
е NC. 2 

(TS 4.3.5.1a16-19) ҸҸ et smit: Ц 


followed by four times With That God and Pouring Milk. 
The fifteen Vigor bricks (vayasya), nos. 31-45, are consecrated with 
fifteen mantras: 


LIT р ЕС 
(You аге) the calf of eighteen months іп strength, saree e«t 
the tristubh meter; елате aA Buz жең: 
the two-year-old in strength, the virāj meter; galfrāāt amt ae 


{тай ad жшт p. 
«qam 9915999 Bed: 
«eara gedt ory 


the two-and-a-half-year-old in strength, the 
gayatri meter; 

the three-year-old in strength, the usnih meter; 
the four-year-old in strength, the anustubh meter; : 
the draught animal in strength, the brhati meter; Seat E adigādi gea 
the bull in strength, the satobrhati meter; RIAI 99: "seit 
the bullock in strength, the kakubh meter; waka чаі gA- 
the cow in strength, the jagati meter; R STER, ad: uzfīrsgēd: dl. 
the beast of burden in strength, the pankti meter; еф ай Pras сей: 1 
the goat in strength, the averted meter; 

4 à ? genda Bae ed 
the ram in strength, the spacious meter; 
the tiger in strength, the invincible meter; ena асаа ed: 


the lion in strength, the covering meter; feet азоби: | 
the man in strength, the lazy meter. чет айка wea: | 


(TS 4.3.5.13171214715,13) 


followed by fifteen times With That God and Pouring Milk. 

The remaining groups of bricks: Face (mukham), Limb (angam), For 
Prajāpati (prājāpatya), and Bull (rsabha), nos. 46-57, are consecrated in 
the same manner as on the first layer. The 143 Space-Filler bricks are con- 
secrated in the northern direction, beginning with no. 58. The adhvaryu 
recites: 


Cover this Agni with Space Fillers нна ай farti: 
in the northern direction! Р AESAAT | 
(not found elsewhere, but cf. BSS 10.38:36.16) 


The last brick consecrated is the brick marked no. 200 in Figure 26. While 
yajamāna and adhvaryu, assisted by pratiprasthātā and brahman, complete 
the mantras Fill The Space, With That God, and Pouring Milk over the 
Space-Filler bricks, the udgātā sings again his space-filler chants. The 
remaining rites and recitations are almost the same as on the first layer, 
but instead of TS 4.4.4.1a, the adhvaryu recites: 


You are the leader of the ritual and the region gat ашып «чаг Мат 


458 


THE THIRD LAYER 


where you resort with auspicious stallions. gat бтп: waa Grarftt: | 

You placed your head in heaven, good with rain. RA mat wid zn e gadi 

Agni! You made your tongue bear the oblation. eren jā matt бай | 
(TS 4.4.4.ld) 


After spreading loose soil, the Piled-Together (samcita) oblation is 
made. The adhvaryu addresses “Agni, boisterous” (TS 5.5.9.1.b) instead 
of “Agni, ocean” (TS 5.5.9.la: see above, page 445). 

When the second layer is completed, the bricks for the third layer are 
put down, ready for consecration on the next day. All return to the Old 
Hall. After the evening Pravargya, the Upasad, and the other customary 
rites, the fifth day ends. 


Sixth Day: April 18, 1975 
EPISODE 15 
The Third Layer 


THE THIRD LAYER is similar in pattern to the first. The first 90 bricks 
are consecrated in a particular order. The remaining 110 bricks are Space 
Fillers, with fixed locations only for the first and last. The order and shape 
of the bricks are given in Figure 37. Their names are provided by Table 10. 


NAMES OF BRICKS IN THE THIRD LAYER 


Number Name of Bricks Number of Bricks 
1 Vibhakti, “Share” 1 
2 Mandala, “Circle” 1 
3 Retahsic, “Seed Discharging” 1 
4—13 Skandhya, “Shoulder” 10 
14-18 Di$ya, "Direction" 5 
19—28 Pranabhrt, “Supporting Exhalation”’ 10 
29-64 Brhatī, “Great” 36 
65-78 Vālakhilya 14 
79-83 Mukham, “Face” 5 
84—88 Angam, “Limb” 5 
89 Prājāpatya, “For Prajāpati”” 1 
90 Vrsabha, “Bull” 1 
91—200 Lokamprna, “Space Filler" 110 
00 

TABLE IO 


459 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


Figure 37—Order of Bricks in the Third Layer 
460 


THE THIRD LAYER 


After the morning Pravargya and other customary rites, the introductory 
rites on the third layer are the same as on the second. The mantras with which 
the bricks are consecrated will now be listed, but the reader is invited to 
supply for himself the mantras With That God and Pouring Milk. 

The Share brick (vibhakti), no. 1, which is above the Share brick of the 
lower layers, is consecrated with TS 1.4.46.3/ (above page 398). This is 
followed by the rites for the naturally perforated pebble, in which the 
Ignorant Priest participates (cf. above, 418). The pebble, with its three 
holes, is taken up with: ` 


Indra and Agni! Make firm Tal sretoram- 
the unshaking brick! feat exec sau 
With its ridge may it set apart u$s TEE, 


heaven, earth and sky! SIEN | 
(TS 4.3.6.1a) maketi a {ї aN 


The adhvaryu goes through the same moves as on the first layer: he takes 
the pebble, goes around the altar, makes the white horse sniff at it, and 
returns, followed by the yajamāna and the avidvān (Ignorant Brahmin). 
The three sit down, touch the pebble, and recite: 


Sky! (bhuvah) yd: 

Let the All-maker (Viśvakarman) seat you fegdnt сат таса ҹә gu 
on the ridge of the sky; you who are wide, adadi kadi rad aad 
extending, brilliant, sun-filled, a ar at — Зее. 


who shines on the land, in the wide sky. 


BE oN um al, var. 
Hold fast the sky, make firm the sky, ESA SSR Ey ENE 


Te me. 
don't harm the sky; att чт Reet- 
for every breath, for every exhalation, {чєн mataa 
for every diffused breath, for every inhalation, sgrana 
for support, for motion! я гй afata 
1 Vayu protect you with great success, agensi ale 
a safe cover. л tr sre 
With that god, in the fashion of Angiras, жеп KU Bh š <a 
sit firm! wat gadas ma; Srt 918 1 
(TS 4.3.6.15) 


At the same time the udgātā sings his chant composed оп the word bhuvah, 
“sky” (cf. Table 15, page 533): i 


bhuvom | bhuva ho yi bhuva ho yi bhuva hà à vu va | г suvar jyotih || 
(AG 25.22) 


The adhvaryu breathes out and in. The Ignorant Priest gives the golden 
coin to the adhvaryu and leaves. The adhvaryu makes an oblation over 


461 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


the eastern hole of the pebble with TS 5.5.4.3. At the svāhā, the yajamāna 
renounces to Vi$vakarman. Then both recite: 


THE THIRD LAYER 


to which another avakā plant and mantra are added. In the meantime the 
Udgātā has started his Way songs, the same as before (pages 426, 453). 
The remaining six Shoulder bricks, nos. 8—13, are consecrated with six 


I have mounted the sky. 
Let offspring not abandon me! 


эте TATS ARTS 
THAT AT Kleita | 


(TS 5.6.8.1а2) 
They put a piece of gold on the western hole of the pebble and recite: 


You are light, give me light, 
give me the sky, protect me from the sky! 
(TS 5.7.6.2c2) 


Asfa ЧӘ tr aest- 
айы чолга атая UR ut 


The consecration of the bricks continues. The adhvaryu consecrates 
the Circle brick (maņdala), no. 2, which is above the Circle brick of the 
first layer: 


You are the highest heaven, еа 
sky penetrated by brahman. sam (det 

The Maruts are your guardians. redex йт 

Vayu is placed in this. PILS 

à i atgfttātsēat 

1 resort to it. gio а 
mak пча 


Let it be my protection and refuge! ase S 
(TS 4.4.5.2d) APAI T ART | 


At the same time the udgātā chants his Circle song, the same as before. 
The Seed-Discharging brick (retahsic), no. 3, above the Seed-Discharging 
brick of the first layer, is consecrated with a mantra recited mentally by 
adhvaryu and yajamāna, but aloud by a helper: 


May the sky, seed-discharging, 
conceive my seed. 
May it cause my seed to be produced. 
(BSS 10.39:38.5-6) 


маа Зе: aT, 
H tal gag i 
ае Ха: STARTA 1, 


The first two of the ten Shoulder bricks (skandhyas), nos. 4-13, are conse- 


crated with: 


You are Nabha and Nabhasya, 
months of rain. 
(TS 4.4.11.1c) 


ааст SHOUT 
аала, 
E 


An avakà plant is added, with the usual mantra. The next two bricks, nos. 


6—7, are consecrated with: 


You are Isa and Urja, 
months of autumn. 
(TS 4.4.11.1d) 


462 


жур 
SIRE. 


mantras: 


The brilliant bore the light, 
the shining bore the light, 
the self-radiant bore the light. 
(TS 4.2.9.4p) 


Let the All-maker (Vi$vakarman) seat you 
on the ridge of the sky, 

full of light, 

for every exhalation, inhalation. 
Support all light, 

Vayu is your master. | 
(TS 4.4.6.1b) 


I join you in bonds of companionship 
with radiance. 
Ijoin you in bonds of companionship 
with hymns. 
(TS 4.4.5.1a3; cf. pages 424, 454) 


You are the path of Vàyu for the gods 
You are the path of the sky. 
TS 4.4.6.2f2, g!; cf. pages 425, 454) 


fae satfdearen 
AAS SHAT, 
AUS =й l 


fiat cat araa- 
ааа gt 
siflcadi 

Rae sumatur 
fa = 


agas: п 


7 ! 
AMA TA 9931 
qal ан! 
z ~ ^ 1 
STATA ATT 
gar аа ul 


жата amer 
1 
айкы пе | 


Five Direction bricks (digya), nos. 14-18, are consecrated with: 


You are queen, the eastern direction; 
You are ruling, the southern direction; 
You are sovereign, the western direction; 
You are self-ruling, the northern direction; 
You are supreme woman, the great direction. 
(TS 4.3.6.2c) 


«пй sett їй! 
aah wart fH | 
audi 891. 
эчени geal бор 1 


Ten Exhalation-Supporting bricks (pranabhrt), nos. 19-28, are consecrated 


with: 


Protect my life, protect my breath; 
protect my exhalation, protect my diffused breath; 
protect my eye, protect my ear; 
infuse my mind, strengthen my voice; 
protect my self, give me light! 
(TS 4.3.6.2d) 


arti ЧЕ тї HT 


aai N nià sant ЧЕ 


ag чї 9 d wf 
ңа A Rra ard & ar- 
ssä, à Е SHAT ase u 


Thirty-six Great bricks (brhati), nos. 29-64, are consecrated with: 


463 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE THE FOURTH LAYER 


You are mā meter, pramā meter, pratimā meter, 
asrīvis meter, pankti meter, usnih meter, 

brhati meter, anustubh meter, virāj meter, 
gāyatrī meter, tristubh meter, jagati meter. 


Al Bra: | WHT Ged: | faut шет: | 
мезг: | чаб: | Sime aed: | 

1 =J, \ {> >, 
set ges: | HAT gez: | 19412 wed: 


Earth meter, sky meter, heaven meter, maa eed: | 199 999: | чая gea: 

Е rb en e. ARET A 252) 
seasons meter, naksatras meter, mind meter, тї wed: | AAR Des: | digg: | 
speech meter, ploughing meter, gold meter, чае: | ядат Bea: | ня шк: | 
jo s fee а ius Е T ; arm ort: pÀ: | Rimi weds | 

gni the deity, ata the deity, Sürya tī e deity, зза чат zd: aaz gt: N 
Candramas the deity, the Vasus the deity, the ЕК И eee 

Rudras the deity, я tādai | didi FAA ат dal | | 

| П ! bs 

the Adityas the deity, the All-gods the deity, the S7471 БШШ agat gaal 1 к 

Maruts the deity, эйт rat гй жат aa я хаап 
Brhaspati the deity, Indra the deity, Varuna the тєє | ЖЕР Sqal 1 quit заа 1] 

deity. P 

(TS 4.3.7.1a) 


Fourteen Vālakhilya bricks, nos. 65-78, are consecrated with: 


You are the head, ruling. quisfa US 
You are firm, supporter. нат aant 
You are the instrument, restrainer. = er 
For food, you! 

For power, you! For ploughing, you! 

For safety, you! You are the instrument, ruling. 


aerate aA- 
у east cat 
FA ғат AT FAT 


You are firm, supporting. "edt US 

You are holder, sustainer. ият atrīt 

For life, you! For radiance you! asdf чата сат 

For power, you! For force, you! aaa waite гат 
(TS 4.3.7.2b) Sela cura 


The rest is routine, but the Space-Filler bricks are consecrated in the eastern 
direction, and the first and last bricks are the bricks marked 91 and 200, 
respectively, in Figure 37. The Piled-Together (samcita) oblation is address- 
ed to *Agni, abysmal," (TS 5.5.9.1c; cf. above, pages 445, 459 . 

The bricks for the fourth layer are put in place. All return to the Old 
Hall for the evening ceremonies, and the sixth ritual day ends. 


Seventh Day: April 19, 1975 


EPISODE 16 
The Fourth Layer | 


THE FOURTH LAYER is similar to the second. The first 79 bricks are con- 
secrated in a particular order; the remaining 121 bricks are Space Fillers. 
The order and shape of the bricks are given in Figure 38. Their names are 
provided by Table 11. Figure 38—Order of Bricks in the Fourth Layer 


464 465 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 
NAMES OF BRICKS IN THE FOURTH LAYER 


Number Name of Bricks Number of Bricks 
1 Vibhakti, “Share” 1 
2-6 Skandhya, “Shoulder: 5 
7-34 Aksņayāstomīya, “With Diagonal Stoma” 28 
35-51 Srsti, “Creation” 17 
52-67 Vyusti, “Dawn” 16 
68—72 Mukham, Face” 5 
73—17 Айрат, “Limb” 5 
78 Prājāpatya, “For Prajāpati” 1 
79 Rsabha, “Buli” 1 
80-200 Lokamprņa, “Ѕрасе Filler" 121 
200 

TABLE II 


After the morning Pravargya and other rites, the introductory cere- 
monies are the same as before. The Share brick, no. 1, above the other 
Share bricks, is consecrated with: 


Mi Al 
May Agni destroy the enemies, ЕЕЕ ЧЕЧЕ 
eager for wealth, admirably, gfancafageaat | 
when kindled, and offered pure. afte: sp mE: н 


(TS 4.3.13.la) 


The first two of the five Shoulder bricks are consecrated with: 


You are Saha and Sahasya, EH agelar 
months of winter. Жабата | 
(TS 4.4.11.1e) М 


The avakā plant is added, together with its mantra. The three remaining 
Shoulder bricks, nos. 4-6, are consecrated with: 


I join you in bonds of companionship atifaar uzat 
with songs. aai FARR | 
I join you in bonds of companionship gaea agat 
with meters. am galu n 

(TS 4.4.5.1 a^; cf. above pages 424, 454, 463) = 
You are the path of the sky for the gods. затчідга Кәлатә | 


(TS 4.4.6.2 g”; cf. above pages 425 454, 463) 
466 


THE FOURTH LAYER 


In the meantime, the udgātā has started to sing his Way songs, the same as 
before. 

The 28 aksnayastomiya bricks, With Diagonal Stoma, nos. 7-34, consti- 
tute a difficult exercise, which requires much concentration, because the 
order is not the same as it was memorized from the Samhita. The 28 mantras 
are prompted by a helper: 


emerge. | 
(1) You are swift, triple stoma, vui ART: | 
(2) sky, seventeenfold, ent repre um I 
(3) support, twenty-one-fold, Wet: TACT: | 
(4) shining, fifteenfold, я а GU | 


(5) speed, eighteenfold, 
(6) attack, twentyfold, 
(7) radiance, twenty-two-fold, 


aftad: favum | 
aši э: | 


(8) heat, nineteenfold, aqi AACA: | 
(9) womb, twenty-four-fold, ает: | 
(10) embryo, twenty-five-fold, mīt: vz | 
(11) power, twenty-seven-fold, зыла: | 


(12) arrangement, twenty-three-fold, 


(13) intention, thirty-one-fold, ч: l 
(14) pale red surface, thirty-four-fold, т | 

(15) foundation, thirty-three-fold, sequen free dalas: | 
(16) vault, thirty-six-fold. afar элт: | 


(TS 4.3.8.la: 1, 3, 7, 2, 4, 6, 8, 5, att: qafat: П 
10, 11, 12, 9, 13, 15, 14, 16) 


(17) You are Agni's portion, the sovereignty of aāutālstā darat эЧ 
consecration, brahman saved, threefold stoma. zg qa raa, ata: u 
(TS 4.3.9.la) re 


(18) You are the portion of those who gaze on men, gaeat arii sfr gaa 
the sovereignty of Dhātr, birthplace saved, чй eqax aaam sim: | 
seventeenfold stoma. ki 

(TS 4.3.9.1c) 


(19) You are Mitra’s portion, the sovereignty of fiet Tash atmearssfilaeī 
Varuna, rain from the sky, the winds saved, RA aftdrat: «чат daas: айй: 1 
twenty-one-fold stoma. иь К" 

(TS 4.3.9.14) 


(20) You аге Indra’s portion, the sovereignty of gegen wmisfa aa 
Visnu, kingly power saved, fifteenfold stoma. aqy eye taam: ad: t 
(TS 4.3.9.1b) ^" * @ 


(21) You are the Vasus’ portion, the sovereignty of agat artiste SATAN 
the Rudras, quadrupeds saved, twenty-four-fold «ест «та dataset: sitet: | 


stoma. 
(TS 4.3.9.1f) 
(22) You are Adityas’ portion, the sovereignty of the зата ardis & asan 
467 


PART П THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


Maruts, the embryo saved, twenty-five-fold 
stoma. 
(TS 4.3.9.2g) 


(23) You are Aditi’s portion, the sovereignty of 
Pūsan, power saved, twenty-seven-fold stoma. 
(TS 4.3.9.le) 


(24) You are god Savitr's portion, the sovereignty of 
Brhaspati, all directions saved, fourfold stoma. 
(TS 4.3.9.2h) 


(25) Support, fourfold stoma. 
(TS 4.3.8.la!8) 


(26) You are the Yāvas” portion, the sovereignty of 
the Ayāvas, offspring saved, forty-four-fold 
stoma. 

(TS 4.3.9.2i) 


(27) You are the Rbhus’ portion, the sovereignty of 
the All-gods, calm and saved, thirty-three-fold 
stoma. 

(TS 4.3.9.2k) 


(28) Revolving, forty-eight-fold stoma. 
(TS 4.3.8.1а17) 


Tal: Bat TATA: Kita: | 


ste чел fae- 


Заа against geeruttucas 


Ū 


amda: qag Sa: «ta: u 
aig ara: 


mali зп затајататат че 
я: equarum AAT: FA N 


Kan urilsfā Gat атататйчей 
ya reris, ega daivām: aa: N 


Gaal театрт: 1 


The 17 Creation bricks (srsti), nos. 35-51, are consecrated with 17 


mantras, also prompted by a helper: 


(1) With one they praised; creatures were es- 
tablished; Prajāpati was the sovereign. 
(2) With three they praised; brahman was created; 
the lord of brahman was the sovereign. 
(3) With five they praised; beings were created; the 
lord of beings was the sovereign. 
(4) With seven they praised; the seven seers were 
created; Dhatr was the sovereign. 
(5) With nine they praised; the fathers were 
created; Aditi was the sovereign. 
(6) With eleven they praised; the seasons were 
created; the seasonal one was the sovereign. 
(7) With thirteen they praised; the months were 
created; the year was the sovereign. 
(8) With fifteen they praised; kingly power was 
created; Indra was the sovereign. 
(9) With seventeen they praised; cattle were 
created; Brhaspati was the sovereign. 
(10) With nineteen they praised; Sidra and Arya 
^ were created; day and night were the sovereigns. 


468 


паатзєтча sat efaa 
этч Еч ачпай, | 
Rata sataa 

я теч HATA | 
yafaa чейнн 
urat чїч бачте, | 
nagan HWALSSId 
masana. | 

чаб чєтаа fradisusaeat- 
Рах чега, | 
UHITMATAATT SAFA- 
заат Етте, | 

ятт четач тај эсден 
&яга<їйчЁгпєй | 
garaga мияда 
Ais Aaa | 
angaa gasan 
gefasst ачай | 
аат иїйтытча gara A- 
win эгїчєї IAAL | 


THE FouRTH LAYER 


(11) With twenty-one they praised; whole-hooved 
cattle were created; Varuna was the sovereign. 

(12) With twenty-three they praised; small cattle 
were created; Pūsan was the sovereign. 

(13) With twenty-five they praised; wild cattle were 
created; Vayu was the sovereign. 

(14) With twenty-seven they praised; heaven and 
earth separated; the Vasus, Rudras, and 
Adityas drew apart; theirs was the sovereignty. 

(15) With twenty-nine they praised; trees were 
created; Soma was the sovereign. 

(16) With thirty-one they praised; creatures were 
created; the Yāvas and the Ayāvas were the 
sovereigns. 

(17) With thirty-three they praised; creatures came 
to rest; Prajāpati was the supreme sovereign. 

(TS 4.3.10) 


чабатага а атча: TTA SIT 


явтїзїйчїга&йҗ | 

AR ALANS ST: JANSA 
qarsa | 
quifirssrearseqaais sema: gardisqsqed 
атата, | 


agamsa зпад siat 
ача tat alfžea aa supp 
ачта TTA, | 

яа kaasa WTA Se 
Asaa, | 

THA ISAAA изп gs 
gratat =паіатаї sissies i 
adamas ARATE, 
mena: Чеда агч (Ва | 


The 16 Dawn (vyusti) bricks, nos. 52-67, are consecrated with а straight- 
forward series of mantras, albeit often long and complex. The first fifteen 


are prompted by Cherumukku Vaidikan: 


a. This is she who first dawned; 
after entering this world she moves. 
The newly married bride gave birth. 
Three majesties attend her. 
b. Bright night and day, well adorned, 
move on together along the same course, 
Wives of the sun, they move alternately, under- 
standing, 
assuming a banner of light, unaging, rich in seed. 
c. Three have come along the path of cosmic order, 
three vessels have come with the light. 
One guards offspring, one strength; 
one guards the ways of the devotees. 
d. The fourth became the fourfold stoma, 
turning into wings of the ritual, seers! 
Harnessing gayatri, tristubh, jagati, anustubh, 
brhat meters, 
the hymn, they supported this heaven. 
e. With five the creator arranged this world, ` 
when he created their sisters five by five. 
Their five strengths go mingling, 
dressed in various forms. 
f. Thirty sisters go to the appointed place, 
putting on the same insignia. 
The sages, knowing, spread out the seasons. 


469 


zaña WD ат Here sA- 
Жез deft afāeT | 
ayia чач 

ad wat AeA: AAT d 
венаф sear Чт 

чата чач att | 
giri mā «на: ята PEATE 
fae dear эге efr и 
mer чети fra sq- 
=й gatāt э saratsssa: | 
aaa raga 

яда! wale Sara ц 
чав advan gat 

азе чепїчат чен | 

errat Prgst sette 
gez seam заточена i 
чабат (ч Зуп ҹа, 
TANS «ахча Valgai 1 
arig тга аач чы 

ята enr жат аат: n 
Asaa «att ач afta repa 
чата nd agantat | 
asaras gad: aaa 


PLATE 74 
The Fourth Layer 


“Charming dawns, well adorned, 
move on together along the same course; 
wives of the sun, they move, understanding, 


assuming a banner of light, unaging, rich in seed.” 
(TS 4.3.11.1b) 


Yajamāna and adhvaryu consecrate brick no. 53, one of the Dawn 
(vyusti) bricks in the fourth layer. The pratiprasthātā stands ready 
to mark the brick. Several bricks in front (nos. 7, 11, 15, 23, 27) have 
already received their three mantras, as the dots clearly show. 


cB 


470 


4n 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE THE FIFTH LAYER 


Ma in their midst they go about in д. waa: alt afta redit: u Departed are those mortals who beheld Заде A ÅRA, 

g. Full-of-light put on the clouds, Ча sft дач чит an earlier dawn of morning. sasari wem: 1 
goddess night the ways of the sun. vidt 24 gidu arent | ac w davar has borom үне bie senate g agais- 

Animals born with many f fa vau at simia ey come who shall behold her in days to come. ay a afer & чач Tautā, 11 
as OEDS pee m S1 437 SRV LILXIDE S 5 7 
look about on their mother’s lap. MAEN AIA STA |. 

h. the a day of full moon, performing auster- черте ачаг TAAN The rest is routine. The Space Filler bricks are consecrated in the northern 
generated ОООО Ое О Windia: ama пй аата та, | direction, as on the second layer, while the yajamana and adhvaryu are 
With his help the gods conquered the demons. ая чеч, aera ar assisted by the brahman and pratiprasthata. First comes brick no. 80, and PLATE 75A 
By his skill he became the demon slayer. к=з тача (и: и last brick no. 200 in Figure 38. The Piled-Together (samcita) oblation 1s 

i. You have made me, who am not younger, ччізятаяяї ата addressed to Agni, strong" (TS 5.5.9.1d; cf. above, pages 445, 459, 464). 

younger. ae NT The bricks for the fifth layer are put in place. All return to the Old 
Speaking truth, I desire this. ics Кас, Hall for the evening ceremonies. The seventh ritual day ends. 
May I enjoy his kindness as you do! pels На zm i 
May none of you act against the other! RU aa че! : M > 

k. The omniscient bas e en my kindness. ATA на Raz ; Eighth Day : April 20; 19.15 
He has gained support, ong айтти; TI, ! EPISODE 17 
Di he has won a fort. иан quát ачі qA- The Fifth Layer 
May Me ui s semp di sre AT я й+к ll . THE FIFTH LAYER is similar to the first and third layers. There are 205 

1. After five dawns, five milkings; чи eg va Фет bricks instead of 200, but 10 of these are half of the ordinary thickness, nos. 
after the cow with five names come five seasons, — ut чачтан чя | 85—94. There are only five Space-Filler bricks, nos. 198—202. All others are 
Five directions are arranged by the fifteenfold, qa fiat: quid БЫ: consecrated in a particular order. The order and shape of the bricks are given 
with equal heads toward one world. demde ein i in Figure 39. Their names are provided in Table 12. 

m. Shewho first shone forth is the embryo of cosmic See. i After the usual ceremonies, the Share brick, no. 1, is consecrated with: PLATE 76 

order. PRATT TH: AAM AF- 
One supports the majesty of waters; anàt feet баё | Agni, we consider a song of praise! — AA: 18 нети | 
one moves among the stations of the sun; giàn tf ач изет 
. oS Ae 

бз аа ои ова One: M d көг The first two Shoulder bricks, nos. 2-3, are consecrated with: 
became a cow for ; pri | 1 
Kaa g mit а E Xu ы dei 

тае (ISA41LM) ~ 


season after season! 
With right bulls she has come with clouds, with TARTUS gara і 


0. 
light, — | qatar «аат Anss- While the udgātā starts his Way songs, the adhvaryu adds an avaka plant 
kaleidoscopic, variegated, with Agni as her яч sri: | with the usual mantra. The five remaining Shoulder bricks, nos. 48, are 
banner. aay, aani consecrated with: 
Performing your common task, ttt e eas gate 1 sa 
bringing old age, you have come, unaging dawn. ` d EE The self-resplendent upheld the light! SIENA 
p. First lady of the seasons, she has come here, IAT чәй AHĀZATSTI- (TS 4.2.9.4p3) 
leader of days, bearer of offspring. gēl а ая язан | = б А : : 
Although one, Dawn, you shine in many places. axi 99 dgdidr eset | 1 Baudhayana Srauta Sūtra (10.42 :41.6) mentions fifteen Dawn bricks, consecrated with 
Unaging, you cause everything else to age. Чї ed SS "uem " TS 4.3.11: three for each direction and three in the center. Here there are four bricks in 
(TS 4.3.11) = ees the center (nos. 64-67), and so one mantra has been added. It occurs in the Yāgambhāgā 
of both the Cerumukkü and Taikkatu traditions. A century ago, Bal Gangadhar Tilak, 


leader of Hindu nationalism, made use of this verse in arguing that the Vedas had 
originated in the arctic region. 


472 473 


PLATE 75A 


Brahman Consecrating Brick 


| 
“Fill the space! ЕШ the hold! 
Auspicious may you sit down! 
Indra, Agni, and Brhaspati 
have placed you in this womb." 
(TS 4.2.4.4n) 


The brahman and pratiprasthātā assist the yajamāna and adhvaryu 
in consecrating the Space-Filler bricks. Each is consecrated with 
the Space-Filler mantra Fill the Space, with With That God, and 
with Pouring Milk. The plate shows the brahman consecrating the 
easternmost brick of the southern wing on the fourth layer. 


PLATE 75B 

The Woman Without Ears 
The last brick of the fifth layer, no. 205, is called vikarni, “without 
ears.” The word ends in the long “i” which is a feminine ending 


(probably because the word istakā, “brick,” is feminine). It has a 
picture in white paste of a woman without ears on it. 


474 


475 


PLATE 76 
Touching the Horse 


As he does with respect to all layers of the altar, the adhvaryu 
touches the light horse before ascending the fifth layer. This will be 
followed by the consecration of the bricks. Round the bird-shaped 
altar there are piles of broken bricks, which are used as stepping 
stones. 


476 


477 


THE FIFTH LAYER 
NAMES OF BRICKS IN THE FIFTH LAYER 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


NN S Number Name of Bricks Number of Bricks 
| 1 Vibhakti, “Share” 1 
В 2-3 Skandhya, “Shoulder” 7 
9—13 Asapatna, “Unrivaled” 5 
H 14—53 Virāj, “Sovereign” 40 
54—84 Stomabhāga, «Chant Sharing" 31 
S 85-89* Nākasat, “Sitting in ће Sky" 5 
| 90-94* Coda, *'Protuberance” 5 
А 95-123 Chandas, “Meter” 29 
124-130 Krttikā, “‘Pleiads”’ 7 
131-135 Vrstisani, “Rain Bringing” 5 
136-143 Aditya 8 
ri 144—148 Ghrta, “Clarified Butter” 5 
149-153 Yašodā, “Glory Giver” 5 
Пе i 154-158 Bhūyaskrt, “Augmenting” 5 
: 159—163 Apsusad, “Sitting in Waters" 5 
í x 164-168 Draviņodā, “Wealth Giver” 5 
203| 190 169-175' Ayusya, "Life Giver” 7 
176-180 Rtunama, *'Season's Name” 5 
195 204 [118 pebbles: see Table 13] 
181-185 Sasthi citi, “Sixth Layer” 5 
ING |107] 186-190 Mukham, “Face” 5 
8 191-195 Angam, “Limb” 5 
196 Prājāpatya, “For Prajapati" 1 
197 Rsabha, “Ви!” 1 
198-202 Lokamprna, “расе Filler" 5 
203 Mandala, “Circle” 1 
204 Retahsic, *Seed Discharging” 1 
205 Vikarni, Without Ears” Ee 
200 


* The Nakasat and Coda are twenty half-bricks equal to ten whole bricks. 
* 175 is called Paficajanya 


TABLE I2 
Let Prajapati place you, who are full of light, | язпфЁй п 1499 
on the ridge of the sky, fea: gt safari 
for every expiration and inspiration. fraler этат 
Figure 39—Order of Bricks in the Fifth Layer Support all light. fi vais 


478 479 


PART II. THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


The supreme lord is your master! 
(TS 4.4.6.1 c) 
For prosperity of wealth, 
for preeminence among your fellows, 
I join you in bonds of fellowship with me! 
(TS 4.4.5.1a8; cf. 424, 454, 463, 466) 


You are the air; you to the air! 
(TS 4.4.6.2h) 


чча йч: n 

= diala 

=гитатаї reactor 

wat car aga ast dafša a 


ға атаеға та cat | 


Then five Unrivaled (asapatna) bricks, nos. 9-13, are consecrated with: 


a. Agni, drive away our enemies who are born, 
and also those who are unborn, you all-knower. 
Shine among us with kindness and without anger. 
In your protection may I be threefold protected 
and victorious. 
b. Agni, drive away with force our enemies who are 
born, 
and also those who are unborn, you all-knower. 
Favor us with kindness, 
may We enjoy your protection; drive away our 
enemies. 
c. You are the forty-four-fold chant, radiance, 
wealth. 
d. You are the sixteenfold chant, force, wealth. 
e. You are the mud of earth, called Apsas! 
(TS 4.3.12.la-e) 


Then forty Sovereign (viraj) bricks, nos. 14-53, 


You are the course meter; the space meter; 

the health-bringing meter; the overpowering meter; 
the covering meter; the mind meter; 

the expanse meter; the river meter; 

the sea meter; the water meter; 

the uniting meter; the separating meter; 

the brhat meter; the rathantara meter; 

the collecting meter; the parting meter; 

the voices meter; the radiant meter; 

the sastubh meter; the anustubh meter; 

the kakubh meter; the trikakubh meter; 

the poetic meter; the water meter; 

the padapankti meter, the aksarapankti meter; 

the vistarapankti meter; the razor-with-strop meter; 
the enveloping meter; the side meter; 

the course meter; the space meter; 

the strength meter; the maker-of-strength meter; 


480 


STE тет я Ҹат я: SERT, 
MAMA IAATT TFT 1 

eret TAR quar asa 

ad tars aaa, Rrasa afar н 


MAM этет я AAT я: AIA 
RAMAUTAR TTS | 
aft at я gaani 
чаҳ ala я oat a: ачы N 


анага: stat ait жала | 


dts: ate айт яла | 


grem: guga std 1 


are consecrated with: 
wagered: | ufagord; | 
көт: | TRATES: | 

WIS GE: | WALT: | 
теше: | fegasnd: | 

agi wed: | alee aed | 
datgrd: | (datorā: i 

garo: | TAT ws | 
fared: | Бугын: | 

{й ше: | зт: | 

WES 9°: | AIL жей | 
MEST: | Рае: | 

199 gez: | agt wed: | 
чачкан: | ortas ēd | 
fendettased: | sn weary чей: | 
WTS VHS: | TARTS: | 

wagerd: | аА: | 

ARGS? | TAFET: | 


THE FIFTH LAYER 


the expansive meter; the conflict meter; 
the covering meter; the difficult-of-access meter; 
the slow meter; the aikanka meter. 

(TS 4.3.12.2-3f) 


faqs oa: | бачае: | 


ge Gas | AR wed: | 


During the consecration of the Sovereign bricks, the Udgātā chants: 


indro višvasya rājati | ho yi la 
(“Тайга rules over the universe”) 


(GG 47.10.1; no source in the Rgveda) 


indro ho yi vāyišvā | sya rājati ho và | ho yi lā | 


(GG 47.10.2) 


pibā somam indra māndatū tvā yante susava hariya švā drih | 


sotürbyahübhiyam suyātā au ho và ē nārvā | 


(GG 44.8.1, based upon RV 7.22.1) 


havu piba somam indra māndatū tvà dati tvā yante susava haryā 
švā dri švā апр | sotūrbyāhūbhyām suyatās suyato nārvā au ho 


và [ i [] 


(GG 44.8.2, based upon the same rk). 


The 31 Chant-Sharing (stomabhaga) bricks, nos. 54-84, are consecrated 


with: 


a. You are the reign, you for rule, 
animate the rule! 
You are progress, you for dharma, 
animate dharma! 
You are accompaniment, you for sky, 
animate the sky! 
You are union, you for air, 
animate the air! 
You restraint, you for earth, 
animate the earth! 
You are support, you for rain, 
animate the rain! 
You are forward breeze, you for day, 
animate the day! 

b. You are return breeze, you for night, 
animate the night! 
You clever, you for the Vasus, 
animate the Vasus! 
You are intelligent, you for the Rudras, 
animate the Rudras! 
You are brilliant, you for the Adityas, 
animate the Adityas! 


481 


THR ata cat 


ad fae | 


` РЕЧ vata ат 


мў fea | 
маб RA car 
faa Gra | 
afrteraftam саг. 
seats fea | 
stake чїч cat 
чаї fstea | 
feriis qvid car 
gft баға | 

WASTE TN- 
sēta и 

agaisfā Ue car 
art faex | 

Эбт agram 
agfa | 

sēdi str artes 
ARTRĪTA | 
giten RA rtea- 
ssaa 1 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


You are strength, you for the ancestors, 
animate the ancestors! 
You are the thread, you for offspring, 
animate offspring! 
You are victorious in battle, 
you for cattle, 
animate cattle! 
c. You are wealthy, you for plants, 
animate plants! 
You are victorious with ready stones, 
you for Indra, 
animate Indra! 
You are the master, you for expiration, 
animate expiration! 
You are the restrainer, you for inspiration, 
animate inspiration! 
You are the creeper, you for eye, 
animate eye! 
You are strengthening, you for ear, 
animate ear! 
You are threefold. 
d. You go forward, 
you go together, 
you go round; 
you climb, you descend, 
you go ahead, you go behind. 
e. You are rich, 
you are beautiful, 
you are prosperous! 
(TS 4.4.1) 


ЭПі hazdear 
ЕЯ 

Ing 

argdifā aande 
жэп Rra | 


TARA à ageda 


TASS | 
ageer- 
чаа | 

эг Өг mada & 
тй ier — 

этїїчї ята car 

atoi Ēteā | 

arsena za- 

suit fstea | 

ян чыч car 
agha 1 

ает sit xata eat 
ava fea | Рта | 
aaa | 9369 fade | 


es 


ахі AAR | 
йс 1 adiis 1 


gets 1 


ae farce 1 
qeifesfar 1 


The next ten bricks are half as thick as all the others. They have already been 
put in place, like all the other bricks, and are covered with a piece of un- 
washed cloth. Since the lower bricks have to be consecrated first, the cloth 
and upper brick are removed each time before the lower brick is consecrated. 
The five lower bricks, Sitting in the Sky (nākasat), nos. 85-89, are conse- 
crated with: 


(85) a. You are queen, the eastern quarter. uaa at Ba 
The Vasu deities are your masters. "dae ат эгбїчайї- 
Agni stops missiles from you. sfiddiat fast 
May the threefold chant support you on earth, ae ie 


ii Te, cat, a: a (rem Aga- 
May the Ajya hymn establish you in firm- LTA, Ca aA: шше siet 


йя, 


ness, TA 
the Rathantara song be your support. AT TIE IH IRRA 
(TS 4.42.1a) 
482 


THE FIFTH LAYER 


immediately followed by: 


f. For the air may the seers, firstborn among 

the gods, 

extend you according to the measure and 
breadth of the sky, 

as well as this one who is disposer and master 
here. 

Let all of them together establish you and 
the Patron 

on the ridge of heaven’s vault, in the world 
of light. 

(f) 


(86) b. You are sovereign, the southern quarter. 
The Rudra deities are your masters; 
Indra stops missiles from you. 
May the fifteenfold chant support you on 
earth, 
may the praüga hymn establish you in 
firmness, 
the brhat song be your support. 
(b) 
followed by (f) 


(87) c. You are the sovereign, the western quarter. 
The Áditya deities are your masters; 
Soma stops missiles from you. 
May the seventeenfold chant support you 
on earth, 
the marutvatiya hymn establish you in 
firmness, 
the vairüpa song be your support. 
(c) 
followed by (f) 
(88) d. Youarethe self-ruling, the northern quarter. 
The All-gods are your masters; 
Varuna stops missiles from you. 
May the twenty-one-fold chant support you 
on earth, 
the niskevalya uktha establish you in firm- 
ness, | 
the vairāja song be your support. 
(d) 
followed by (f) 
(89) e. You are the lady paramount, the great 


quarter. 
The Marut deities are your masters; 


483 


seafienadaecat 
нант Fag | 

Ra arta ako sere 
ferat «raattatra 

X сат dd ELI 
«per WE аЙ cn 
інт ч аен N 


Rasia чїй Fa, 

eared Заг afaa 

seit edat аай 
qaza «а: чїй vi 
Adas, 

ATA чч wu INRA 


агай яй R- 

«Пате Зат often: 

Фа! etat Заа? 
Читат edid: gia daa 
чаан, 

SU IET ата х 


чазы бп 
fa Ж tar іча 
чёт Raat ябы. 
чата «а: great dag . 
Rickard 
i i Wa Cir. 
gag ers 918 TAB: 


uftucafā edt (au 
яе Eur Baar 


. PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


Brhaspati stops missiles from you. 

May the twenty-seven-fold and the thirty- 
three-fold chants support you on earth; 

the vaisvadeva and the āgnimāruta hymns 
establish you in firmness, 

the sakvara and raivata songs be your suppor 

(е) 
followed by (f). 


The next five, Protuberance (coda) bricks, nos. 9 

placed on top of the preceding five, as follows 
90 91 94 92 93 
85 86 87 88 89 


яе ат чаї 

finazafēratt cat stil 

gts, sinat 

Заваан ga aera 
t TAA maad 


A 


! Cl D 
атая safes 


0-94, of half thickness, аге 


They are covered with a piece of cloth and consecrated: 


(90) a. This one in front has tawny hair and the 
sun’s rays. 
The leaders of his host and bands are 
Rathagrtsa and Rathaujas, 
and Puūjikasthalā and Krtasthalā are his 


nymphs, 
his missile is wizards, his weapon the 
Raksases. 
(TS 4.4.3.la) 
followed by: 


f. Homage to them; may they be gracious 
to us. 
Him whom we hate and who hates us I 
place in your jaws. 
(f) 
(91) b. This one on the right is all-worker. 
The leaders of his host and bands are 
Rathasvana and Rathecitra, 
and Menakā and Sahajanyā are his nymphs. 
his missile is biting beasts, his weapon 
death of men. 
(b) 
followed by (f). 
(92) d. This one on the left is collecting riches. 
The leaders of his host and bands are Senajit 
Susena, 
and Visvaci and Ghrtāci are his nymphs, 
his missile is the waters, his weapon wind. 
(d sic!) 
followed by (f). 


484 


oS 


wi gà #91: gån- 

=й emaa WATT 
waft 

RFEDI x жете AAA 
agaat edt 


AIA, 


su efr Tela: 


Зет duet ap ga 
ча Вч ля at fe 
& di wea mur n 


эй gam Волат 

ае waa «аяг 
anma Àt 

aaa ч AZIM MATAT 
азата: чта Ed: 
Ф aa: wea: 


aagana dagg- 

met afr gamer 
аздт 

{йя « gard arava 
ami FR- ^ | 

ara: aR: 


THE FIFTH LAYER 


(93) e. This one above is bringing riches. 
The leaders of his host and bands Tārkşya 
and Aristanemi, 
and Urvašī and Pūrvacitti are his nymphs, 
his missile is lightning, his weapon thunder. 
(e) 
followed by (f). 
(94) c. This one behind is all-extending. 
The leaders of his host and bands are 
Ratheprota and Asamaratha, 
and Pramlocanti and Anumlocanti are his 
nymphs, 
his missile is the serpents, his weapon 
tigers. 
(c) 
followed by (f). 


sagte 

ra atgdzaiReātējar 
garana- 

gdafl ч Raat 
иан. 

хасаа, па: 

at qallzeredar- 

аы чатан 
#гаттлтипйї | 
пз} smqeepdedt vedi 
aa f- 

sgim: safe 


Each time one of the Protuberance bricks is consecrated, Cherumukku 
Vaidikan pours a little water from a kindi jar into the yajamdna’s hand. This 
is followed by the consecration of 29 Meter (chandas) bricks, nos. 95-123, 


as follows: 
gāyatrī (nos. 95-97, in the east): 


a. Agni is the head and peak of heaven, 
this one is lord of the earth. 
He animates the seeds of the waters. 
b. Agni, from the lotus 
Atharvan kindled you, 
From the head of every priest. 
c. This Agni is lord of booty 
A thousandfold, a hundredfold; 
The sage is the head of riches 


tristubh (nos. 98-100, in the south): 


d. You are leader of the rite and the firmament, 
where you resort with your friendly steeds. 
You place your head in the sky, gaining light, 
you make your tongue convey the oblations, Agni. 
e. Agni awakened by men’s kindling stick 
meets Dawn that approaches like a cow. 
Like young birds stretching towards the branch, 
his rays rise towards the vault of heaven. 
f. For the worthy sage we have raised 
our voice of praise, to the strong bull. 
Gavisthira has paid homage to Agni, 
like the broad golden disk in heaven. 


485 


auai: agfa 

atta sfera fit: | 

gūt at ANR 1 

yal ager Tae Fa. 
wat frat: ача Brent: 1 
RA gala aft gadi 
fread чч TATRA і 
маіх: alta salat 
oft Maftaissadtgarta | 
ag a я aang rete: 

я aaa: rer THATS N 
adai Hay Avala 

aA агата FIAT TH | 
agi ялап sita 
18а xxu | 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


jagati (nos. 101-103, in the west): 


g. Guardian of the people, vigilant, 
clever, Agni was born for new prosperity. 
Face touched with butter, he shines bright 
with great sky-touching flame, for all the Bhara- 
tas. 
h. The Aügirases found you in a secret place, 
Agni, resting in every wood. 
So are you born, kindled unto great force. 
They call you “Son of Strength," O Afgiras. 
i. On the triple altar men have kindled Agni, 
banner of the ritual, first domestic priest. 
Let him sit on the sacred grass with Indra and the 
gods 
as a skilful hotà for the ritual. 


anustubh (nos. 104—106, in the north): 


k. You of resplendent fame 
the people invoke in their homes, 
you with flaming hair, dear to many, 
Agni, to carry the oblations. 

1, Friends, together give to Agni 
food and praise, 
to the highest among people, 
the powerful son of strength. 

m. You deprive, bull Agni, all treasures 
from the stranger. 
You are kindled at the altar, 
therefore bring us the treasures. 


brhati (nos. 107-109, in the center): 


n. With this homage I invite 
Agni, son of strength, 
dear and efficient ritualist, 
everyone's immortal messenger! 

o. Let him harness his red horses 
giving all the goods; let him run 
when libations are properly poured. 
This ritual with its brahman and rites 
belongs to the Vasus. The divine reward 
is for men! 

p. His flame went up 
when the libation was poured; 
a pillar of ruddy smoke touches heaven; 
people kindle Agni together. 


496 


ada ТЧ SAS MAÈ- 
vr gad: guru asā | 
айа gear, erat 
gate wife aaea: 90: Ц 
гатай чч gat fea, 
дг (бапо 9499 | 


A aizā gala: Gel неч; 


сагаіє: абаха wu 
Е C) B ec 
ача du яча qafa- 
дій ачыс аҹ | 
gern ®Ч: tu ч яй 
«Паб dat аза 999: 1 


cat (йяяакан 
«dem fig sema: 


faat get 


Ў вея da i 
чаі: et d: qaqa- 
rre eit ТЧ | 
attgra AA- 
gūt ad AAT dl 
asafāgdat ga- 
dā faali sm | 
zaud often 

я AT AGA AT Ц 
mat at зїй aaa 
зї serias Zu 

Bei Зена, eden? 


£5 


Rote чаннаң і 


TU WAST 

awe Aig: 1 

занї чачта! (feast: 
nn ce И) potio 

aafaa at: a 


THE FIFTH LAYER 
usnih (nos. 110—112, in the center): 


. Agni who owns the prices: cows, 


youthful son of strength, 
give us wide fame, Jātavedas! 


. Kindled, bright, sage Agni, 


worthy to be invoked with chant, 
shine riches for us 
with your many faces! 


. Agni, king of night, 


and again when dawn appears, 
you with your sharp teeth 
burn the demons! 


pankti (nos. 113-115, in the south): 


. May we kindle you, Agni, 


radiant unaging god, 

so that this admirable kindling stick 
may light up the sky. 

Bring food to the chanters! 


. For you, Agni, lord of light, 


the offering is offered with verse, 
wonderworker of the tribe, 
oblation bearer. 

Bring food to the chanters! 


. Luminous one, mix in your mouth 


two ladles full of butter, 

and fill them to the brim for us. 
For our hymns, lord of strength, 
bring food to the chanters! 


aksarapankti (nos. 116-119, in the west): 


. Today, Agni, may we prepare you an offering, 


with our praises and invocations, 
like a horse, like an auspicious resolve 
that touches the heart. 


. For you have become, Agni, 


leader of resolve that is auspicious, 
skillful and true, 
leader of exalted order. 


. Singing today with these songs 


we wish to honor you, Agni. 
Your might thunders 
like that of the sky. 


. Because of our songs, 


turn to our side. 


487 


ay aster d 

gata: adl ad 

чей НЕ addr ale яа: п 
= wur agenfa- 


‚їйї йт | 


Raga gaoa ANSE u 
ait daga дя 

sit adedladad | 

* {тя 

wal gg Яй nr 


эп à erg Еа 
gard gan 

wg ea a чая afte 
tada ufa 

BAX «азд эп aT 
эп Ж эги SEIL 
speed SIETI | 
gaer чн fia 
edam Gray gu 
SAX жа AT AT 0 
за Garg ufus 

gai foia one 1 
sūta sa Чї 
sud aaa 

ZAK RATT эп AT 


эй «неї a «й: 
жі ч ахх Еее d 
Raat а ate: Ц 


era ай wal 


мде чач unit: | 


PART П THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


Like sunlight, Agni, 
be kind with all your faces! 


aticchandas (no. 120, in the north):! 


aa. I regard Agni as hota, generous donor, 
son of strength, all-knower, 
like an inspired sage. 
bb. The god accomplished at rites, 
his lofty body rising to the gods, 
who follows the radiance of bright-flaming but- 
ter, 
of the fat that has been poured out. 


dvipadā (nos. 121-123, at the center): 


cc. Agni, be our intimate friend, 
friendly protector who offers defense. 
dd. Burning and shining, we ask you for favor, 
now for our friends. 
ee. Good Agni is of bright fame. 
Come, most brilliant, and grant wishes. 
(TS 4.4.4) 


~ « ° еу 
dt чаї 999 «Г: | 
эти RR: gaat яа: u 


че ētak ней ате 
ча: TIX аё IARAA | 
C EE CINE 

ч gāda wed 


dāt Чапа TT | 


gara Brita ENAT 
Areta ATE: | 


AA cd ят ATA: | 

жа ята Brat da TEA: | 
& cat яти Р: | 
grt sese afara: | 
aguadaaan: | 

иал wer татат «01 =: 1 


The seven Pleiads (krttika) bricks, nos. 124—130, are consecrated with: 


Your name is Amba—with Prajapati, 
with every recitation, 
I place you! 
(TS 4.4.5.lb) 


этеп arate 
amfa cat 
Саат gai MT 


followed by six more mantras produced by replacing “Amba” in the above 
by what must have been the earliest names of the Pleiads: Dula, Nitatni, 
Abhrayanti, Meghayanti, Varsayanti, and Cupuņīkā, respectively. 

The five Rain Bringers (vrstisani), nos. 131-135, are consecrated with: 


You win the east wind, 
you win rain, 
you win lightning, 
you win thunder, 
you win rain! 
(TS 4.4.6.1d) 


gaai | 
aaah | 
Гаете бб | 
Кыр ын 
ӨНҮ | 


As in the second layer (page 455), each of these Rain-Bringing bricks is 
lifted out of the layer where it had already been placed and carried by two 


1 According to Keith, the division in Weber’s text into aa and bb is unnecessary (this 
mantra being RV 1.127.1); thus the 29 bricks are consecrated by 29, not 30, mantras. 


488 


THE FirrH LAYER 


helpers clockwise around the altar, the adhvaryu touching it, before itis con- PLATE 77 


secrated. 


The eight Aditya bricks, representing the sun and other celestial deities, 


nos. 136-143, are consecrated with: 


You for the ocean, 
you for water, 
you for liquid, 
you for impulse, 
you for the wise, 
you for the radiant, 
you for the sky light, 
you for the Adityas! 
(TS 4.4.6.21) 


eife car | 
AHH car | 
аа car | 
етт cat | 
TAT cat | 
{заде car | 
Rascar aif | 
зае сат | 


On each of the five Clarified-Butter (ghrta) bricks, nos. 144-148, some 
clarified butter is put, and they are consecrated with: 


You for the verse, 
you for radiance, 
you for shine, 
you for blaze, 


you for light! 
(TS 4.4.6.2k) 


A al | 
ga cat | 
qa cat | 
ae eat | 
TAA car | 


Like the Rain-Bringing bricks, these Butter bricks too are carried around 


the altar before they are consecrated. 


The five Glory-Giver (yašodā) bricks, nos. 149-153, are consecrated 


with: 


You, giving glory, I place in glory. 
With this seer, this sacred power, this god, 
in the fashion of Angiras, sit firm! 
(TS 4.4.6.21) 


amai сат ари атаан 
datoraa яалт qut vada 
бең, нат dz u 


and four more mantras arising from this by replacing “glory” by “‘brilli- 
ance,” “milk,” “radiance,” and “wealth,” respectively. 
The five Augmenting (bhūyaskrt) bricks, nos. 154-158, are consecrated: 


You are augmenting, 
you make space, 
you are eastern, 
you are the zenith, 
you are air sitter, sit in the air! 
(TS 4.4.7.1a) 


| 
‚ vere | 
яе | 
=й | 
[A еі 
жїзї | 
мга атыга dia d 


Five Sitting-in-Waters (apsusad) bricks, nos. 159-163, with: 


489 


PLATE 77 
A Rain-Bringing Brick 


As in the second layer, there are five Rain-Bringing (vrstisani) bricks 
in the fifth layer. One of these is square (paficami: no. 135), one a 
small triangle (paficamyardha: no. 133), and three are large triangles 
(adhyardhardha: nos. 131, 132, and 134). All Rain-Bringing bricks 
receive special treatment: they are lifted out of the layer where they 
had already been placed, and are carried clockwise round the altar 
by helpers before they are put back and consecrated. The adhvaryu 
carries them ritually by touching them while they are being trans- 
ported. The plate shows one of the large triangular Rain Bringing 
bricks being carried round the altar. 


Еу 4— 


490 


491 


PART П THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


You are sitting on the waters, sega 1 

you are sitting on the griffon, уча 
ou аге sitting on the vulture CES 

y 8 TC, пич 1 


you are sitting on the eagle, n c 
you are sitting on the vault! gredi t 
(TS 4.4.7.lb) ій | 


Five Wealth Givers (draviņodā), nos. 164-168, with: 


In wealth of earth I place you, — . genea zd areal 1 
in wealth of air I place you, araa eat afar апат | 
in wealth of sky I place you, Raen кй maan 1 
in wealth of ters I pl Fo We em 
quarters I place you, шї car afr emer 1 


wealth giver I place you in wealth! i Д 
i m (TS 4.4.7.1с) aagi cat Alaa тааб n 


Seven Life Givers (Zyusya), nos. 169-175, with: 


d. Protect my exhalation, яй ANRI 
protect my inhalation, ani З чї! 
protect my cross breathing, ai Ж NR | 
protect my life, а ч 


protect all my life, 


fun ^ 
protect the whole of my life! тї Ша 
е. Agni, your highest name, your heart, edid чї 
come, let us grasp each other, эй TL TW EMA 
be among the five races, Agni! arate as tae 


(TS 4.4.7.2d-e) _ «bsec | 


Brick no. 175, consecrated with the mantra e, is also called the Five Races 
(райсајапуа). When about to recite its mantra, the adhvaryu looks at the 
udgātā, who intones his Chant of the Five Races: 


bhrājā vu vo va (3 x) agnir mūrddhā divah kakut/ patih prthivya 
ayam| арат retāmsi jayinvatayi] bhrājā vu vo va (2 x) bhrājā vu vo 
bà] г višvasya jagato jyotih [| 
(AG 5.3, partly based upon JA 3.7; cf. RV 8.44.16a; 
cf. Kauthuma-Rāņāyanīya AG 3.127)! 


Without waiting for the udgātā to complete his chants, the adhvaryu conti- 


1 This chant, also called agner vratam ""Agni's will," occurs five more times in the 
Agnicayana: it is one of the ten chants sung around the completed altar (Episode 
18); it is sung when the pratiprasthātā sprinkles curds mixed with honey over the altar 
(Episode 19); it is sung when Agni is transported to the altar (agnipranayana: Episode 
20); and again when Agni and Soma are transported (agnīgomapraņayana: Episode 24). 


492 


THE FIFTH LAYER 


nues with the consecration of the five Season’s-Name (rtunama) bricks, nos. 
176-180: 
7 атат aatan: | 
You are the Yāvas, the Aydvas, — T 
the courses, the helpers, Sabda! Sat эя 
(TS 4.4.7.2f) 


Two pebbles, dipped in clarified butter, are placed in the center and con- 
secrated with: 


(You are) ocean, the firm one! айс яй: i 
(Remainder of f) a 


The five bricks and the two pebbles are each consecrated with With That God 
and Pouring Milk. 

The two pebbles must have been introduced, because there are more 
mantras than bricks.! This process continues: adhvaryu and yajamāna begin 
to consecrate 118 black pebbles that are placed between the bricks, like ce- 
ment. These pebbles are called šarkara in Sanskrit and koļipparan, “chicken- 
fish,” in Malayalam (see Episode 10). Later, four naturally perforated peb- 
bles will be added. While these pebbles are consecrated by the adhvaryu 
together with the yajamāna, the udgātā sings his Pebble Songs: 


yo no hà bu | idām idam pura ha bu | pra va pra vasya ya ha yi | 
nina nināya tam и vo hà bu | stūsā yi sakhaya ya hà yi | dramütayayi | 
o yi là | | 

(GG 45.2.1) 
yo nā idam idam pura | yo na idam idam pūrā | pra vasya ā nināya 
tam ū va stūsā yi | (2 X from ninaya) 


sakhaya a yindram ata | уа yi || 
(GG 45.2.2, both based upon RV 8.21.9) 


While these chants continue, the 118 pebbles are consecrated, like bricks, 
each with a mantra and in groups, followed by the required number of re- 
citations of With That God and Pouring Milk. The positions of the pebbles, 
between the bricks, is indicated in Figure 40, and will be specified in Table 
14 and in the following text. The naturally perforated pebbles are marked by 
small circles in Figure 40. Their names dnd number are provided in Table 
13. The pebbles will be consecutively numbered 1* — 118*. 


1 According to Baudhāyana Šrauta Sūtra 10.45:44.12 (Volume II, page 571) there are 
seven Season’s-Name bricks. ; 


493 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


NB sl ИНЕ: 
“МИИ 


Figure 40—Position of Pebbles іп the Fifth Layer (Compare Figure 39) 
494 


THE FIFTH LAYER 
NAMES OF PEBBLES IN THE FIFTH LAYER 


Number Name of Pebbles Number of Pebbles 
1*-22* Indratanū, “Indra’s Body" 22 
23*-55* Yajūatanū, “Rituals Body" 33 
56*-67* Jyotismatī, “Luminous” 12 
68*-79* Bhūta, “Being” 12 
80*-84* Ајуапі, “Being Uninjured" 5 
85*-88* Rāstrabhrt, "Holding the Realm" 4 
89* Paurņamāsi, "Full Moon” 1 
90*-103* Naksatra, “Lunar Mansion" 14 
104* — Amāvāsī, “New Moon” 1 
105*-117* Naksatra, "Lunar Mansion” 13 
118* Paurņamāsī, “Full Moon” ml 
118 

TABLE I3 


Like the bricks, the pebbles fall into groups, each consisting of four or 
five sets: one set of pebbles is placed in the eastern part of the bird (the head 
and shoulders), one set in the southern wing, one set in the western part (the 
tail and back), one set in the northern wing, and sometimes one or two peb- 
bles in the middle. The position of the pebbles is not completely determined, 
but they must occur in the interstices between certain bricks. Table 14 pro- 
vides the names of the group, the number of pebbles in each set of the group, 
and the numbers of the bricks, between which they are placed. Within each 
set, the pebble farthest from the center is generally placed first, and each 
subsequent pebble is closer to the center. Figure 40 complements Table 14. 
Of the remaining thirty pebbles, the first paurņamāsī pebble is placed at the 
meeting point between bricks nos. 124/125/131/181. The naksatra pebbles 
nos. 90*-103* are placed from east to west along the east-west line joining 
the body and the southern wing (1.е., the line that goes west from the point 
where the first paurņamāsī was placed). The amāvāsī pebble is placed at the 
meeting point of bricks nos. 43/161/156/42/40/38/39/41 (i.e., the center of the 
junction with the tail). The naksatra pebbles nos. 105*—117* are placed from 
west to east along the west-east line joining the body and the northern wing. 
This line ends at the meeting point of bricks nos. 18/57/59/21, where the 
second paurpamasi pebble is placed. 


495 


GROUP 


Indratanū 
Bricks 
Yajfiatanü 
Bricks 
Jyotismati 
Bricks 

Bhüta 
Bricks 

Ajyani 
Bricks 

Rāstrabhrt 
Bricks 


1 Eastern end. 
2 Western end. 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


. EAST SOUTH 


5 5 
nos. 58/60 66/113 
8 8 
nos. 56/58 113/117 
3 3 
nos. 3/56 177/182 
3 3 
nos. 5/7 139/160 
1 1 
nos. 6/7 138/193 
1 1 


nos. 136/137 138/199 


TABLE 


POSITION OF PEBBLES BETWEEN BRICKS 


WEST NORTH CENTER 


5 5 2! 
141/140 80/106 180/185 
8 8 ils: 


156/161 79/ 53 195/ 82 
3 3 
35/1 51/78 


3 3 
35/712 49/77 
1 1 1 


35/193 47/76 173/84 
1 ie 
188/193 75/76 


14 


And now the mantras. The twenty-two Indra's-Body pebbles, nos. Li 
22*, are consecrated with: 


Through Agni you conquer all; 
through the sun you are self-ruling; 
through order, lord of strength; 
through the bull, creator; 

through ritual, bountiful; 

through sacrificial fee, celestial; 
through rage, slaying enemies; 
through friendship, supporting the body; 
through food, wealth; 

through earth, gain; 

with verses, eater of food; 

by shouting vausat, increase; 

by song, protecting the body; 

by holy power, drinking Soma; 
with cows, supporting ritual; 


496 


afat Тїз | 
quan anz | 
жеп ==: | 
TAT TA | 
aad ячаі | 
afer gañ: à 
argat gag | 
dtatēla ачып: | 
TAA TA 
челт, 1 
Ritas: | 
AIST: | 
ята чат: | 
Berar ARAT | 
эй BAT: | 
aa BUT 1 


THE FIFTH LAYER 


with military power, men; 
with horse and chariot, holding the thunderbolt; 
with seasons you are master; 
through the year, enclosing; 
through penance, unassailable; 
together with bodies, the sun! 
(TS 4.4.8) 


The thirty-three Ritual’s Body peeks nos. 23*-55*, are consecrated with: 


Prajāpati, with mind come to Soma; 

the creator in the consecration; 

Savitr in the bearing; 

Pusan in the Soma cow; 

Varuna when tied (in a cloth); 

Asura when being bought; 

Mitra when purchased; 

Sipivista when put in place;! 

enticing men when pulled forward ;? 

master when arrived; 

Prajāpati when trarisported; 

Agni at agnidh’s altar; * 

Brhaspati when moved from it; 

Indra in the havirdhāna Hall; 

Aditi when put down; 

Visņu when taken down; MM 

Atharvan when sprinkled; — | 

death when pressed; 

drinking unpurified with cleansed; 

wind when purifying; 

Mitra when mixed with milk; 

Manthins when mixed with grains; . 

All-gods when taken out; 

Rudra when offered; 

wind when covered; 

contemplating men when revealed; 

food when it comes; 

famed of the ancestors; 

life when taken; 

river Indus at the final bath; 

ocean when gone; 

water when dipped; 

heaven when brought to completion! 
(TS 4.4.9) 


1 On the yajamāna's thighs. 
2 In the Soma cart. 


497 


аш AAT 1 

йя ч 99 ч аз | 
RIM x v 
аяса ЧАЧ: | 
ачатѕяіче: i 

ҷӯ: яз, eft: r 


aan AASS: | 
атат AAMIR 1 

айат AAR, 1 

qat тажатат, | 

qum 3498: | 

з: чат: | 


fia: Ala: | 


fie зара: à 

я ч: deal: | 
эчт: | >. 

simia soana: 1 
eet s ^ 
зке пайааіа: 
хей «йч | 
гаш: 1 


‚ Beupurafģaato à 


TAMIA: 1 
smsfida: ! 


` agaa atqanja: | 


ят: qua: | 
бл: айй 
яг dest: | 
data vāla:1 
ga ga 
ата | 
qaar ясата: | 
ма SITE: | 
ant atara 
agar: | 
їчен, | 
айза: | 


PLATE 78 


PLATE 78A-B 
Consecration of Pebbles 


On the fifth layer, one hundred and eighteen pebbles (called Sarkara) 
are placed in the interstices between the bricks. They are conse- 
crated by yajamāna and adhvaryu with three mantras each, just 
like the bricks. At the same time the udgātā chants his Pebble Songs. 
On the plate, some of the Ritual’s Body (yajiiatanū) pebbles are 
being consecrated. As can be seen from the white dots, most of 
the surrounding bricks have already been fully consecrated, though 
others (e.g., nos. 184 and 200) have not. This is as it should be, for 
all pebbles are inserted between the consecration of bricks nos. 
180 and 181. Comparison of the plate with Figure 40 shows that 
some pebbles have been misplaced. 


498 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


The twelve Luminous pebbles, nos. 56*-67*, are consecrated with: 


I place you, luminous; 

I place you who makes light; 
I place you who finds light; 
I place you who shines; 

I place you who burns; 

I place you who flashes; 

I place you who flames; 

I place you who is blazing; 

I place you who is immortal; 
I place you who has great light; 
I place you who awakens; 

I place you who is awake! 


(TS 1.4.34) 


waaay car атат | 
ГЕ сат argafā | 
sitfūfāš сат ята | 
wedi cat eram 1 
saged cat area | 
aeagnraedi cat тй | 
аата ear emanat | 
атай car таай | 
astai cat arate 1 
garai var Arga | 
saei сат атап | 
эпа cat aram | 


The twelve Being pebbles, nos. 68*—79*, are consecrated with: 


To earth—svaha ; 

to air—svāhā; 

to sky—svaha ; 

to sun—svaha ; 

to moon—svaha ; 

to lunar mansions—svaha ; 

to water—svāhā; 

to plants—svaha ; 

to trees—svaha ; 

to moving and unmoving creatures—svaha ; 
to swimming creatures—svaha ; 
to creeping creatures—svaha ! 


(TS 1.8.13.3i) 


{ӨГӨЙ sarei 1 


aquia жапа! | 
SEU чат | 
aAA: ent | 
RT жп! 
әд: жата | 
чае: «zt I 
TAT: engh | 
aaa: «паті 
нечэ: хате! 


The five Being Uninjured pebbles, nos. 80*-84*, are consecrated with: 


d. To him with a hundred weapons, a hundred 
powers, 
a hundred aids, who conquers hostility, 
overcoming a hundred autumns 
Indra shall lead us over all obstacles! 
e. The four paths going to the gods, 
stretching between earth and sky, 
may all gods lead us here to that 
which is uninjured (ajyāni), unconquered! 
f. Summer, winter, spring for us, 
autumn, rains be good for us; 
may we enjoy favor and protection 


500 


smga sadia 
этаїйячйзбтиачт | 
arā 9 #: ari aial- | 
баету aa gR Grat и | 
X aan: Waa pararet 
эе aig AA frafea | 
dat at asia amaga, 
че яй Зап: чї gās dd n 
Зс dara за at agra: 
aat: 99 al sg | 
dgtggart araartrgrai 


cs 


THE FIFTH LAYER 


of these seasons through a hundred autumns! 
g. To the Idu year, the full year, 

the year pay great respect; 

worthy of ritual, with benevolence, 

may they protect us from failure and death. 
h. Better than the best have the gods collected, 

with your help may we gain access to you; 

miraculous drop, enter us; 

be good to our children and offspring! 


(TS 5.7.2.3d-4h) 


Rare tomas еп! 
засаг часах 
“чен зат ZEM: | 

wat аах {ийт абі 
сапат attur: ATA || 
aza: йад: wate Zal- 
єсаліѕааа AAMAS cara 
а «ira: Pat эп Pare 
at аты waa em 


The four Holdings of the Realm, nos. 85*—88*, are consecrated with: 


Glorious Agni lead him to glory, 
bring fame here that belongs to Indra; 
let him be head, chief, resplendent, 
most famous among his equals! 

Seers who found celestial light, 


seeing happily, underwent penance and consecra- 


tion; 
power, force, and strength were born, 
may the gods together accord that to us! 
Creator, disposer, highest witness, 
Prajāpati, supreme being, sovereign; 
my chants, meters, rules are calling, 
to secure him supremacy! 
Turn to me, come to me, 
let him be your ruler, your master; 
you depend on his discrimination, 
from now on all of you follow him! 


(TS 5.7.4.3e) 


an aafaa aaa 
епічне ae 1 

s qut ҷа qas: 
URRIRA этет 1 

ag wadeq zd Sur 

а Aaa: gaik: | 

ad: aa web эп& 

agen tat aft & wee u 
этап атат deste deg 
ami: qur fred à 
sanasa fafast er g- 
ase азий Wm u 
sTddengs йа ae 

TAX sms faf eg | 

sep [їн gu iava- 

first чата starr er a 


The First Full Moon pebble, no. 89*, is consecrated with: 


Full behind and full in front, 

In the middle full moon is victorious; 
May the gods, dwelling together in her, 
rejoice here in the highest vault of heaven! 


(TS 3.5.1.1a) 


чай чапта quit gerai- 
gadaa: ате tur | 
aei tat si dadea 
Say wae ZE Alzararā ll 


immediately followed by With That God and Pouring Milk. The Lunar Man- 
sions, nos. 90*—103*, are consecrated with fourteen mantras, each mantra 


followed by: 


You are rays of Agni, 


501 


эй жя: ют 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


of Prajāpati, 
of the creator, 
of Soma; 
You for verse, 
you for radiance, 
you for shine, 
you for blaze, 
you for light! 
(TS 4.4.10.1a, second half) 


The fourteen mantras are: 


Krttikā lunar mansion, Agni deity; 
Rohini lunar mansion, Prajapati deity; 
Mrga$irga lunar mansion, Soma deity; 
Ardra lunar mansion, Rudra deity; 
Punarvasus lunar mansion, Aditi deity; 
Tisya lunar mansion, Brhaspati deity; 
Aéresas lunar mansion, snakes deity; 
Maghās lunar mansion, ancestors deity; 
Phalgunis lunar mansion, Aryamān deity; 
Phalgunis lunar mansion, Bhaga deity; 
Hasta lunar mansion, Savitr deity; 
Citra lunar mansion, Indra deity; 
Svati lunar mansion, Vayu deity; 
Višākhās lunar mansion, Indra-Agni deity! 
(TS 4.4.10.la and b, first half) 


saldā; 
я: 


ER 


Rū zal 
ey zat 
gā eal 


| эй at 


N eat i 


1 
1 


2,08). 

л? д> 

h 8, E 
335.4 

x 

Уј 

m 

al 

a. 


eH 
FE 
= |, 
AM d 
KP 
© S. 
ged 
a, 
| 2, 
„281 a 

ES 

a. 


zu an 1 


fae à qud теба t 
aar adas erat žaat 
am add Чай Заа! 
чаї яфтнйяг Зая! 


ws 1 


чей add wit Rast 


жеш ada” «rar 8 E 


Rar ааят! laat 
att aaa атаа! 
fruit agafen saat 


The New Moon pebble, no. 104*, is consecrated with: 


The share that the gods, dwelling together, 

have magnanimously given you, new moon, 

with that fill our ritual, bountiful one 

Grant us a wealth of heroes, you fortunate one! 
(TS 3.5.1.1b) 


qq Ж xar wage. 

aatar ааг faa t 
ят at ast gi Raa 
i at айк чай аа 


The remaining thirteen Lunar Mansions, nos. 105*-117*, are consecrated 


with: 


Anuradha lunar mansion, Mitra deity; 
Rohini lunar mansion, Indra deity; 
Vicrts lunar mansion, ancestors deity; 
Asādhās lunar mansion, water deity; 
Asādhās lunar mansion, All-gods deity; 
Šroņā lunar mansion, Visnu deity; 
Sravistha lunar mansion, Vasus deity; 


502 


Saua ча imc "aal 
En азаб) aal 
Ачат чая чё жаа 
этет ATMA SAT 
этет tat PAF Зат Baat 
Ant aaa (чаі 
ээг этїї aday Raul 


THE FIFTH LAYER 


Satabhisaj lunar mansion, Indra deity; 
Prosthapadās lunar mansion, one-foot-goat deity; 
Prosthapadās lunar mansion, serpent-of-the-deep 
deity; 

Revati lunar mansion, Pūgan deity; 
Ašvayujs lunar mansion, Ašvins deity; 
Apabharanis lunar mansion, death deity! 

(TS 4.4.10.1b, second half) 


sakumā! Raa 
gga Adams ачаа! 
sgg чаан а! aaat 
tadi ама qur Saat 
aagi аша! aat 
— M art daat 


Again, each of these mantras is followed by TS 4.4.10.1а2. Finally, the Se- 
cond-Full Moon pebble, no. 118*, is consecrated with TS 3.5.1.la, like the 
first, and With That God and Pouring Milk are recited for 90*—118*. 

The operation with the pebbles is now over, and adhvaryu and yajamana 
resume the consecration of bricks. Since the next group of bricks is called 
Sixth layer, the ceremonies customarily performed between layers take place. 
The adhvaryu touches the dark horse and spreads loose earth over the layer 
(excluding twenty-five bricks that remain to be consecrated), reciting TS 1.5. 
11.1 d, followed by With That God and Pouring Milk. Then the five Sixth- 
Layer (sasthī citi) bricks, nos. 181-185, are consecrated with: 


h. You are uniter and foreteller 

of Agni, Soma, and Sirya. 
i. You are terrible, fearful 

of ancestors, death, and Indra. 
k. You are the firm quarter, earth 

of god Savitr, Maruts, and Varuna. 
1. You are support and foundation 

of Mitra-Varuna, Mitra, and Dhatr. 
m. You are eastern and western 

of Vasus, Rudras, and Adityas! 

(TS 4.4.11.2h-m) 


Each of these mantras is followed by: 


They are your masters, homage to them, 
May they be kind to us! 
He whom we hate and who hates us, 
I place him in your jaws! 
(TS 4.4.11.3n) 


data aAa- 
R: ater der 
sad ata ч 
Rani ara 
yar = чї si 

dad afirgiredt челе 
ata anata 
Raagi эте 
щей ч adīt ч 


чая ааттаа 


= sf fied aA- 


The Mouth, Limb, Prajāpati, Bull, and Space-Filler bricks are all consecrated 
in the usual manner. The Space Fillers, nos. 198-202, are consecrated in the 
eastern direction, as on the first and third layers, the first and last fixed 


while the udgātā sings his Space-Filler chants. 


Next come the ceremonies with the naturally perforated pebbles, indi- 
cated by small circles in Figure 40. The adhvaryu sweeps the altar with 


503 


PLATE 79 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


palāša leaves, takes four svayamātrņņā pebbles, mounts the altar, and puts 
one pebble in each of the interstices between bricks at the center of the four 
sides of the square body (ātmā) of the bird. The first pebble is put where 
bricks nos. 3/4/5/2/110/95 meet, as he chants: 


p > 1 ч Lie PE 
You for exhalation, you for sight; Ел ыча. GST 


with that god чаї Zadat- 

in the manner of Angiras sigvaz 

sit firm! sar = 1 
(TS 5.5.5.4) А 


The second is put at the meeting point of 11/98/108/109 with the mantra that 
is obtained from the former by substituting “diffused breath" for *'exhala- 
tion." The third is put at the meeting point of 13/135/133/140/141/10 by 
substituting *inhalation," and the fourth at 12/123/122/184 by substituting 
“language.” 

The remaining rites resemble the well-known pattern (see pages 418, 
461). The adhvaryu gets one of the svayamātrņņā pebbles, with five holes 
in it. He goes round the altar with the pebble, makes the white horse sniff 
at it, and returns avoiding the dark horse and followed by yajamāna and 
avidvān, the Ignorant Brahmin. The three sit down at the center of the altar, 
touch the pebble, and recite: 


Heaven! (suvah) ga: У 

I place you in the seat of the living, AMA «39 UTTATET- 
in the shadow of the helper; ачытат 

homage to the ocean, aa: "HAITI 

homage to the clearness of the ocean! qd: аялча чаи 


Let the Highest One (paramestin) seat you 


Sone oul ES 
on the ridge of heaven; чай eut agag Ва: 2 


you who are wide and extending rated хаза 
strong, lordly, masterful. . ачаа surget Raddi 
Hold fast heaven, make firm heaven, don't harm fad uxo (zd eve 

the sky: : ^ Ва ui Ree- 


for every breath, for every y inhalation, 


fated moaia C 
for every diffused breath, for every exhalation, babs ита 


for support, for motion. Sata afew ata 
May Sūrya protect you with great success, Kikeatstt чі неп 
a safe cover. aA efTuT Weds 
With that god, in the fashion of Aūgiras, aat хаата Hat dta u 
sit firm! E 

(TS 4.4.3.3g-h) 


At the same time, the udgātā chants his song, which is composed on suvah, 
“heaven” : 


504 


THE FIFTH LAYER 


suvom | suva ho yi suva ho yi suva hā ā vu vā | ē suvar jyotih || 
(AG 25.23; see Table 15, page 533) 


The adhvaryu breathes in. The Ignorant Priest gives him a golden coin, and 
the yajamāna gives the Ignorant Priest his sacrificial fee. The adhvaryu makes 
an oblation into the eastern hole of the pebble, reciting TS 5.5.4.3 (as be- 
fore: pages 419, 462), after which adhvaryu and yajamāna recite: 


I have mounted heaven, Ганта 
we have attained light! gan г 
(TS 5.6.8.1a3) 


They put a piece of gold on the western hole of the pebble and recite: 


You are sky, give me sky, gz 
restrain heaven, protect me from heaven! Р as 
(TS 5.7.6.2с3) 


The adhvaryu then completes the consecration of the bricks. The Circle 
(mandala) brick, no. 203, placed above the Circle bricks in the first and 
third layers, is consecrated with: 


You are heaven, unconquered, Срат 
penetrated by immortality. 5989 THT- 

The Adityas are your guardians. х гапе mgr: 
Sūrya is placed in this, чаї Тїї 
to which I resort. am x di 


i i ! М e T. 
May it be my protection and refuge! spits ar X ad — 


At the same time the udgātā chants his Circle song. The Seed-Discharging 
(retahsic) brick, no. 204, above the others, is consecrated with: 


May sky, seed discharging, at Хаи 
give me seed; ага Wat zug 
may my seed procreate! «rd $9: saag ll 


(BSS 10.46: 46.19-47.1) 


Finally the brick Without Ears (vikarņī), no. 205, which has a picture in PLATE 75B 
white paste of a woman without ears on it, is consecrated with: 


maga pua масая, 
«aps dau enean. 
azer ata end sur mn 
wt зн Я asta ол ii 


He neighs like an eager horse in the prairie, 
come out of its enclosure. 
The wind blows behind his flames, 
your trail (Agni) becomes black. 
(TS 4.4.3.31) 


505 


PLATE 79 
The Ignorant Brahmin on the Fifth Layer 


As on the first layer (Plates 11, 67) and on the third, the Ignorant 
Brahmin assists yajamana and adhvaryu with the consecration 
of a naturally perforated pebble. The pebble on the fifth layer has 
five holes in it. The accompanying recitation is addressed to heaven 
(suvah) and the Highest One (paramestin), and invokes the pro- 
tection of the sun (sūrya). The udgātā chant, which is sung at the 
same time, is also composed on the word suvah. 


М 


506 


507 


PLATE 80 


PART JI THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


The next rites are routine. The adhvaryu recites TS 5.5.4.4 and TS 4.4.4.6 t. 
They descend from the altar with TS 5.5.9.2g and 4.6.1.4q. The adhvaryu 
recites TS 5.7.9.1 a and 5.7.8.1a, and spreads loose soil over the twenty- 
five bricks. This is followed by TS 1.5.11.1 d, With That God and Pouring 


Milk. 


Then the adhvaryu takes 1000 specks of gold dust and puts 200 each into 
five peacock feathers. Five times water is poured into his hands, each time 
with gold from one feather added to it. He sprinkles the water five times over 
the altar, crosswise in the four directions and at the center, reciting: 


RUDRA 


Eigth Day: April 20, 1975 
EPISODE I8 


Rudra, Flow of Milk, and Other Ceremonies on the Fifth Layer 
(Satarudriya; Ksīradhārā) 


THE PACIFICATION OF the new bird altar begins with an offering to Rudra, 
an angry deity closely associated with Agni, sometimes regarded as a terri- 
ble form of Agni himself. As elsewhere in the Vedas, Rudra is addressed as 
Siva “gracious,” a euphemism that contributed to the origin of the Hindu god 
Siva. The offering, a continuous libation of goat's milk, takes place not at 


You are the measure of a thousand, асе жит SH | 

you are the image of a thousand, асе пеат RT i the center, which is center of power, or in the east or south, also preferred 
you are the size of a thousand, weder Dar AR | directions, but at the western brick of the northern wing on brick no. 189, 
you are the replica of a thousand, atdeva air | which must on all accounts be deemed one of the most innocent among the 


you are a thousand, you for a thousand! 


(TS 4.4.11.30) 


argdiskr arala cat | 


Finally, the yajamāna, standing at the northern hip, facing the altar and 
prompted by a helper, wishes that the bricks be turned into cows: 


Agni, may these bricks be cows for me, 
one, and a hunded, and a thousand, 

and a hundred thousand, and a million, 
and ten million, and a hundred million, 


and a thousand million, and ten thousand million, 


and a hundred-thousand million, 

and ten hundred-thousand million, 

and a hundred hundred-thousand million. 
Agni, may these bricks be cows for me, 


sixty, a thousand, ten thousand, imperishable. 


You are standing on order, increasing order, 
dripping butter, dripping honey, 

full of strength, full of power. 

Agni may these bricks be cows for me, 


заг й su gear ma: ue 
Wt g Ч асе ur 

чё ч 94 ч 

яза wae ч 

194 ч agru 

mei wredar gardat 

EHI W эги ED Šad: weg 
af: aeeaqanaliaarn 
Ratu: Чїй 

gagūl agaa 

эзїї: erat. 

«т эти gemt ad: Gee 


bricks. The adhvaryu does not climb on the altar. He stands on a pile of 
bricks, first to the south of the brick facing north, then to its west facing east, 
and finally to its north facing south. Only two bricks can be so easily ap- 
proached from different sides. 

The adhvaryu will recite the entire fifth DEREN of Be fourth kanda 
of the Taittiriya Samhita, subdivided into three portions. The libation will 
be poured through an arka leaf (Malayalam: erukinte ila), which he holds 
in his folded hands, first at the height of his face, then at the height of his 
navel, and finally at the height of his ankles. A large vessel with milk stands 
near by, and two clay kindi jars are kept at hand. The pratiprasthata pours 
milk from the kindi into the arka leaf in the hands of the adhvaryu, and a 
helper keeps another kindi full of milk ready, so that the libation is uninter- 
rupted. 

At the outset, the adhvaryu calls the pratiprasthātā: 


Bring and pour (i.e., milk)! ЕТУ MEAT 
(BSS 10.48:48.11) 


The pratiprasthātā comes with the milk, begins to pour, and the adhvaryu 


PLATE 81A 


Prost art eager 
аятай 1 | 


glorious, giving milk of desire 


Буолар vald! begins the libation, standing south of brick no. 189, facing north, holding 


(TS 44.114 p) the arka leaf at the height of his face. He recites: 


There follow samcita oblations for Agni and Varuna with TS 5.5.9.1e 2 4.5.1 a. Homage to your anger, Rudra, bios 
(substituting “desirable” for “ocean” : cf. pages 445, 459, 464, 473) and TS | шоо, alis s ча 
2.1.11.6w. While the adhvaryu makes the oblation into the center of the altar, Дое Боо DUE DOW, ‚чае req Brat 
he sits himself outside the bird, immediately west of the tail. The sruva ladle is b E E, atgruiga 4 TA: V 
tied to a long bamboo pole, supported by two bamboo poles from the sides. Dn I UN RU ar a gd: Бич 
It is believed that if the adhvaryu steps on the altar, he will die. The com- with your ous missile, Bri aqa Rui: d 
pleted altar is now ferocious (krüra), vibrating with power, and dreadful be gentle to us, Rudra. Втат «tat ат 99 
(ghora). Its powers have to be channeled and it has to be pacified and made | с. Your body, Rudra, which is gracious, aal at ү ЧЕЧ і 
to be at peace (Santa). not terrifying, with auspicious look, а ex rat аҹ. 


508 | 509 Aas teak | 


PLATE 80 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


The next rites are routine. The adhvaryu recites TS 5.5.4.4 and TS 4.4.4.6 t. 
They descend from the altar with TS 5.5.9.2g and 4.6.1.4g. The adhvaryu 
recites TS 5.7.9.1 a and 5.7.8.la, and spreads loose soil over the twenty- 
five bricks. This is followed by TS 1.5.11.1 d, With That God and Pouring 


Milk. 


Then the adhvaryu takes 1000 specks of gold dust and puts 200 each into 
five peacock feathers. Five times water is poured into his hands, each time 
with gold from one feather added to it. He sprinkles the water five times over 
the altar, crosswise in the four directions and at the center, reciting: 


RUDRA 


Eigth Day: April 20, 1975 
EPISODE 18 


Rudra, Flow of Milk, and Other Ceremonies on the Fifth Layer 
(Satarudriya; Ksiradhārā) 


THE PACIFICATION OF the new bird altar begins with an offering to Rudra, 
an angry deity closely associated with Agni, sometimes regarded as a terri- 
ble form of Agni himself. As elsewhere in the Vedas, Rudra is addressed as 
Šiva “gracious,” a euphemism that contributed to the origin of the Hindu god 
Siva. The offering, a continuous libation of goat’s milk, takes place not at 


You are the measure of a thousand, яш яш fe | 

you are the image of a thousand, асаа яй aftr i the center, which is center of power, or in the east or south, also preferred 
you are the size of a thousand, agda frat sr | directions, but at the western brick of the northern wing on brick no. 189, 
you are the replica of a thousand, -—— эй | which must on all accounts be deemed one of the most innocent among the 


you are a thousand, you for a thousand! 


(TS 4.4.11.30) 


argaislā atala «ar | 


Finally, the yajamāna, standing at the northern hip, facing the altar and 
prompted by a helper, wishes that the bricks be turned into cows: 


Agni, may these bricks be cows for me, 
one, and a hunded, and a thousand, 

and a hundred thousand, and a million, 
and ten million, and a hundred million, 


and a thousand million, and ten thousand million, 


and a hundred-thousand million, 

and ten hundred-thousand million, 

and a hundred hundred-thousand million. 
Agni, may these bricks be cows for me, 


zur # яя трат Sd: urrā 
at = = st ad ur 

g ч du 

ячё wd ч 

aifi ч agaa 

sie meder qarda 

ERI Ā эги geal ad: weg 
ait: atdagamataamomm 


bricks. The adhvaryu does not climb on the altar. He stands on a pile of 
bricks, first to the south of the brick facing north, then to its west facing east, 
and finally to its north facing south. Only two bricks can be so easily ap- 
proached from different sides. 

The adhvaryu will recite the entire fifth ie of te fourth kāņda 
of the Taittiriya Samhita, subdivided into three portions. The libation will 
be poured through an arka leaf (Malayalam: erukinte ila), which he holds 
in his folded hands, first at the height of his face, then at the height of his 
navel, and finally at the height of his ankles. A large vessel with milk stands 
near by, and two clay kindi jars are kept at hand. The pratiprasthata pours 
milk from the kindi into the arka leaf in the hands of the adhvaryu, and a 
helper keeps another kindi full of milk ready, so that the libation is uninter- 
rupted. 

At the outset, the adhvaryu calls the pratiprasthata: 


sixty, a thousand, ten thousand, imperishable. 
You are standing on order, increasing order, 
dripping butter, dripping honey, 

full of strength, full of power. 

Agni may these bricks be cows for me, 
glorious, giving milk of desire 

beyond in the other world! 


Rae: їнї 

чаш ачаа 

silent aar 

ad ия ESI ad: ara 

Ёгтї art terza | 
agaga и | 


Bring and pour (i.e., milk)! NE PIC IET 
(BSS 10.48:48.11) 


The pratiprasthātā comes with the milk, begins to pour, and the adhvaryu 
begins the libation, standing south of brick no. 189, facing north, holding 
the arka leaf at the height of his face. He recites: 


PLATE 81A 


(TS 4.4.11.4 p) 

"AAE wp Arad 
sat a gdā mt: 

‚чаа мет wed 
аттана Я ad: Ч 


4.5.1 а. Homage to your anger, Rudra, 


There follow samcita oblations for Agni and Varuna with TS 5.5.9.1e Ūū 
| to your arrow homage, too, 


(substituting "desirable”” for “ocean”: cf. pages 445, 459, 464, 473) and TS 
2.1.11.6w. While the adhvaryu makes the oblation into the center of the altar, es [ош bow, 
he sits himself outside the bird, immediately west of the tail. The sruva ladle is | д оша To orra poe 
b. With your most gracious (Siva) arrow, 


tied to a long bamboo pole, supported by two bamboo poles from the sides. | and i at a xd: radar 
S А : ddr | gracious bow, m a 

It is believed that if the adhvaryu steps on the altar, he will die. The com- | with your gracious missile Rri яча à we: | 

pleted altar is now ferocious (krzra), vibrating with power, and dreadful | be gentle to us, Rudra. Brat deal ат 99 

(ghora). Its powers have to be channeled and it has to be pacified and made | c. Your body, Rudra, which is gracious, aut at * qeu І 

to be at peace (Santa). | not terrifying, with auspicious look, E Ф xx Brat аҹ. 


508 509 TRAST | 


PLATE 80 


The Yajamāna Turns the Bricks into Cows 


* Agni, may these bricks be cows for me, 
glorious, giving milk of desire 
beyond in the other world!" 
(TS 4.4.11.4p) 


The bricks of the altar are called istaka, which may mean that they 
are wish-bricks or wish-stones. When his altar is completed, the 
yajamana faces it from the west and wishes that the bricks be turned 
into cows. 


510 


511 


PLATE 81А 
Rudra 


*Homage to your anger, Rudra, 
To your arrow, homage, too. 
Homage to your bow, 
and homage to your arms. 
With your most gracious arrow 
and gracious bow, 
with your gracious missile, 
be gentle to us, Rudra.” 
(TS 4.5.l.la-b) 


When the altar is completed and strengthened with oblations, it 
vibrates with power that has to be channeled and pacified. This 
pacification begins with a continuous oblation of milk for Rudra, an 
angry deity closely associated with Agni. The offering is poured 
not at the center, but over a distant brick, no. 189. During the first 
round, the adhvaryu stands on a pile of bricks due south of no. 189. 
The libation is poured by the pratiprasthātā through an arka leaf 
that the adhvaryu holds in his folded hands at the height of his 
mouth, facing north. Throughout the oblation the adhvaryu ad- 
dresses Rudra with a long recitation. The udgātā stands on the 
left. 


PLATE 8IB 
Flow of Milk 


During the Rudra ceremony, the udgātā chants 57 sāmans called 
“Flow of Milk” (ksīradhārā). He sits against the northern pole 
of the door immediately to the west of the tail, facing east. 


512 


9 


ә 


me 
+ 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


with that body, most potent to heal, 
haunter of mountains, look on us. 


. Haunter of mountains, the arrow you carry 


in your hand to shoot, 

make it gracious, guardian of mountains; 
do not harm the world of men. 

With gracious utterance 

we address, you, mountain dweller, 

that all our people 

be free from sickness and in good spirit. 
The advocate has spoken in advocacy, 
the first divine physician, 

confounding all snakes 

and all sorceries. 


. The dusky, the ruddy, 


the brown, the auspicious, 

and the Rudras who in thousands 

lie around the directions of this earth, 
we deprecate their anger. 


. He who creeps away, 


blue-necked and ruddy, 

has been seen by the cowherds, 
the bearers of water 

and all creatures; 

may he, seen, be gentle to us. 
Homage to the blue-necked, 
thousand-eyed one, the bountiful; 
and to those that are his warriors 
I have paid homage. 


. Unfasten from he two notches 


of your bow the bowstring, 
and cast down 
the arrows in your hand. 


. Unstringing your bow, 


you of a thousand eyes and a hundred 
quivers, 

destroying the points of your arrows, 

be gentle and gracious to us. 


. Unstrung is the bow of him of the braided 


hair 
and arrowless his quiver; 
his arrows have departed, 
empty is his quiver. 


. O most bountiful one, the missile 


in your hand, your bow, 
Guard us with it on all sides 
free from sickness. 


514 


«чі чачат Фа 
{її теат «Па i 
пена батга 

ara Rada 1 

Втаї tikta at = 

al Red: ged aig 
RAT ada eat 
Ватт azrafš | 
gut a: ачїйзтї- 
заха JAAT чач | 


еца agarad: ц 
wat wea sient 

sa чы: ая е: | 

з dans жап ufirāt йш 
fiar: demaftsdurs 89 Eug | 
gar аїза 41% 
dear ева: | 
sat йг tex 
aragaz: | 

зая st anf 

a get азат БАП 
ча! этет ат 
azat alge | 

watt % tea ейт 
mist Wa: I 


aga MARRET- 


grisa 
ara ger зія: 
qu ат ir aq || 
AIA чан 
aata args | 


fasá ч: agizat 
Ratei amiars sa | 
FATAL TT 

anna fragt i 
ar d ЗЕР 

TA aya A ыі 
алта, ANARA- 
dagaur чїй || 


4.5.2 


4.5.3 


RUDRA 


. Homage to your weapon, 


unstrung, terrifying; 
and homage to your two hands, 
to your bow. 


. May the missile from your bow 


avoid us on every side, 
and put far from us 
this quiver that is yours. 


. Homage to the golden-armed leader of 


hosts, 
and to the lord of the directions homage! 


. Homage to the trees with green tresses, 


to the lord of cattle homage! 


. Homage to the one who is yellowish red 


like fresh grass, 
to the radiant, to the lord of paths homage! 


. Homage to the brown one, to the piercer, 


to the lord of food homage! 


. Homage to the green-haired, wearer of the 


cord, 
to the lord of prosperity homage! 


. Homage to the dart of Bhava, 


to the lord of the moving world homage! 


. Homage to Rudra, with bent bow, 


to the lord of fields homage! 


. Homage to the minstrel, the invincible, 


to the lord of the woods homage! 


. Homage to the ruddy one, the ruler, 


to the lord of woods homage! 


. Homage to the minister, the trader, 


to the lord of thickets homage! 


. Homage to the extender of the world, to 


the offspring of the victor, 
to the lord of plants homage! 


. Homage to the loud calling, the screaming, 


to the lord of footmen homage! 


. Homage to the wholly covered, to the 


running, 
to the lord of warriors homage! 


. Homage to the strong, the piercing, 


to the lord of assailers homage! - 


. Homage to the leader, the holder of the 


quiver, 
to the lord of thieves homage! 


. Homage to the holder of the quiver, to the 


owner of the quiver, 


to the lord of robbers homage! 


515 


«а ATT» 
атачае уй | 
загіне Я wat 
agat da че N 
qR & чае Efe 
хач dong fra: | 
etit a =ч. 

Y seran FE ча, і 
aay vastes aret 
Rata qd qd: t 
qt аба ЕМА: 
чаї чаї я: | 

at: aftager баай 
qefrat чаа жи: || 

її argent faemfas- 
salai чах att: 1 

аат = атча 
gerit qd smt | 

«di чч ве 

Saat чей чи: | 

чаї жятаїз<чан 
Aal air st: à 

ча: gaian 
aatat Wd аҹ: | 

чат Фар Ered 
gani чай AH | 

sil afer аута 
wernt Че «А: 1 

mat зага Raga- 
dép va mua 
ai zulwmssmerdu 
qli ча aH: | 

яй: gea acit 
edat Tay aa: f 

ян: adarna Peart 
эпе гїї Чай 94:1 
ad: agad бт рй 
«чата TA AA: | 

чаї чаб ої. язга. 
ATRIA GAT sd: | 


mess šis 


4.5.4 


m. 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


Homage to.the cheater, the swindler, 
to the lord of burglars homage! 


. Homage to the glider, to the wanderer, 


to the lord of the forests homage! 


. Homage to the bolt-armed destroyers, 


to the lord of pilferers homage! 

Homage to the sword-bearers, the night 
wanderers, 

to the lord of pick pockets homage! 


. Homage to the turbaned mountain 


wanderers, 
to the lord of bandits homage! 


. Homage to you, bearers of arrows, 


and to you, bowmen, homage! 


. Homage to you that string (the bow), 


and to you that place on (the arrow) 
homage! 


. Homage to you that bend (the bow), 


and to you that let go (the arrow) homage! 
Homage to you that hurl, 
and to you that pierce homage! 


. Homage to you that art seated, 


and to you that lie homage! 


. Homage to you that sleep, 


and to you that wake homage! 


. Homage to you that stand, 


and to you that run homage! 


. Homage to you assemblies, 


and to you, lords of assemblies, homage! 


. Homage to you horses, 


and to you, lords of horses, homage! 


. Homage to you that wound, 


and to you that pierce homage! 


. Homage to you that are in bands, 


and to you that are destructive homage! 


. Homage to you sharpeners, 


and to you, lords of sharpeners, homage! 


. Homage to you hosts, 


and to you, lords of hosts, homage! 


. Homage to you troops, 


and to you, lords of troops, homage! 


. Homage to you of misshapen form, 


` and to you of all forms homage! 


. Homage to you that are great, 


and to you that are small homage! 


. Homage to you that have chariots, 


and to you that are chariotless homage! 


516 


wat аза gadā 

magai qd wa: | 

wat fava Rana- 
ф=пяї ЧЧ 99:1 

чй: чапга rare 
gmat чах aa: | 


alsa ah ata: 


ига WT aH: 

ad жй Ērti 

SATA TAY rt: | 

ян җн 

мапах Sip ч: | 

яй атаарда: — 

aRar dr 94: 1 

яй эпа ачаг dt art: | 
азе Ведала dy ur: |, 
ан anda: wala at чи: | 


аң: зача аталы di яи: | 


aakadzt arama at aa: | 
яй: qeu яахаа аг яй: |. 


яаг arā» 
safa ят 99: N 


аа тетра. 
бігала dr яти: | 
aa IANA- 

хае рая dt T: | 
aa eret 
TMA 3r TA: 
чат smit 
ardukuma ат sd: | 
mat mērīt 
TINA аї AA: | 
an freed 
Borena at sti: 
а яти: наза dt sd: d 


ча «0591 sweats dt art: 1 


RUDRA 


i. Homage to you chariots, 

and to you, lords of chariots, homage! 
k. Homage to you hosts, 

and to you, lords of hosts, homage! 
1. Homage to you, doorkeepers—svaha! 


яй WRAL 
чучела dt att | 
an: abt: 
#гатЁуйат dt ad: | 
aa: SIT: eat ! 


At this point the yajamāna, sitting at his usual spot south of the altar, re- 
nounces to Rudra. The adhvaryu stands on another pile of bricks, west of 
brick no. 189, holds the arka leaf at the height of his navel, continues the 


libation facing east, and continues his recitation: 


1. And to you, charioteers, homage! 
m. Homage to you, carpenters, 
And to you, makers of chariots, homage! 
n. Homage to you, potters, 
and to you, smiths, homage! 
o. Homage to you, Pufijistas, 
and to you, Nisādas, homage! 
p. Homage to you, makers of arrows, 
and to you, makers of bows, homage! 
q. Homage to you, hunters, 
and to you, dog leaders, homage! 
r. Homage to you dogs, 
and to you, lords of dogs, homage! 
a. Homage to Bhava and to Rudra. 
b. Homage to Sarva and to the lord of cattle. 
c. Homage to the blue-necked one, and to the 
white-throated. 
d. Homage to the wearer of braids, and to 
him of shaven hair. 
e. Homage to him to a thousand eyes, and 
to him of a hundred bows. 
f. Homage to him who haunts the mountains, 
and to Sipivista. 
g. Homage to the most bountiful, and to 
the bearer of the arrow. 
h. Homage to the short, and to the dwarf. 
i. Homage to the great, and to the stronger. 
k. Homage to him who has waxed, and to 
the waxing. 
Homage to the chief, and to the first. 
. Homage to the swift, and to the active. 
. Homage to the rapid, and to the hasty. 
. Homage to him of the wave, and to the 
roaring. 
p. Homage to him of the stream, and to him 
of the island. 


oBHBH- 


517 


PLATE 82 


impa di wa: | 
AAA 
ra dt ад: t 
яа: EMS: 
«Ata di «ti: | 
яң: {йүү 
Ria at ай: | 
ча guest. 


agata a 99: } 


«at meo 

меат at ad: 

яну: ayer dt tat | 
aa Wart a Kart T 


га: grad ч gadā vi 


яй testam a Brewster sa |, 
ан: BUTEA sr 

саната = | 

wa: аста a 

STARA ч | 

«at бп 3 

Вава a 1 

at Agema Bday ч! 
ЧАЇ grad ч pU | 
wal ggā ч ааа ч! 

wat get ч davdā wi 
анї эй 9 rt | 
яң эпт AIR = | 

ан: ач a afer T1, 
awd gu MAAA + | 
ай: aaa = ід ч | 


PLATE 82 
Rudra: Second Round 


During the second round of Rudra, the adhvaryu faces east and 
holds the arka leaf through which the libation is poured at the 
height of his navel. 


518 


519 


4.5.6 a. 


4.5.7 


PART П THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


Homage to the oldest, and to the youngest. 


. Homage to the first born, and to the later 


born. 


. Homage to the midmost, and to the 


immature. 


. Homage to the hindmost, and to him in the 


depth. 


. Homage to Sobhya, and to him of the 


amulet. 


. Homage to him who swells with death, 


and to him at peace. 


. Homage to him of the ploughed field, and 


to him of the threshing floor. 


. Homage to him of fame, and to him at his 


end. 
Homage to him of the wood, and to him 
of the thicket. 


. Homage to sound, and to echo. 


Homage to him of the swift host, and to 
him with the fast car. 


. Homage to the hero, and the destroyer. 
. Homage to the armored, and to the 


corsleted, 


. Homage to the mailed, and to the 


cuirassed. 


. Homage to the famous, and to him of a 


famous host. 


. Homage to him of the drum, and to him 


of the drumstick. 


b. Homage to the bold, and to the cautious. 


. Homage to the messenger, and to the 


servant. 


. Homage to the quiver bearer, and to the 


owner of the quiver. 


. Homage to him of the sharp arrow, and to 


him of the weapon. 
Homage to him of the good weapon, and 
to him of the good bow. 


. Homage to him of the stream, and to him 


of the way. 


. Homage to him of the hole, and to him of 


the pool. 
Homage to him of the ditch, and to him 
of the lake. 


. Homage to him of.the stream, and to him 


of the tank. 
Homage to him of the cistern, and to him 
of the well. 


520 


att Hert а ae ч | 


ай: gari WITT Wd 
ant ятата TENA | 
«mit TAT ч 

gaa = | 

TA: GRUNT = 

aaa sa | 

art ara” 9 

SEU = | 

an заяа 9 

чеч 9 | 

яи: TI таат = | 


чап аға ч KAT 9 | 


ян: яам ч ябага 91 
яй эша MESSA E) 
aa: gda maf | 
«mit їйї = 

qun 91 

чаї ARAN a 

alta = 

AT: Mar ч 

айат = I 

AA gta MISSERI | 
Чаї gt cw пей ч | 
ча zari far ч! 
«АТ Кү Ө Agfa =! 
яй ЧӨ sms sqft «a | 
ча: ама E 
garā ч | 

ча: gea = 

vat ч | 

aa: gam 9 

diva a | 

ян: quia ч 

ARENA ч! 

Tal WEA ч 

arat i 

чн: FAA MATA |] 


RUDRA 


m. Homage to him of the rain—svaha! 


~ [i 
айт ач STAT | 


Again, the yajamāna renounces to Rudra. The adhvaryu stands оп a pile of 
bricks north of brick no. 189, faces south, holds the arka leaf at the height 


of his knees, and continues the libation reciting: 


m. And to him not of the rain. 

n. Homage to him of the cloud, and to him 
of the lightning. 

o. Homage to him of the cloudy sky, and to 
him of the heat. 

p. Homage to him of the wind, and to him of 
the storm. 

q. Homage to him of the dwelling, and to 
him who guards the dwelling. 

4.5.8 a. Homage to Soma, and to Rudra. 

b. Homage to the dusky one, and to the 
ruddy one. 

c. Homage to the giver of welfare, and to the 
lord of cattle. 

d. Homage to the dread, and to the terrible. 

e. Homage to him who slays in front, and to 
him who slays from a distance. 

f. Homage to the slayer, and to the special 
slayer. 

g. Homage to the trees with green tresses. 

h. Homage to the deliverer. 

i. Homage to the source of health, and to 
the source of delight. 

k. Homage to the maker of health, and to the 
maker of delight. 

l. Homage to the auspicious, and to the more 
auspicious. 

m. Homage to him of the ford, and to him of 
the bank. 

n. Homage to him beyond, and to him on this 
side. 

o. Homage to him who crosses over, and to 
him who crosses back. 


p. Homage to him of the crossing, and to | 


him of the ocean. 
q. Homage to him in the tender grass, and to 
him of the foam. 
r. Homage to him in the sand, and to him of 
the stream. 
45.9 a. Homage to him in the cleft, and to him in 
the distance. 


521 


ata =] 

si wea ч {йге ч | 
те 1 

ча stra чт. 

Ssa 91 


„val 


чат ала ч 91 
чаї атєаелія ч апей ч [| 
ча: dina ч 214 91 
айат AEA = | 


aa: т ч gadā 9 | 


ча sort ч єї a 
aa зааг a аўч uri 


чаї кей ч omi a] 


чаї абет «зд: 1 
чаа | 
ad: ға ч ама чї 


ad: TEVA TAME SI | 
aa: Brat a Влае ч | 
ян ч федя 91 

ад: area araa a | 

ч: AVI гача ч | 
ча MARA MSSZ a 
ян: 91914 ч ке ST | 
ч: ener ч Maratu sr 


ad gran a sacala uni 


. b. Homage to him dwelling in the stony and, 


4.5.10 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


to him in habitable places. 

c. Homage to him of braided hair, and to 
him of plain hair. 

d. Homage to him who dwells in the cowshed, 
and to him of the house. 

e. Homage to him of the bed, and to him of 
the dwelling. 

f. Homage to him of the hole, and to him of 


the abyss. 

g. Homage to him of the lake, and to him of 
the whirlpool. 

h. Homage to him of the dust, and to him of 
the mist. 

i. Homage to him of the dry, and to him of 
the green. 

k. Homage to him of the copse, and to him of 
the grass. 

l. Homage to him in the earth, and to him 
in the gully. 

m. Homage to him of the leaf, and to him of 
the leaf-fall. 


n. Homage to him who growls, and to him 
who smites away. 
o. Homage to him who drags, and to him who 


repels. 

p. Homage to you, sparkling hearts of the 
gods. 

q.-r. Homage to the destroyed. Homage to 
the intelligent. 


s.-t. Homage to the unconquerable. Homage 
to the destroyers. 
a. Chaser, lord of the Soma plants, 
waster, red and blue, 
frighten not nor injure 
any of these people, of these cattle; 
be not one of these injured. 


b. That auspicious form of yours, Rudra, 


auspicious and ever healing, 
auspicious and healing form of Rudra, 
with that show mercy on us for life. 


c. This prayer we offer up to the impetuous 


Rudra, 

with plaited hair, destroyer of men, 

that health be for our two- and four-footed 
beings, 


522 


sm; feiert sr erdum a) 


Ann 


ай: ФА ч ge | 
айт rata =: Jats 9 | 
«mee = Tart a 

ad: талі ч Weert u | 
ча! сота ч fea чч! 
а: qasata 9 Quen a] 

ян: з= я = uRcua wn 
«ir gera deals я! 
аң sada ч а\я wl 

ad arty ч agata 4 


asaan satire ч | 
аң enr d 

saad | 
«а! a: krāt 

атат кй: 1 

«di беор: | 

«il ft: 1 

аң EAr: 1 

ча andae: il 

їй eder 
Зет | 

nat genit darat 

at Aist 

wt vut f чана, ll 
art aq лат at: 

rat faggi 1 

Grat BALA Wash | 

жй āt gs йай! 
gas wat gad BAA 
э ан я чан AL | 
aal я: табе fiai deri 


RUDRA 


and all in this village be prosperous and 
free from ill. 


. Be merciful to us, Rudra, and give us 


delight; 

with honor let us worship you, destroyer of 
men; 

the health and wealth that father Manu 
won by ritual, 

may we attain that, Rudra, under your 
leadership. 


. Don't slay our great, or our small, 


our waxing or what has waxed, 
our father or mother; 
injure not, Rudra, our dear bodies. 


. Harm us not in our children, our 


descendants, our life; 


* Harm us not in our cattle, in our horses; 


destroy not in anger our heroes, Rudra; 
with oblations let us serve you with honor. 


. Far from you, slayer of cows, and slayer of 


men, 
destroyer of heroes, be on our side; 
guard us and give us aid 

and grant us protection in abundance. 


. Praise the famous youth, mounted on the 


chariot seat, 

dread and destructive like a fierce wild 
beast; 

being praised, Rudra, be merciful to the 
singer; 

let your missiles destroy others than us. 


. May the missile of Rudra spare us, 


may the anger of the brilliant evil worker 
(pass); 

unstring for the generous donors strong 
bows; 

bounteous one, be merciful to our children 
and descendants. 


. Most bounteous, most auspicious, 


be auspicious and favorably inclined to us; 

placing down your weapon on the highest 
tree, 

clad in your skin, come, 

and approach us bearing the spear. 


. Blood-red scatterer, 


homage to you, adorable one; 


523 


faa gt ий ARRAGA u 


ger dl 2а sir degt 
зая aaa йи & | 
aes g а иңел fut 
adaga ad ez goiat u 


at at agaga аг 91 sni 
WD saeaqa m ise 
ага! яй: fat ata атаў 
хат at terat ez ARS: Uu 
WURDE чча AY già 
at a ч ат at sig ART: i 
ates, at al ex атай чч 
ga янап а Tu 
MUG, & йүн зч deut 
ма чча чане sui 
wat ч чү aft a ža нага] 
я ч: ai aeg Rael: и 


ч ga ded gait 
Ц A 1 
яй я эйїнчєсд | 
Ian ТЫА. it 
ger IRA wur isl 


NO 


ara X pate dara tat: Ц 


NN N 1 


aR cl wed Віта 


aR dar тйтп: | 


Ad Kau aadzī«agta 
Figdediaru WI 989 N 


#й өн Ётаан 
frat а: gaai wai 


А чы gi rary 


gr ama эп чү 
rate frat dfn 
fake Беа 
AHR MET WA | 


4.5.11 a. 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


may your thousand missiles 
destroy others than us. 


. A thousandfold in thousands 


are the missiles in your arms; 
adorable one, turn away 

the points of those you rule. 

The Rudras that are over the earth 
in thousands by thousands, 

we unstring their bows 

at a thousand leagues. 


. The Bhavas in this great ocean, 


the atmosphere, 
we unstring. . .1 


. The Sarvas of black necks, and white 


throats, 
who wander below on the earth 
we unstring . . . 


. The Rudras who abide in the sky, 


of black necks and white throats, 
we unstring... 


. Those who of black necks and ruddy, 


grass green, are in the trees, 

we unstring... 

The masters of creatures, 

without top-knot, with braided hair, 
we unstring... 


. Those that assault men in their food 


and in their cups as they drink, 
we unstring... 


. Those that guard the paths, 


bearing food, warriors, 
we unstring. . . 

Those that resort to fords, 
with spears and quivers, 
we unstring... 


. The Rudras that, so many and yet more, 


occupy the guarters, their bows we unstring, 
we unstring their bows 
at a thousand leagues—svaha! 


"ret gads BÀ- 
Seyret Aura ats N 
акей araa 
agde šad: | 
argritart=t мча: 
ariar wat afr і 
яе agat 

A елт эгїї graa 
ачіх arada- 

59 weal aati 
MAT HEA- 
seaR war aff |... 
aa: тїгєтє: 
STAT эге: ATRI: |... 
«festa: fürfepeuar 
Rax Sat STATA: 1... 
3 gag айча 
der Peake. 
3 prid eit 
fairer: aft |..." 


а ay Ра 
чїїч (4991 ala 1... 


Я wert чач 

eger FTA |... 

% half sate 
gardedt түй: |... 
ч патағчаг qalar 
feit єп аР | 


sa weal ant жата u 


The yajamāna renounces to Rudra. The adhvaryu, facing west, holds the 
arka leaf at the height of his ankle, and recites together with the yajamāna: 


1. 


Homage to the Rudras on earth, 
whose arrows are food; 

ten eastwards, ten to the south, 
ten to the west, ten to the north, 


1 Verses all end like 4.5.11 a. 


524 


Rat та A great 
aaa 
gar maiat efor 
ga aii- 


FLOW OF MILK 


ten upwards; аша 
homage to them, «ағат ан- 


may they be merciful to us. aw yera 
Him whom we hate and who hates us, ач edt ad чї it 


I place him in your jaws—svāhā! & at wat «ч erat і 


The yajamāna renounces to Rudra. Then he recites, together with the adh- 
varyu, two similar mantras, replacing “оп earth” and “food” in the above 
mantra, respectively, by “in the air" and “wind” in the second mantra, and 
by “in the sky” and “таіп” in the third mantra. At each svāhā! the yajamāna 
renounces to Rudra. At the second mantra the adhvaryu holds the arka leaf 
at the height of his navel, and at the third at the height of his neck. This 
completes the oblation. 

During this ceremony the udgātā sings his chants, which last even longer 
and continue after the Rudra recitation has been completed. Standing, later 
sitting, at his usual place, against the northern pole of the door immediately 
to the west of the tail, facing east, he chants 57 sámans, together called Flow 
of Milk (ksīra-dhārā): 


I. hà hà vu và | ојаѕ tad asya titvise | hà hà vu và | ubhe yat samava- 


rtayāt | hà hà vu và | indra$ carmeva rodasi [| 
(GG 19.8.1, based upon RV 8.6.5) 


II. indro višvasya rajati | ho yi là // 
(GG 47.10.1; no rk) 


Ш. indro ho yi và yi $và | sya rajati ho và | ho yi là // 
(GG 47.10.2; no rk) 
IV. svadisthaya madisthayà pavasva soma dharaya indraya pa | tava 


à tava ū tavā vu và au ho và | sūtāh [| 
(GG 49.2.7, based upon RV 9.1.1) 


V. induh pavista cetanah priyah kavinam matis srjad a$vam | 6 va o 
và / rāthā au ho và | iva || 
(GG 50.5.3, based upon RV 9.64.10) 

VI. huve vācām | vācam vàcam huve уак | šrņotu šrņotu vag уак | sa- 
maitu samaitu vag уак | ramatàm ramatam ramātā au ho và [i hà i hà 
і ha |] 

(АС 1.1; no rk) 
УП. huva yi vācām | vācam huva yi | уак | šrnotu $rnotu vag vak | 
samaitu samaitu vag vàk| ramatàm ramatu và au ho va mā yi mà yi 
ma yi |] 

(AG 1.2; no rk) 
VIII. Аа bu ha bu ha ba eva hy eva au ho và | г bhūtāya | ha bu hà bu 
ha bu ēvā hy eva au ho và | ē rūpāya / hà bu (etc.) | ē ayuse | ha bu 


525 


PLATE 81B 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


(etc.) | г jyotise || 
(AG 1.4; no rk) 


IX. au ho và (3 x) / aganma jyotir (2 x) aganma jyotih | au ho và (Зх) 
/ amyta abhūmā (3 x) / au ho va (3 x) | prthivya antariksam āruhāmā 
(3x)/ au ho và (3 x) / antariksad divam āruhāma (3 x) | au ho và (3 x) | 
avidāma devān (3 x) / au ho và (3 x) / sam u devair aganmahi (3 x) | au 
ho và (3 x) / svargaloka abhūmā (3 x) | au ho và (A x) | @ suvar jyotih || 

(AG 1.5; no rk) 


X. somās (5 x) somah | yatra caksus tada bhara | yatra šrotran tadā 
bhara | yatra rüpan tada bhara | yatra ayus tada bhara | yatra 
varcas tada bhara | yatra tejas tada bhara | yatra jyotis tada bhara | 
somās (4 x) somā rajan ho ha au ho và | il ila // 

(AG 1.6; no rk) 


XI. hà bu (3 x) somo vaya bu (3 x)/ vayo rajan (3 x) | rajan vaya bu 
(3 x) / bhūya mata yava yavā yi | pūya mata yava yava yi | indro vayus 
sama svarān | hà bu (3 x) somo vaya bu (3 x) | vayo rajan (3 x) | rajan 
vaya bu (3 x) / au ho và hà vu và | г vayuna visvah prajā adyapāvathah/ 

(AG 2.4; no rk; “all beings are cleansed by the wind") 


XII. ha bu (3 x) à (3 x) hū gnu (3 x) i ya ha vi уй hā vi ya ha bu | hà bu 
hà bu hà vu và | il ila || 
(AG 6.4; no rk) 


XIII. ita iti (3 x) iti ti ti matrmácarati vatsakā (3 x) à yi tā au ho va | е 
ity e ity e ity |] 

(AG 8.1; no rk; “the little calf runs after its mother”) 
XIV. svayam skunva yi (5 х) svayam skunvā au ho và | e skunva e 


skunva ē skunva yi // 
(AG 8.2; no rk) 


XV. adhipatayi mitrapatāyi ksatrapatāyi suvahpatāyi | manyuna 
vrtrahā sūryeņa svarad yajfiena | maghavā daksinasya priya tanuranne 
nagayah | prthivyasrnikassamityaparamesthi rajhavisandadhara | 
vrsabhatvastāvrireņašacīpatirvasas kāreņārddhabhāk | somena soma- 
pā agninā višvam bhūtam abhyabhapo vāyunā visvāh prajā abhyapāva- 
thah | yedevadevadivisadasthatebhyovodevadevebhyonamah | 
yedevadeva antariksasadasthatebhyovodevadevebhyonamah | ye- 
devadevah prthivisadasthatebhyovodevadevebhyonamah | yedevadeva 
apsusadasthatebhyovodevadevebhyonamah | yedevade vadiksusa- 
dasthatebhyovodevadevebhyonamah | yedevadevabhatasadasthate- 
bhyovodevadevebhyonamah | avajyāmivadhanvanovitemanyunnayā- 
тазі | mrlatanna ihā asmabhyam ila bhaya idam višvam bhūtayyuyo 
à vu và | namah |] 

(AG 10.1; no rk) 


526 


FLOW OF MILK 


XVI. adhipatayi mitrapatayi ksatrapatayi suvahpatayi | namonisa- 
mgibhyašcopavītibhyašca | nama uttatibhyascottanvanebhyasca | 
namasyatbhyasca pratidadhānebhyašca | namah pravidyatbhyašca 
pravyādhībhyašca | namo dhavatbhyascabhidhavatbhyasca | namc 
ghnatbhyašca jighāmsatbhyašca | namašritebhyašca šrāyiyebhyašca | 
avajyāmivadhanvanovitemanyunnayāmasi | mrlatanna ihā asmabhyam 
ila bhāya idam visvam bhūtayyuyo à vu va | nāmāh || 

(AG 10.2; no rk) 


XVII. adhipatāyimitrapatāyiksatrapatāyisuvahpatāyi/namonnāyana- 
monnāpataya г kaksayavapannadaya | namasthirayasthiradhanvane- 
са | namas tryambakayacakapardineca | namas tisthatecopatisthatecaļ 
namas sayyatecaviyateca | namas samvrtecavivrteca | namaļ patheca- 
vipathayaca | avajyāmi . . . (the rest of the sāman is the same) // 

(AG 10.3; no rk)! 


XVIII. Jā bu (3 x) aham annam (3 x) aham annādo (3 x) aham vi- 
dharayo (2 x) aham vidhārayah | ha bu (3 x) yad varco hiranyasya | 
yad và varco gavam uta | satyasya brahmano varcah | tenamasam 
srjamasa yi | ha bu (3 x) aham annam (3 x). . . vidharayah (as be- 
ginning) / ha bu ha bu ha vu va / ē aham annam aham annādo aham 
vidharayah (3 x) @ aham suvar jyotih // 

(AG 11.1, based upon JA 107.34) 


XIX. hā bu (3 x) aham saho (2 х) aham sahah | aham sasahir (3 x) 
aham sasahano (2 x) aham sasahanah | hà bu (3 x) yad varco . . te- 
namasam srjamasa yi | hà bu (3 x) aham saho (2 x). . . sisahanah 
(as beginning) / ha bu hà bu ha vu va | ē aham saho aham sāsahir 
aham sasahanah (3 x) г aham suvar jyotih [| 

(AG 11.2, based upon JA 107.34) 


XX. ла Би (3 x) aham varco (2 х) арат varcah | ha bu (3 x) yad varco 
. . tenamasam srjamasa yi | hà bu (3 x) айат varco (2 x) aham 
varcah | hā bu hā bu hā vu và | e aham varca (3 x) e aham suvar jyotih || 
(AG 11.3, based upon JA 107.34) 


XXI. hà bu (3 x) ahan tejo (2 x) ahan tejah | hà bu (3 x) уай varco . . 
tenamasam srjamasa yi | ha bu (3 x) ahan tejo (2 x) ahan tejah | hà bu 
hà bu ha vu va | г ahan teja (3 x) г aham suvar jyotih || 

(AG 11.4, based upon JA 107.34) 


XXII. hà bu (3 x) manojait (3 x) hrdayamajait (3 x) indrojait (3 x) 
ahamajaisam (3 x) / hà bu (3 x) уай varco . . . tenamasam srjamasa 


1 AG 10.13 are even stranger than most of the others. Like the others, they have coun- 
terparts in the Kauthuma-Ranayaniya Samaveda, which are different and equally strange. 


527 


ыда АБВ киа «ж АЎ ЦАА 


Part II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


yi | hà bu (3 x) manojait (3 x) hrdayamajait (3 x) indrojait (3 x) / hà bu 
ha bu hà vu va | € manojaiddhrdayamajaidindrojaidahamajaisam 
(3 x) e aham suvar jyotih || 

(AG 11.5, based upon JA 107.34) 


XXIII. ha bu (3 x) dišanduhe (3 x) disauduhe (3 x) dišoduhe (3 x) sa- 
rvāduhe (3 x) | hà bu (3 х) уай varco . . . tenamāsam srjāmasā yi | 
hà bu (3 x). . . sarvaduhe (3 x) | ha bu ha bu hà vu và | г di$anduhe 
dišauduhe dišoduhe sarvāduhā (3 x) г aham suvar jyotih || 

(AG 11.6, based upon JA 107.34) 


XXIV. ha bu (3 x) vāyo vāyo vayāh vayo vayo vayo vayo vayo 
vayah | hà bu (3 x) yad varco . . . tenamāsam srjamasa yi | hà bu (3 
x)vayo . . . vayah | hà bu hà bu hà vu và | г vayo vayo vaya (3 x) 
ё aham suvar jyotih // 

(AG 11.7, based upon JA 107.34) 


XXV. hà bu (3 x) rüpam (8 x) rüpam | ha bu (3 х) yad varco . . . 
tenamasam srjamasa yi | hà bu (3 х) rüpam (8 x) rūpam | hà bu hà bu 
hà vu và | e rūpam rüpam rūpam (3 х) г aham suvar jyotih |] 

(AG 11.8, based upon JA 107. 34) 


XXVI. hi hi ya au (3 x) udapaptam (3 x) arddhonabham syakrsi (3 x) 
vyadyauksam (3 x) atatanam (3 x) | hà bu (3 x) yad varco . . . te- 
namāsam srjamasa yi | hi hi ya au (3 x). . . atatanam (3 x) | hà 
bu hà bu ha vu và | € udapaptam ūrddhonabhām syakrsi vyadyau- 
ksam atatanam (3 x) ē pinvasvā yi // 

(AG 11.9, based upon JA 107.34) 


XXVII. ha bu (3 x) prathe (3 x) pratyastham (3 x) / ha bu (3 x) 
yad varco . . . tenamasam srjamasa yi | ha bu (3 x) prathe (3 x) 
pratyastham (3 x) ha bu hà bu hà vu và | ē prathe prathe pratyastham 
(3 x) e aham suvar jyotih || 

(AG 11.10, based upon JA 107.34)! 


XXVIII. hà bu (3 x) ho (3 x) б ho (3 x) ve ho (3 x) / praja bhūtam 
ajijane il ila [| 
(AG 12.3; no rk) 


XXIX. hà bu (Зх) i lā (3 x) suvas suvas suvar jyotir jyotir jyotā au ho 
và | г ila suvar jyotih || 


FLOW OF MILK 
(AG 12.4; no rk) 


XXX. ha bu(3 x) ima (3 x) prajah (3 x) prajapate ho yi (2 x) prajapate 
hà vu và | e hrdayam (3 x) à vu và | prajā rüpam ajijane il ilā // 
(AG 12.5; no rk) 


XXXI. udyam ļokān arocayo ho imam lokan arocayo ho yi | divam 
sūryam arocayo ho yi vi$vam bhūtam arocayo hē hà au ho và | gharmo 
rocit || 

(AG 12.6; no rk) 


XXXII. hà bu hà buha và yi hi à yi hi à yi hi yo yo yo i ya hà vi ya 
hà vi ya hà bu sahas tan na indra daddhyojah | a yo và à và yo (3 x) | ise 
hyà sya mahato virāpša yi | a yo vài và yo (3 x) | kratun nanrmņam 
sthavirafi ca vājām | a yo уйй và yo (3 x) | vrtregu šatrūn suhanā krdhà 
yinah | a yo vàü và yo (3 x) / ha bu hā bu hā và yi hi à yi hi à yi hi yo 
yo yo i уй hà vi ya hà vi ya hà vu và | г vratame suvar e šakunah || 

(AG 12.10 based upon JA 107.37) 


XXXIII. ha bu (3 x) vo ha ha (3 x) ai hi (3 x) ai hi hà vu va (3 x) hà 
hà bu (3 x) | ha bu hà bu hà vu và | prajātokam ajijane has īhā | ha 
bu (3 x) vo haha (3 x) ai hi (Зх) ai hi ha vu va (3 x) hà ha bu (3 x) / 
ayur (3 x) agnir asmi janmanā au ho ho và i ya au ho ho và i ya au ho 
ho và i ya | hàbu (3 x). . . hā bu ha vu ha vu và (3 x) (as before) | 
іра prajam iha rayim rarano has tha | hà bu (3 x). . . ha ha bu 
(3 x) / ayur ayur ayur jataveda au ho ho và i ya au ho ho và i ya 
au ho ho và i уа | hà vu (3 x). . . hā hā bu (3 x) | ha bu hà bu ha vu 
và | rayasposaya sukrtayabhüyase has iha | һа bu (3 x). . . haha bu 
(3 x) / ayur ayur ayur ghrtame caksur amrtam ma āsannā au ho ho và 
i ya au ho ho và i уд au ho ho và i yà | hā bu (3x) . . . hā hā bu (3 x) 
hà bu hà bu hà vu và | aganvāmamidam brhaddhās īhā | hà bu (3 x) . . 
hà ha bà (3 x) | ayur ayur āyus tridhatvarko rajaso vimana au ho ho và 
i yà au ho ho và i ya au ho ho vā i ya] hā bu (3x) . . . haha bu (3 x) 
| hà bu hà bu hà vu và | idam vamam idam brhaddhās iha | ha bu 
(3x)... hāhābu(3x)/ ayur ayur āyur ajasrafi jyotà yi rā au ho ho 
và i ya au ho ho và i ya au ho ho và i yā/ hà bu (3x). . .hahab' 
(3 x) / habuha bu hà vu và | caracarayabrhata idam vamam idam brhad 
dhās tha | hà bu (3 x). . . haha bu (3 x) | ayur ayur āyur havir asmi 
sarvamā au ho ho và i уй au ho ho và i ya au ho ho và i ya | hà bu 
(3x). . . hāhā bu (3 x) | hà bu hà bu ha vu và | e yasokrat bhūtam 
atatanat prajà usamacūkupat | pašubhyohās iha (2 x) || 


1 Except for AG 11.9 and some irregularities, originally probably unintentional, the 
ten chants AG 11.1-10 exhibit a structure that may be expressed as: A"Ba"C" (n = 
1,..., 10), where B represents the underlying mantra from ЈА 107.34. Furthermore, 
if A is represented as: 


(AG 12.11, based upon JA 107.8; cf. RV 3.26.7) 


XXXIV. patih райт divaya | райр райт antariksasya | райр райр 
parthivasya | patih patir apamoksadhinam | patih patir vi$vasya bhüta- 
sya | patih pātīh pata au ho va | ē patir diva ē patir antariksasya | ē pa- 
tih parthivasya / ē patir apamoksadhinam e patir višvasya bhūtāsya 


һа bu (3 х) a, (3x)... a, х), 
then C is of the form: 
hà bu hà bu hā vu va | ea, . . . a; (З x) e suvar jyotih. 


528 529 


ы ee OO eee 


PART П THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


| ё suvar jyotih [| 
(AG 15.10; no rk) 


XXXV. hà bu (3 x) ēnyābu (3 x) nya hà bu (2 x) ēnyā hà vu va | i || 
(AG 19.3; no rk) 


XXXVI. hà bu (3 x) à ho ni (3 x) a ho ni ya (3 x) au ho va [ i |] 
(AG 19.4; no rk) 


XXXVII. hà bu (3 x) ha ha ha ha ha hà bu (3 x) | ha bu hà bu hà vu 
và [ i [[ 
(AG 19.5; no rk) 
XXXVIII. hà bu (3 x) i hà ha ha ha ha hà bu (3 x) | hà bu ha bu ha 
vu và [ i [[ 
(AG 19.6; no rk) 
XXXIX. santvā bhūtānyairayan ho yi (3 x) / santva bhūtamairaya- 
ddhoyi (3 x) / santvā bhavyamairayaddhoyi (3 x) | santvā bhavisya- 
dairayaddhoyi (3 x) | vātmanah prāņah prāņah prāņopānovyānās cāk- 
sūs cāksūs cāksuh šrotram srotram šrotram šraddhā Sraddha šraddhā 
Srir àyur ámrtam šarmā varmā bhūtihpratisthā | higī higi (3 x) 
higi higi higi gà higi (3 x) / à vi uvi (3 a) u vi yu vi yu vi hā u vi (3 x) / 
higi i ti (3x) itītīti hā iti (3 x) / asī asi (3 x) asi yasyasi hā yasi (3 x) 
arūruco divam prthivim asya sihāyasi (3 x) | patir asyapam osadhi- 
namo yi patāyir asi (3 x) / cayitran devanam ud agādanīkam va yisve- 
sān devānām samid ajasraū jyotir ātatandivi ho yi vā yišvesān de- 
vānām samid ajasraū jyotir atatandivi ho yi và yišvesān devānām sa- 
mid ajasraū jyotir ātatandivi ho āyuryann āyuryann āyuryan | ava ava 
ауа (3 x) caksur mitrasya varunasyügneh | srp t pra srpi aihi (3 x) | asto 
satasvabhana và aihi | vipranavisthayamata aihi | antardevesu ro- 
cata aihi | gravano barhisi priyam aihi | indrasya rantyam brhad aihi 
indrāsya rantiyam brhat indrasya rantyam brhād aihi | apra dyāvā 
prthivi antariksam suvas samsarpa samsarpas suvas samsarpa sam- 
sarpās suvas samsārpa samsarpah | janāvanam suvās suvah janāva- 
nām suvās suvah janavanam suvās suvah | sūrya ātmā jagatās tasthu- 
sas ca | àyam gauh pršūirakramīd aihī | asadan mataram pura aihi | 
pitaraf ca prayan suvā aihi | anta$ carati rocanā aihi | asya prāņā- 
dapānatā aihi | vyakhyan mahisodivam aihī | trimšaddhā mavirajata 
aihi | vak patamgayadhiyata aihi | prativastorahadyubha aihi | pra- 
vayati pravayati pravayati pravāyāti pravayata au ho và | г devādivā- 
jyotih || 
(AG 25.15: Aditya sāman, based upon JA 107.35.52,53,54; cf. RV 
1.115.1) 
XL. ha bu (3 x) bhrājā (3 x) āyur āyur āyur udutyaūjā udutayūjā udu- 
tyafijà | citran devanam udagad ānīkām [ hà bu (3x) bhraja (3 x) ayur 
āyur āyus tavedasan tavedasan tavedasam | caksur mitrasya varuna- 


530 


FLOW OF MILK 


syagnayih | ha bu (3 x) bhrājā (3 x) ayur (3 x) devam vahā devam 
vahā devam vahā | āprā dyāvā prthivi antariksam / hà bu (3 x) bhrājā 
(3 x) ayur āyur āyus tiketavas tiketavas tiketavah | sūrya ātmā jagatas 
tasthusāš ca [ hà bu (3 x) bhrājā (3 x) ayur (3 х) drše vi$va (3 x) / surya 
ātmā jagatas tasthusās ca | hà bu (3 x) bhrājā (3 x) āyur (3 x) уа 
sūryayya sūryayya sūriyā au ho vā / hā bu (3 x) bhrājā (3 x) āyur (2 x) 
aya au ho và | indur ila satyan dyaur bhūtam prthivi sahasteja дра 
usa dišo jyotih [| 
(AG 25.20, based upon JA 107.35; cf. RV 1.115.1) 
XLI. bhürom | bhūr ho yi bhür ho yi bhür ha à vu và | г suvar jyotih |] 
(AG 25.21; no rk) 
XLII. bhuvom / bhuva ho yi bhuva ho yi bhuva hà à vu và | ē suvar 
jyotih [| 
(AG 25.22; no rk) 


XLIII. suvom / suva ho yi suva ho yi suva hà à vu và | ё suvar jyotih [| 
(AG 25.23; no rk) 


XLIV. satyom / satya ho yi satya ho yi satya hà à vu và | ē suvar 
Jyotih [| 

(AG 25.24; no rk) 
XLV. purusom / purusa ho yi purusa ho yi purusa hà à vu và / ē suvar 
Јуойр [| 

(AG 25.25; no rk) 
XLVI. gaurom | gaur ho yi gaur ho yi gaur hà à vu và | ē suvar 
jyotih || 

(AG 25.26; no rk) 
XLVI. lokom | loka ho yi loka ho yi loka hà à vu và | г suvar 
jyotih [| 

(AG 25.27; no rk) 
XLVIII. agner hrdayom | agner hrdaya ho agner hrdaya ho agner hr- 
daya hà à vu và | г suvar jyotih [| 

(AG 25.28; no rk) 
XLIX. dyaurom | dyaur ho yi dyaur ho yi dyaur hà à vu và | ё suvar 
jyotih || 

(AG 25.29; no rk) 
L. antariksom | antariksa ho antariksa ho antariksa ha à vu và | e 
suvar jyotih // 

(AG 25.30; no rk) 
LI. prthivyom | prthivi ho yi prthivi ho yi prthivi һа à vu va | 8 suvar 


Jyotih [| 
(AG 25.31; no rk) 


531 


в ās ee Ps 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


LII. agnom / agna ho agna ho agna ha ā vu va | ē jyotih // 
(AG 25.32; no rk) 


LIII. vayom | vaya ho yi vaya ho yi vaya hà à vu và | ē raja || 
(AG 25.33; no rk) 


LIV. sūryom / sūrya ho yi sūrya ho yi sūrya ha ā vu va | ē bhrājā // 
(AG 25.34; no rk) 


LV. candrom | candra ho yi candra ho yi candra hà à vu va | ē à 
bhrājā |/ 
(AG 25.35; no rk) 


LVI. nākom | naka ho yi naka ho yi naka ha à vu va | г prstham // 
(AG 25.36; no rk) 


LVII. šukrom | šukra ho yi $ukra ho yi šukra hà à vu va | г bhrāļā 
bhrājā [| 
(AG 25.37; no rk) 


As we have seen earlier, the brief songs composed on single words from 
the end of the Moon Chants (candrasāmāni) of AG 25.21-37 occur through- 
out the Agnicayana. Of the seventeen Flow of Milk chants XLI-LVII, five 
occur only here, while the remaining twelve are also found elsewhere. The 
last six, LII-LVII, are also among the Space Filler chants (pages 443—444). 
Table 15 provides a survey of the chants, the words they are composed on, 
and their occurrence. 

Long before the udgātā has completed his Flow of Milk chants, the 
adhvaryu’s recitation for Rudra is over. At the end of his oblation, the 
adhvaryu throws the arka leaf away and puts some seeds (called ce/anni 
in Malayalam) on brick no. 189, reciting: 


Rudra in fire, ut = wat | 

in waters, in plants, ay ag uud 2 
Rudra that has entered all beings, at FA Ват аяза ` 
to that Rudra homage—svāhā! че agra ARY aa enel u 


(TS 5.5.9.3i) 


After renouncing to Rudra, the yajamāna takes a bow and three arrows and 
goes clockwise round the altar, making five stops with the following re- 
citations: 
N 
I. Rudra, may the wind blow for you se oy = 
after your bow in the east, чата эЧ AT 9 


À Mox x d 
I pay homage to you, Rudra TRH чод aeuo. 


with the year! Яде | 
II. Rudra, may the wind blow for you aq d wr fnm wa- 
after your bow in the south, amgrdt at arg È = 
532 


CEREMONIES ON THE FIFTH LAYER 
DISTRIBUTION OF SEVENTEEN MOON CHANTS 


(candrasāmāni) 
AG 25 Flow of Milk Space Filler Elsewhere 
21 bhūrom “earth” XLI — perforated pebble on 
first layer (Episode 13, 
page 419) 
22 bhuvom “sky” XLII — perforated pebble on 


23 suvom "heaven" XLIII — 


24 satyom “‘truth” XLIV — 
25 purusom “тап” XLV — 
26 gaurom “соу” XLVI — 
27 lokom *'place" XLVII — 
28 agner hrdayom XLVIII — 


"Agnr's heart" 
29 dyaurom “heaven” XLIX — 
30 antariksom “ку?” L — 
31 prthivyom “earth” LI — 


32 agnom “йге” LII III 
33 vàyom "wind" LIII IV 
34 süryom “sun” LIV V 
35 candrom “тооп” LV VI 
36 nākom “vault” LVI VII 
37 $ukrom “‘glow” LVII VIII 


(or the planet Venus) 


TABLE 15 


I pay homage to you, Rudra, 
with the full year! 

III. Rudra, may the wind blow for you 
after your bow in the west, 
I pay homage to you, Rudra, 
with the Idà year! 

IV. Rudra, may the wind blow for you 
after your bow in the north, 


533 


third layer (Episode 15, 
page 461) 

perforated pebble on 
fifth layer (Episode 17, 
page 505) 

lotus leaf (Episode 12, 
page 411) 

golden man (Episode 
12, page 417) 


around altar (Episode 
18, page 542) 


quid т uan 
seni | 

чт À єт magg- 
«gri ad arg a 
че № saaat 
Нево | 

wa, X eaa- 
azi ad ят a 


PLATE 83 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


I pay homage to you, Rudra, 
with the idu year! 
V. Rudra, may the wind blow for you 
after your bow above, 
I pay homage to you, Rudra, 
with the year! 
(TS 5.5.7.2-4) 


МЇ уу 


че wir 
аер t 

ач d wifi aq- 
заат aq ag È 


qud & и ясаїш 
е ВЯ | 


A jar with water is given to the pratiprasthātā, and the adhvaryu addresses 


him: 


With this water jar 
go around three times clockwise, 
sprinkling with a continuous stream! 
(BSS 10.48:49.13-15) 


HATER AA 
GAIA AAT 
Br чара RAs wa u 


The pratiprasthatà does so. At the same time, yajamāna and adhvaryu recite: 


Strength resides in stone, in mountain, 
in wind, in rain, in the breath of Varuna, 
collected from waters, plants, trees. 
Maruts! Give us generously 
of that food and strength! 
(TS 4.6.1.1a) 


чанач gad frami 
абі THT аалед uud | 
зад ЭҮ ases 
sfa eiat ai я ячи 
мч иа: ALTA N 


After the pratiprasthātā has put down the jar, the adhvaryu, touching it, 


says: 


Your hunger is in the stone; 
let your pain reach the evil-doer, 
whom we hate! 
(TS 4.6.1.1b) 


MALT YT. 
mai d 9099 
4 fien: | 


CEREMONIES ON THE FIFTH LAYER 


Agni, bile of waters! 

f. Frog, come here with these, 
make this ritual 
beautiful and auspicious! 

g. Pure, with wonderful radiance, 
he has shone on earth 
as with the light of dawn! 

h. Moving to battle 
with strength as on Etaša's course, 
in heat thirstless and unaging! 

i. Agni, purifying, with your light, 
god with your charming tongue, 
bring the gods here and sacrifice! 

k. Agni, shining and purifying, 
bring the gods here 
to our ritual and oblation! 


aa Raag u 

ante eru ae аа at mem | 
qardi Вта efr u 

qag эт Raadet 991 1 

aad Kru sadi я ort Ul 


яч ч umen vo эп dt gura 
a dgurvīt omm: u 


эй qa їчї яга! За Beat | 
ит dara afer ater a || 


а ad: чаж ВЭЙ Bare sass dg | 
wd яте ЕЙ э 1! 
(TS 4.6.1.1c - 3k) 


Moving around the center of the altar, the adhvaryu makes the snake ob- 
lations (sarpāhuti) with six mantras across the center. The first mantra is 
recited by the adhvaryu sitting west of the center: 


Favorable by name: а эпи set fre 

you are the eastern quarter, аап Аче. 

Agni is your master, гче «ят 

the black snake your guardian, арат Лаў атп 

homage to master and guardian! aunt ae = 

May they be gentle to us! Siew Mi 

Him whom we hate and who hates us, ii ат 9591 

I place within the jaws of you two—svaha! & 4 feet чар т Klē 
(TS 5.5.10.1 а) Фат ча ganīt erat n 


Then the pratiprasthātā goes three times round the altar counterclockwise, 
and without pouring water. The adhvaryu ties the representation of a frog, 
an avaka plant, and some darbha grass to a bamboo pole. With the pole he 
drags these objects twice in the eastern, southern, western and northern parts 


The yajamāna renounces to Agni/black snake. The next five mantras are 
similarly structured, but quarter, master, and guardian change, and the 
yajamāna renounces each time to the combination master/guardian. The 


of the center, with eight mantras: 


c. Agni, we surround you 

with ocean wind, 

be purifying and auspicious to us! 
d. Agni, we surround you 

with what is left of winter, 

be purifying and auspicious to us! 
e. Descend upon earth, upon reeds, 

upon the lower waters; 


534 


AJEA SNEM- 

SÀ qR anaf | 

sra amm Brat ata И 
Тн car mam- 

5й чї ерпай | 

Graal rard 1191 Wa th 
зч sugu ATA- 

5ч чат 1 


adhvaryu sits north, east, south, and two times west of the center, respec- 
tively: 


QUARTER MASTER ` GUARDIAN 
mighty: southern Indra scorpion 
forward: western Soma viper 
stable: northern Varuņa striped snake 
mistress: great Brhaspati white snake 
powerful: this Yama snake with spotted neck 
535 


PLATE 83 
Pouring Water Around Agni 


“Strength resides in stone, in mountain, 
in wind, in rain, in the breath of Varuna, 
collected from waters, plants, trees. 
Maruts! Give us generously 
of that food and strength!” 
(TS 4.6.1.1 a) 


While the adhvaryu makes the yajamana recite this verse, the 
pratiprasthata goes three times clockwise round the altar, pouring 
a continuous stream of water from a jar with a spout and two breasts. 
The Sūtra text specifies that the circumambulation and pouring 
should be done by a strong man (balavan: BSS 10.48:49.13). 


536 


537 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


When this is over, the udgātā chants ten sāmans around the altar: 


(1) Gāyatram at the head of the bird: 


agna āyūmsi pavasom | à suvorjam іѕайса na are bādhāsvā dā hm 
bhā au va // agne pavasva svapom | asme varcas suvirayan dadhat 
posām raya hm bhā au và || agnir rsih pavamānom | paficajanyah 
purohayitas tamimahayi maha him Ьа au va [| 

(RG = Usani 1.8, based upon JA 108.29; cf. RV 9.66.19-21) 


(2) Rathantaram at the southern wing: 


obhitvas Sara nonumovā | ādugdhā iva dhenava išānam asya jagatas 
suvardrsam | i$anamayindra | tāsthūsā o va ha vu va | as [[ īšovā | 
nam indra tasthuso na tvavam anyo divyo na parthivah | na jato naja | 
nāyisyātā o và hà vu và | as |] na јо va | to na janisyate $vayanto 
maghavann indra vajinah | gavyantas tvà ha | vamaha o và hà vu và | 
as || 
(RG — Üsani 1.9, based upon JA 63.1: cf. RV 7.32.22-23) 
(3) Brhat at the northern wing: 
au ho yi tvàm iddhi havamaha ē | sātau vajasya karavah | tava au 
ho và | vrtrayisuvayindra sa otpātinnārah tuvankastha au ho эа | 
sūvarvātā ho và ha vu уй | has [| au ho yi tuvame | kastasavarvatap | 
sa tvā au ho và | našcāyitra vājrāhā o sta dhrsņuyā | maha stavā au 
ho và | no adrāyivā ho và hà vu va | has || au ho yi maha г | stavano 
adrayivah | gama au ho và | $uvam rathayama o yindrā sankāyirā | 
satrā vājā au ho và | nā jayigyusayi ho và ha vu va | has || 
(RG = Usani 1.10, translated below page 642; 
based upon JA 74.7, cf. RV 6.46.1-2) 


(4) Rtustha-yajhayajniya at the tail: 


vāsantā innu rantiyah | grīsma intu rantiyah / varsāņi innu šā hm 
māyi | тайдай | hemanta šišira inna rantiyabu | va | 
(AG 8.3, based upon JA 107.23) 


(5) Varavantiya at the southern shoulder: 


asvan na tva bu ho ha yi | varavantam | vanndadhyo ha yi | agna 
yinnama au ho và i ho hà yi | uhuvā dih | samrajantàm addhvara 
au ho và i ho và yi | ū hū và пат ehiyaha | ho yi la || 

(GG 2.7.3; based upon RV 1.27.1) 


(6) Syaitam at the northern shoulder: 


abhi pra vas surādhāsā au ho và | à yindram àrca yatha vida o hà 
yi / yo jaritrbhyo māghāvā purovasuh | sahasrenayiva šā hm mayi 


538 


CEREMONIES ON THE FIFTH LAYER 


ksata au ho va | vāsu | 
(GG 25.3.3, translated below page 644; based upon RV 8.49.1) 


(7) Prajapater hrdayam at the southern hip: 


habu habu habu ima ima ima prajah prajah prajah praja pate ho yi 
praja pate ho yi praja pate havu và | ē hrdayam e hrdayam e hrdaya 
à vu và | prajā rupam aji jane il i [a || 

(AG 12.5; no rk) 


(8) Agner vrata at the northern hip: 


bhrājā vu vo và bhraja vu vo và bhraja vu vo và / agnir mūrdhā divah 
kākut | patih prthivya ayam | арат retamsi jayinvatayi | bhraja vu 
vo và bhrājā vu vo và bhraja vu vo ba | г višvasya jagato jyotih// 

(AG 5.3, based upon JA 3.7; cf. RV 8.44.16; page 492) 


(9) Agner arka at the head: 


ho ho và i ya ho ho vai ya ho ho vai ya | agnir mardha divah kakut | 
patih prthivya ayam | арат retamsi jayinvatayi | ho ho vai уа ho ho 
vài уй ho ho vai ya au ho val г gnir mūrdhā dava divah || 

(AG 15.5; same rk) 


(10) Vamadevya on the body: 


kaya nasca yi traya bhuvat | utis sadavrdha sakhā au ho ha yi ka ya 
$a cà yi | stayau ho hm ma | vārtto | ha yi || kastva satyo mādānām | 
māmhisthomāt sadantasā au ho hà yi | dhrdhacida | rujau ho hm 
mà | vaso | hà yi || abhisunas sakhinam | avita jarayitrnam au ho 
hà yi šatām bhava | siyau ho hm ma | ta yo ha yi || 
(UG 2.1, based upon JA 63.3; cf. page 643) 


The order in which the udgātā went around the bird was not straight- 
forward. After completing his sāmans, the udgātā takes yajamāna and 
adhvaryu around the bird, but this time going clockwise. At each point he 
instructs the yajamāna the text of the song, and yajamana and adhvaryu 
repeat after him. The idea is that yajamāna and adhvaryu should recite at 
least the text of the samans; the udgata is therefore not essential. When Nel- 
likat Akkitiripad (a Sāmavedin) was yajamāna, C.V. Krishnan was also 
adhvaryu; so Nellikat merely instructed hin. When Nellikat's father per- 
formed the agnicayana, the adhvaryu himself was a Sāmavedin; hence no 
instruction was required. 

Though the idea is (or was originally) simple, there are complications. 
There are nine sāmans for the yajamāna, instead of ten. There is one saman 
for the yajamana that the udgata did not sing. There are therefore two sa- 
mans that the udgātā sang and the yajamāna does not recite. The corres- 
pondence between the sāmans of the udgata and of the yajamāna is as follows: 


539 


PLATE 84 


PSN is is ООН PP S A 


PLATE 84 
Chants Around Agni 


The udgātā chants ten sāmans around the altar. On the plate, he 
addresses the head of the bird, which is not seen, though stepping 
stones in front of it are. His chant is derived from a verse of the 


Rgveda (8.44.16), which extolls Agni as the head and the palate of 
heaven. 


540 


541 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


YAJAMANA’s Sāmans UDGATA’s Sāmans 
head (1) 
southern shoulder AG 25.28 
southern wing (2) 
southern hip (5) 

tail (4) 
northern hip (6) 
northern wing (3) 
northern shoulder (7) 

body (10) 


The text of the new sāman is: 


agner hrdayom | agner hrdaya ho agner hrdaya ho agner 
hrdaya ha ā vu va / ē suvar jyotih // 


(AG 25.28) 
The adhvaryu addresses the hota: 
e. laud! , ac 
(BSS 10.49:51.2) 
The hota recites: 
Father Mátari$van, make the dwellings flawless, feat ataa Raat TAI at 


flawless dwellings such as the USijs have made a Gr 7 
tikās E WIS T st: - Gal: 
Let Soma, omniscient leader, be leader; wat a mu = E E 
let Brhaspati recite the hymns and acclamations! B Wt [чнч gk 
(TS 5.6.8.6һу 2819199119 arefūsa u 


Yajamāna and adhvaryu recite at the same time: 


The ritual offered by Bhrgus and Vasus get Яз agfa- 
fulfills our wishes; Waal agūT- 
may I here enjoy wealth met а трај ает 


of you thus offered and approached. zr Мей [|| 
sai aa 


(TS 5.6.8.6g) 
Finally the adhvaryu, prompted by a helper, recites: 


You are Agni, common to all men; эн ras f 1 
you are the year; азса 


542 


CEREMONIES ON THE ALTAR 


you are the full year; 

you are the ida year, the idu year; 
you are the id year, the year; 
your head is its spring; 

your southern wing, summer; 
your tail, the rains; 

your northern wing, autumn; 
your middle, winter; 

altars, the waxing moons; 

mud, the waning moons; 

bricks are nights and days! 

Its months and half-months 
should be ordered for you; 

its seasons ordered for you; 

the year ordered for you; 

nights and days ordered for you! 
It comes, proceeds, departs, meets, rises! 


чага зба | 


e 


чапяаїзайтяснй<ї# 1 


zzcatdstā aemdsfā | 
au 8 аяға: fre: | 
Rea gūto: чє: | 
aut: чейн, | 
этч ЧЕ: | 
кнг Ada | 
eager aa: | 
aaa: BATE | 
ASAE: 1 

ae à aal- 
этн PETAI, | 
RAAT BETA | 
AAT FETA 1 


Let Prajāpati seat you, Saag ra 
z Seded 


With that god, ЕКА 27 
In the Angiras manner, іЯ Ds гч aftegfēfā | 
Sit firm! язча! «dag | 

(TA 4.19.1) aat wadatsfrrems ga: dia d 


While reciting the last lines, the adhvaryu stands at the northern hip and 
touches the five layers, from top to bottom (as he will do twice more on the 
tenth day: see below, pages 599 and 654). He receives his sacrificial fee. 

All return to the Old Hall to perform the evening Pravargya, Upasad, 
and the other ceremonies. The bird-shaped altar of Agni has been completed, 
strengthened with chants and recitations, and pacified. It is now ready for 
service. Thus ends the eighth day. 


Ninth Day: April 21, 1975 
EPISODE 19 
Further Ceremonies on the Altar 


AFTER THE MORNING Pravargya and Upasad are performed in the Old 
Hall, and the Subrahmanya chant on the utkara, the adhvaryu goes on the 
altar and makes five āghāra butter libations diagonally over the naturally 
perforated pebble at the center, reciting: 


To him that sits in man, qui dz 
To him that sits in waters, equa uz 
To him that sits in forests, ачах az | 
To him that sits on sacrificial grass, R on | 
To him that finds heaven! TIE 
gaf? az | 


(TS 4.6.1.3n) SEL 
543 


PART П THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


Then he makes oblations of curds mixed with honey over the center, six times, 
facing east, south, east, north, and twice east, reciting: 


(1) You are missiles by name, Saal чта em 
your homes are in the east, аі а: ga пет 
your arrows are Agni. а 
Water is wind’s name, ae EU 
homage to you, be gentle to us! ыз ич - 
Him whom we hate and who hates us атаи nh 
-I place in your jaws—svaha! R а front uz at ote 


a dr ari cart wet u 
after which the yajamāna renounces to the missiles; 


(2) You are smearers by name, Гетц aa cer 
your homes are in the south, Sal ak efron wer: 
your arrows are the ancestors. REIR ade: > 
Ocean is wind’s name, etc. cc ae 

after which the yajamāna renounces to the smearers; 

(3) You are bolt bearers by name, afañ ata er 
your homes are in the west, ач a: ware ает: 
your arrows are sleep. Pie. E 

sea Sir га Чат 
Cleft is wind’s name, etc. idi 5 ad 
TEC ATT... 

Yajamāna renounces to the bolt bearers; 

(4) You are stable by name, за тая A ET 
your homes are in the north, aut Wem m 

IF N 
your arrows are waters. N йч at 
S Я Я а” SINT a ало: 
ea 15 wind’s name, etc. 2 NP. 
TARY ATA, . 
Yajamāna renounces to the stable; 
(5) You are masters by name, MMI ат ET 


your homes are above, 
your arrows are rain. 
Helper is wind’s name, etc. 


eat a suf атп 
at wert 
SATA, TAT... 
Yajamāna renounces to the masters; 


(6) You os ылы eaters by name, semp mper unit 
our homes are here b" 
y > it 9.36 Ta 
your arrows are food. adaa 3 i 
Winking is wind's name, etc. a oe fe 
sfifirit alah, 


544 


CEREMONIES ON THE ALTAR 


Yajamāna renounces to the raw-flesh eaters. 
(TS 5.5.10.3c) 


The adhvaryu addresses the pratiprasthātā: 


Pratiprasthātā! Make this Agni aRar Ran 
spotted like a tortoise! 7 жаччеї HE | 
(BSS 10.50:52.13) 


The pratiprasthātā sprinkles curds mixed with honey, with the help of a thick 
bundle of darbha grass, over the altar in the eastern, southern, western, and 
northern directions, reciting each time: 


NEN of 1 
o. Gods among gods, reverends among reverends, agar garai arfarat grams, 
who await their yearly share, gamang этага | 
who do not eat oblations, warn ean ae af 
in this ritual enjoy honey and butter! E dga wat ga и 


p. Gods who attain godhead above gods, A C NE TA EA 
who lead the way to this brahman, 2 91 59 att STARTA 
without whom no place is pure, A TAM: gan AA | 
are not on the summits of earth or sky! Hal at чач ura 1% ga 

(TS 4.6.1.40-p) ча fata daram aft gy и 


While the pratiprasthātā makes Agni spotted by sprinkling curds mixed with 
honey, the udgātā chants three sāmans: 


I. agner vratam “‘Agni’s will": see above pages 338, 373. 

II. o ha yi dadhi grāviņņo | akarisam o hà yi | o ha yi jisņor ašvasya 
vajina 6 hà yi | surabhi no mukha karat | pra nā ho āyū homsi ta rā 
yisat | o yi la || 

(GG 37.7, cf. RV 4.39.5) 

III. sa pūrvyo maho na me | venah kratubhāyi ranaje ha hà au ho va à 

yi hi | yasya dvārā mānūh pita hà ha au ho va à yi hi | dā yi và yi sa 
hà ha au ho và à yi hi | dhiya ānājā au ho và | madhūš cūtah // 
(GG 37.4, cf. RV 8.63.1) 


The adhvaryu covers the altar with avakā plants from a basket and addresses 
a protector: 


Protect this fire altar! zwafit maa | 
(cf. BSS 10.51:52.19) 


All return to the Old Hall for the last Pravargya and Upasad. Then follows 
the disposal of the Pravargya implements, which occurs also in the Agnisto- 
ma (provided the Pravargya ceremonies have been performed). Slowly 


545 


PLATE 85 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


moving in procession, yajamana, brahman, adhvaryu, and pratiprasthata 
carry the Pravargya implements in a basket and on the mahāvīra stool out 
of the eastern door of the Old Hall. They are accompanied by the yajama- 
na’s wife, the prastotā, and the agnidh. There are three stops at which the 
prastotā sings a sāman (for the Kauthuma-Rāņāyanīya songs, see Van Bui- 
tenen, 1968, 126—129). After the cortege arrives at the Agni altar, the Pravargya 
basket and stool are placed upon it. The pratiprasthātā goes clockwise around 
the altar pouring water from a sambharani jug, with chant and recitation. 
He repeats his round, after which the stool is taken from the altar. 

The Pravargya implements are placed upon the altar in the shape of a 
man. First the adhvaryu, sitting on the altar, puts on brick no. 12 of the 
fifth layer some soil left from the Pravargya mound. He smooths and sprinkles 
it, and puts a piece of antelope skin on the northeastern corner. Then he 
sprinkles rice flour, grass, and sand three times over the area. With recita- 
tions from the Taittiriya Aranyaka he pours a mixture of curds and honey 
into the mahāvīra pot and the two spare pots, and adds bundles of veda grass. 
All the implements are then put down in the shape of a man. Afterwards the 
adhvaryu sprinkles sand, grass, flour, and the mixture of curds and honey, 
which is followed by recitations and several chants by the prastotā. 

Back in the Old Hall several oblations into the new domestic fire pave 
the way for the Carrying Forth of Agni (next episode). First comes a butter 
oblation for Agni Anikavat, “Agni of Foremost Rank," made by the adhva- 
ryu standing west of the altar, reciting: 


r. May Agni with his piercing blaze, 
cut down every enemy; 
may Agni gain wealth for us! 

s. Of foremost rank and gentle 


эйи гй sf 
aaa ARa 
atrīt axgā 29, 1 


he will perform our ritual for the gods, 

skillful in gaining prosperity through ritual. 

Undeceived guardian and protector, 

Agni, radiate with brilliance and wealth - svāhā! 
(TS 4.6.1.5 r-s) 


The yajamana renounces to Agni Anikavat. 


йч Фа 99591 мей 

gel ars эбин: Sales 1 
sided ЧІ ST я: TET 
эй gage Зай єп n 


The adhvaryu then makes two oblations of clarified butter for Vi$vakar- 
man, “‘all-maker,” architect of the universe. At the first oblation he recites: 


a. The seer, taking his place as hota, 
our father, offering all these worlds, 
seeking wealth through prayer, 
has entered subsequent creatures, 
hiding those who came first.! 


я нт fast gael Gg 
=Гчёїат raeļiga, frat 9:1 
a этетаган: 
massas эп AAT | 


1T follow the parallel Rgveda 10.81.1, which makes more sense. 


546 


CEREMONIES ON THE ALTAR 


b. Vi$vakarman being with strong mind, 
creator, disposer, and highest seer, 
their offerings rejoice in food 
where the One is said to be 
beyond the seven seers. 

c. Our father, begetter, disposer, 
who begot us from being unto being, 
who alone gives names to the gods, 
others come to question him. 

d. By offering to him they gained wealth, 
the seers of old like numerous singers 
who created worlds lit and unlit 
in the expanse of space. 

e. You will not find him who has created, 
some obstacle is in your way. 
Enveloped in mists and stammering, 
taking life, the reciters wander.! 

f. Beyond sky, beyond this earth, 
beyond gods, hidden from demons, 
what germ the waters received first 
When all gods came together? 

. This first germ the waters received 
when all gods came together, 
one resides in unborn's navel 
where all this world rests. 

h. God Viávakarman was born, 

second the celestial genius, 
third the father, begetting plants, 
he deposited the waters’ germ in many places. 


са 


The yajamāna renounces to Vi$vakarman, 
the ladle is refilled, and the second 
oblation is made with: 


i. Father of the eye, seeing with his mind, 
he created these two (heaven and earth) 
as butter oblation; 
when the eastern boundaries were fixed, 
heaven and earth extended. 

k. Eyes and faces on all sides, 


Виа яаа rfr 

wrar rarer еа BEE | 
dale ааг Haha 
FA amiy чє THATS: 1 

ay a: Гчат sir at (атат 
Fa: sat ara undae | 
at karat man wa пч 

ay daa уч ағғағат u 
а asdsa ятх адат 
ча: ЧА TAT A TAT | 
aaa gal ciet Рат 

X чат газта N 

a бш я girar. 
=ч AAA warf | 
diena sd Me єп- 
gat saaran u 

чй Rear ae пят чт 

чё Заби јет ач 

ay fare пуа чы эпчї 
at gan чадан frāt a 
arx sen чи a 

дї Зап adesa GU 1 
AI ATTRA 
afk hrs Per зза Баң n 
баага usum a 
enfazeadt яаая, fail: | 
gah: fiar facet 
zat тй Aana, gear talu 


чып: far atar fe ЧЇЙ 
qus AKARANA | 

diae AEN. gā 
anf aralgfrīt aian 1 
fradagta adiga 


1 Geldner notes that the poet here ridicules ritualists, who mutter mantras and kill 
animals but do not know how to find the supreme deity. 


547 


PLATE 85 
Deposition of Pravargya Implements in the Shape of a Man 


“You who are shaped like a man, do not sit in our mouth. 
Upright or oblique, I am not ordained in your manner, 
you are ordained in my manner. 

What you are that I am; what I am that is you. 


Go to heaven jointly with the yajamāna!”” ; 
(BSS 9.16:288.19-289.2) 


After the last Pravargya ceremony has been performed, its imple- 
ments are carried in procession from the Old Hall to the completed 
sacrificial altar. There they are deposited, in the shape of a man, 
on the northern side of the body of the bird-shaped altar. The 
adhvaryu performs this rite, guided by an expert who knows exactly 
how the implements should be placed. 


548 


549 


The yajamāna again renounces to Vi$varkarman. 


a. 


PART П THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


hands and feet on all sides, 
the one god producing heaven and earth 
forges them together with arms and wings. 


. What was the foundation, 


what and which of many the beginning, 
When Vi$vakarman created earth, 
developed heaven, all-seeing? 
What was the wood, what the tree, 
which they used to fashion heaven and earth? 
You clever ones, try to find out 
where he stood when he supported the worlds.! 


. Your highest, lowest, 


and middle positions, Vi$vakarman, 
make them available to your friends 
for offerings, self-sufficient one; 
make the offering to yourself, 

being satisfied! 


. Master of Speech (Vācaspati), Visvakarman, 


let us today invoke you for our protection, 
who is effortless in strength, 

Enjoy our nearby offerings, 

beneficial to all, doer of good! 


. Vi$vakarman, growing with oblation, 


make the offering to yourself, 

being satisfied. 

May our enemies around be confused, 
may we here have a generous patron! 


. Vi$vakarman, with strengthening oblation, 


you made Indra our invincible protector; 
the clans of old respected him, 
fearful, ready to be invoked-svaha! 


(TS 4.6.2 1a-6q) 


fraāiga ga Radera. 1 

& agai eft et gdā- 
alaighen aada Wa mk: N 
fx frgrirefteri- 

яти жанч, ferr, Әта, | 
тїї aft яаая Boren 

Ф етай ат Barer: Ц 
fæ Вава = = ч gu nefi- 
aay maigre Prag: 1 
ят stet quadz- 
mraeg апе retā N 
at Ж агае чї sam 
Wt ierat ERAI | 
fret апае gf «ura: 
eat derer TTT чл: N 
aai freenet 
чаа NN этет gu | 

a at Ав ечат sīmā 
Вагата argent N 
Рага кЇчЇ агачта: 

хай dara чї gam: | 
часа afad: great 
Fram нч! aR 1 
бєй» efor aia 

eres res eia eet | 

чей fag: adama qdi- 
хаа Rest чапса, etat |l 


Cherumukku Vaidikan hands three twigs of udumbara wood (instead of 
the usual vālāsam) to the adhvaryu, who puts them on the fire, reciting: 


Lead him forward, that Agni 

to whom butter is offered ; 

unite him with increase of wealth, 
offspring and possessions—svāhā ! 


. Bring him to the fore, Indra, 


that he may rule his fellows; 
unite him with splendor, 


saga яа 

8 gaarssge | 
точи ay dst 
язар = ta ч emet u 
zeit dai бг 
ЕТТЕ 1 


watt aden чш 


1 Cf. Archimedes: dis poe тод or ka? код tiv piv “Give me a place to stand and I move 
the world.” 


550 


CARRYING FoRTH OF AGNI 


tūr итеп saa, erat M 
чей asi gan 

ada ячип «99, | 

qe Зат зї na- 

ay wp aine: ang 


that their shares will go to the gods—svaha! 
c. Exalt him, Agni, 
in whose house we make the offering; 
may the gods give him assistance, 
and the lord of Brahman (brahmaņaspati)—svāhā ! 
(TS 4.6.3.1a-c) 


The yajamāna renounces to Agni, Indra, and Agni, respectively. The adhva- 
ryu lifts the Soma from its stool, and while he holds it, the pratiprasthata 
puts firewood in a large clay pot. À helper adds embers from the fire. The 
adhvaryu puts the Soma back and places the fire pot in front of himself. 


Ninth Day: April 21, 1975 
EPISODE 20 


Carrying Forth of Agni and Oblations 
(Agnipranayana, Adhvarahuti, etc.) 


SITTING WEST OF the new domestic altar in the Old Hall, the fire pot in 
front of him and facing east, the adhvaryu addresses the hota who sits be- 
hind him, the āgnīdh, and the “second hota,” viz., maitrāvaruņa (among 
Kausitakins; among Aitareyins, the "second hota” is maitrāvaruņa and 
brahman): 


Address Agni who is being carried forth! ий sofa: | 

Agnidh! Join with the wooden sword! PIECE IC EIU 

Let the second hota recite the Apratiratha hymn! favit ®їатяїйчия« айд t 
(BSS 10.51:53.15-16) 


He lifts the pot with the fire (using palmyra potholders) and begins to move 
east, through the eastern gate of the Old Hall, reciting: 


я car f Зат 

эги waited ый: 1 

а a aa Brady: 

eei Garde: v 

ag Вай liag 
waa ZA eret: | 


d. May the All-gods carry you, 
Agni, with their thoughts, 
be most gentle to us 
with kindly face, resplendent! 

e. May the five divine regions assist the ritual, 
goddesses remove poverty and enmity, 
increasing wealth for the ritual patron! 

f. Ritual is founded on prosperity of wealth, чта эрчий: Т 
waxing large on kindled fire, Taree erf чай skarā, 
praiseworthy, grasped on wings of recitation, uns Beat атакта: | 
they sacrificed embracing the heated vessel! seris Gaal а. 


551 хан яй uirum || 


PART П THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


g. When gods expended their strength on ritual 
for the divine creator and enjoyer, 
they pleased the gods with hundreds of drinks; 
the gods kept embracing the ritual! 

h. With the sun’s rays and tawny hair 
Savitr has raised his infinite light; 
god Pūsan moves at his impulse, 


Sail Waa 

aa sala ый HE 1 

за»: Зат: Тач: 
ahaa Чеп азаа, ll 
чӯ«Вне ч: quedar 
абга STARA эге | 


CARRYING FORTH OF AGNI 


and put them down! Protos eres n 
p. Seizing up and putting down, Sart 9 faant ч 
gods have increased my brahman; vat Жат ARTTI | 
Indra and Agni, you please scatter aut ае ети X 
my enemies on every side! XT М m 
(ТЕ дез) SM 


circumspecting, guarding all things! 
i. Gods assume priestly roles for gods; 
ready for slaughter, the pacifier sacrifices ;! за Rl stead rEg- 
when the fourth rite goes to the oblation, PS IES 0 
diay НЯ «нат азе | 


may our pure prayers be accepted! € k 
(TS 4.6.3.1d-2) 891 99 ad grāfa 


ч: maar эгїї at urrā I 
By this time the adhvaryu and the others have reached the shed of the āgnīdh. 
Together with yajamāna and brahman, the adhvaryu sits down inside and 
places a stone called vainkaņņippāra in Malayalam (pršnir ašman, “spotted 


During this recitation in procession, the hotā recites eight verses, which are 
also recited when the fire is carried forth at the animal sacrifice and at the 


stone,” in Sanskrit) in the center, reciting: 


k. Measuring he stands at the center of heaven, 
filling the two worlds and the sky, 
all-ladle, butter-ladle he discerns 
banners in east and west. 
1. Bull, ocean, ruddy bird, 
he entered the womb of his old ancestor; 
the spotted stone is put at the center of heaven, 
from aside he guards the ends of space. 
(TS 4.6.3.3k-1) 


Rad пч feat wed erat 
эпчїй=пя, dat waters | 
a Гап а at чат+й- 
Tau чїн «gu u 
зет dua star: gadi: 
qder 918 figu fida 
aA Гат а: gaar 
В іа хаа: чтедейї n 


They get up and move toward the tail of the main altar as the adhvaryu re- 


cites: 


m. All songs made Indra grow, 
enclose the ocean, 
best charioteer of charioteers, 
true lord and lord of strength. 
n. Let the ritual invite, 
and bring the gods; 
let god Agni offer, 
and bring the gods! 
o. At strength’s impulse 
he seized me with power; 
Indra has humbled my enemies 


1 The pacifier is the slaughterer; see page 49. 


552 


aes fart orto. 
«анде fn: | 
хн celta 
antar ае ча, п 
gagi 

gars SIT T aa- 


varuņapraghāsa rite of the fourth-month ritual (cāturmāsya): 


With a heavenly hymn bring forth the god Jātavedas. 
He shall convey our oblations in proper order. 
This very pious recitatory priest (hotā) is led forth 
to the worship. Covered like the wagon of a traveller, 
the glowing one appears by himself. 
Agni becomes free from his birth, which is immortal, 
as it were. 
Mightier than might itself, the god is prepared to 
live. 
(RV 10.176.2-4) 


On the footstep of refreshment, on the navel of the 
earth, 
we would set thee down, Agni Jātavedas, 


in order to convey our oblation. 
(RV 3.29.4) 


Fair-faced Agni, sit first, along with all the gods, 

on thy woolen homestead which is full of ghee and 
nestlike.! 

Lead the worship to Savitr, properly for the 


worshipper. 
(RV 6.15.16) 


Hota, in that thou dost understand, sit in thy own 
place 

and set the worship on the course of correctness. 

Pursuing them, thou shalt worship the gods with the 

oblations, and thou shalt bestow lofty vigor upon the 


worshipper. 
(RV 3.29.8) 


The understanding hota, violent and shining, has sat 
down on the seat of the (other) hotās with his great skill. 
Bright-tongued Agni is of undeceivable commands 
and intentions, the very best bearer of thousands. 


1 Cf. Burkert (1979), p. 44. 
553 


я аа Bear (иат war MINTAA | 
теат AY ARGAT і 


‘wag єч я ячен gard «ter 1 


wii я ят oada cat п 
aaaeeeaa зед: | 
adaha «чта, Жат startā фа: N 


galarrar Чї 9 
mat great этїї | 
яга fa ін. 
eni grata dtstā u 


эй AA: ara tā- 

et D al e 
gari sera: Win fei, | 
ger gadi «ая 
aa dy amaa ST di 


ad да: за 3 wis Pca 
геш asi буча аа 
зата ата, Еч} ame 

X ggasi 991 «ar: || 


f = 

жеч deat Ҹат 924: 1 
arises 08: 
wee: aubrey эй: n 


my 
a 
mu 
X 
ad 
jab 
3 
"LN 
4 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


Thou art our messenger, our protector, who leads us cd часад а: RE- 
. H А Ё СА . = 
to what is better, o bull. Without relenting, be thou ei че эп quw паг | 


the shining protector of our offspring and of our 


MW ai 
aH dist aaa Ag 
own persons. WP AR ФП 


(RV 2.9.1-2) аяда, drags їч: u 


While adhvaryu and hota are moving east with the fire and with these re- 
citations, the brahman has joined them after going counterclockwise around 
the new domestic altar. The maitrāvaruņa, acting as second hota, stays 
behind to the west of the new domestic altar, and recites the Apratiratha, 


or Song to the Irresistible Warrior (cf. above, pages 103-104): 


a. Swift, sharpening like a bull his horns, 
warrior fond of slaughter, disturber of people, 
bellowing, eyes open, sole hero, 
Indra conquered a hundred armies at once! 
b. With the bellowing, eyes open, conquerer, 
fighting, invincible, dare devil Indra, 
you men conquer and vanquish armies, 
with the bull with arrows in his hands! 
c. Powerful with those who hold arrow and quivers, 
Indra ruling with his troups, 
winning fights, drinking Soma with his large 
gang, 
with bow uplifted, shooting with well-drawn 
arrows! 
d. Fly round with your chariot, Brhaspati, 
killing demons, dispersing enemies, 
breaking armies, destroying, victor in battle, 
protect our chariots! 
e. Cleaver of cowpens, cow finder, thunderbolt 
holder, 
winner of battles, powerful smasher; 
equal him in courage, you fellows, 
comrades, follow in Indra's footsteps! 
f. Known for his strength, powerful, heroic, 
superior victor, dominant terror, 
surpassing heroes and fighters, born of strength, 
Indra, cow finder, mount your victorious chariot! 
g. Mightily penetrating cowpens, Indra, 
merciless hero with hundredfold wrath, 
irresistible, enduring in battle, invincible, 
may he assist our armies in battle! 
h. Let Indra lead and let Brhaspati, 
sacrificial fee, ritual, and Soma go before; 
the Maruts precede divine armies 


554 


sug: Raat rait a gtāt 


dara: = UP PUES 


Наас аач а: 
BAX dal язда, ат: u 
data Геца 
genial gya ҹа | 
«бл чча ач, ех 
gui ях gyda gent wi 
a gde: а Paracel 
авт а ga FAI mr | 
ax gela, diat aigars. 
citra ийат 1 
get Ч Чеп Wit 


четата gardia: | 


изе та! suit gut sni- 
«кеп аат чота) 
табха me ada 
чїйгїн патат | 
gay dora aa dfe 


SESS, 15 ASAT ZA: | 
эттей зга сат waist 
Sather verat tē «Зет u 


эти ттт ada mda 


sapit ait: этана: à 
gare: wasrardgedt- 
sunny чі ag TREN 
зея эпе] at gea- 
Staton аз: чє g tet: 1 
хяйзпаўябтизтёгяї 


CARRYING FORTH OF AGNI 


that cause destruction and win victory. 
i. The roars of bull Indra and king Varuna, 
of the Adityas, of the mighty Marut army, 
roars have arisen of the gods, 
spirited, earthshaking, and victorious! 
k. Ours be Indra when the standards meet, 
on our side the winning arrows, 
on our side victorious heroes, 
help us, gods, when invoked! 
(TS 4.6.4.1a-4k) 


(siet а reci M 
(GU wi quer v 
эпте нет” sr uw | 
чайчы зччәдатаї 

AN Fara waters u 
зган: eddy vast 
aR AT KK Tar | 
sams AT TUT деса. 
wart Зат aaar аң! 


While these recitations take place, the Sāmaveda is not left out. The prastota 
chants agner vratam, “Agni’s Will" (above page 338). In the mean time 
the adhvaryu has arrived at the altar and puts the fire pot down on the tail. 
Cherumukku Vaidikan pours melted butter from a dish over his hands, and 
the adhvaryu sprinkles it over the altar in the four directions and at the 


center: 


May Vasus with Rudras protect you on the east; 

ancestors under King Death, with ancestors on the 
south; 

Adityas with All-gods on the west; 

Dyutāna Māruta with Maruts on the north; 

gods under chief Indra from below and above! 


часа wx: quem TT | 

fretwcar агата: Hats олт: wiegt 
fen ERE: warp eg 1' 
gara! meet wera wg | 
FARA TOUT 


(TS 5.5.94) — <чщйтїчўөга eg, t 
He picks up the fire pot with the potholders, faces east, and recites: PLATE 86 
a. Advance east, o wise Agni, uratad atest He zr 


for Agni you be the Agni here! 

Light up all regions with your radiance, 

give strength to our two- and four-footed beings. 

b. With Agni ascend the vault of heaven, 
born of the ukhà pot, lifting him in your hands! 
Go to the ridge of heaven, paradise, 
and eat together with the gods! 
(TS 4.6.5.1 a-b) 


ainā ARAE | 

feat aren gtatāt fir AT 
eni ay hfe 89: ада dl 
TAARAT ATE 

gere guy ба: | 

Ra: qu* {айап 


sani 


Prat антет, il 


He steps on the altar with the fire pot and approaches the center of the altar: 


c. From earth I mounted sky, 
from sky I mounted heaven, 
from the ridge of heaven's vault 
I reached celestial light! 
d. Going to heaven without looking away, 
They mount the celestial region, the two worlds! 


555 


gren sregpzeafiarasée- 
TARA fzgursdgu | 
feat arku TERT, 

чаз атаєа, і 
gaird ama 

ят пх Urata ФЗ N 


PLATE 86 
Arrival of Agni 


* Advance east, o wise Agni, 
for Agni you be the Agni here! 
Light up all regions with your radiance, 
give strength to our two- and four-footed beings. 
With Agni ascend the vault of heaven, 
born in the ukhà pot, lift him in your hands. 
Go to the ridge of heaven, paradise, 
and eat together with the gods!" 
(TS 4.5.6.1a-b) 


The adhvaryu arrives with the fire from the domestic altar at the 
tail of the offering altar. 


556 


SES ee | 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


Halfway to the center, the adhvaryu puts the fire down. Cherumukku Vaidikan 
hands him a ladle filled with curds, and he makes an oblation on the center. 


During these activities he recites: SV ыы E, 
ak 4 ĀM Tam? x 


Cb ou ms 
They stretch the ritual carefully, egre Ret a 
streaming on all sides. Es mmt žgati 
e. Agni, advance, first worshipper, FZL HAAT | - 
eye of gods and men; ganu dit: erste: 
pressing together with the Bhrgus, giia adam: хаб t 


the sacrificers go to heaven, to prosperity! 

f. Of one mind but multiple form, night and dawn 
suckle one child together ; = on „1 
radiant, he shines between heaven and earth; hi amt set dd xu 
giving wealth, gods support Agni! Зат зй aitas, (чот: N. 

g. Agni of a thousand eyes, a hundred heads, sri ATMA aagi- 
your exhalationsa hundred, inhalations a thousand, — sud Ñ ягоп: Siebert 1 
you are lord of wealth a thousand times, wax alga XUI fra 
thus we worship you for strength—svāhā! adi à fata asia = n 


TEA eset fe 
alt Rra ertt 1 


The yajamāna renounces to Agni. The adhvaryu returns the ladle, lifts the 
fire, goes clockwise around the Pravargya implements to the north and sits 
down east of the center facing west. Then he overturns the pot and puts the 
fire in the center of the altar, reciting: 


h. You are the bird with wings, sit on earth, sisti fir rata grams az 
sit on the ridge of the earth; tu ел: als 
with your glaze fill the sky, S 


with your light support heaven, ij о 
with your brilliance strengthen the quarters! siR Ragna 

i. Receiving offerings, handsome Agni, aim Ra ча 91 
sit down in front of your own womb; urggta: gala: TT 


All-gods, up high with the sacrificer . . яй чаї fre diz atem | 
| ART ган, 
adding fire sticks to the fire: Р yar starta, . . 
. . . you sit down! „za 


(TS 4.6.5) 


In the mean time, the hotā has completed his recitation (ending in Rgveda 
2.9.2). Encircling darbha grasses are put around the newly installed fire, 
water is sprinkled, the adhvaryu sits west of the fire and prepares an oblation 
of clarified butter. The yajamāna ascends the altar, goes around the adhvaryu 
and the adhvaryu passes the ladle with oblation round his legs. The yajamana 
sits south of the adhvaryu. While the yajamāna holds the ladle, the adhvaryu 
makes four adhvara oblations, reciting: 


558 


CARRYING FORTH OF AGNI 


Agni must lead the ritual knowingly, what agg яза 
that destroyers of ritual will not find it. Ha чие es! 
Announce the ritual to the gods, 8:4: ngatazi 


romote the ritual patron—svāhā! é А 
i А (BŠS 10.52:54.17-19)  "" "f Hee emer И 
The other three mantras have Vayu, Sūrya, and Yajfia, respectively, in the 
place of Agni. The yajamāna renounces to these, one at each svāhā. These 
oblations occur in the animal sacrifice, when fire has been transported to the 
new altar. The remaining ceremonies also follow the animal sacrifice: the 
yajamāna scoops clarified butter in his own ladle, and makes oblations to 
Agni, Vayu, and Aditya. The adhvaryu traces the outline of the mahāvedi 
for a second time. He directs the āgnīdh to bring water to the altar and 
marks the spot where juhū, upabhrt, other implements, and the clarified 
butter will be placed. Returning to the altar, he places fifteen fire sticks, 
anointed with butter, in a dish and puts them in the fire with svāhā! The 
yajamāna renounces to Agni. The adhvaryu puts three fire sticks of atti, 
vayyankat, and vahni wood (see above page 206) on the fire with three 
mantras: 


k. Enkindled, Agni, shine for us, Ў | 

youthful E rays, sian qeit afa | 

strength accrues to you for ever—svāhā! сатх WaT зч Alea ата: чат |! 
l We worship you in your highest birth, Agni fie & чєй wear 

we worship you with praise in your lower home; Bia Baws ача! 

I offer to the womb from where you came, ARMAS ax d 

when kindled, they offer oblations in you—svaha! "ES чїй ae ale eet || 
m. I choose that many-fold benevolence SE = = 

of exguisite Savitr, given to all men, чт GU faat- 

that mighty fat cow which Kaņva milked, WISÉ зт Gale RATAR | 

streaming with milk a thousandfold—svāhā! MA BA э siat. 

(TS 4.6.5.4k-m)  azaani чает. néi me atat t 


Bal wa fuf gūt À- 


At each svaha, the yajamàna renounces to Agni. More butter oblations fol- 
low: for Vi$vakarman, with TS 5.5.4.3 (see page 283); for Agni with TS 
4.4.4.7w (see page 335); and finally a Full-Ladle oblation (pūrņāhuti) for 
Agni with: 


Seven are your kindling sticks, Agni, 
and seven your tongues; 

seven seers, seven dear homes; 

seven hotās sacrifice for you sevenfold, 
seven wombs you fill with butter! 


HH Ws würd: ag Ger: 
^ auda: чә art пб | 
ag dat: анат cal азі 
ga Aia yar gaa єп] N 
(TS 4.6.5.5n) < 


The main offerings are for Agni Vaisvānara, “Agni who is common to 
all men.” They follow the basic pattern of isti rites (pages 46-48). The offerings 


559 


PLATE 87 


PLATE 87 
The Full Oblation (Pirnahuti) 


“Seven are your kindling bricks, Agni, 
and seven your tongues; 
seven seers, seven dear homes; 
seven hotās sacrifice for you sevenfold, 
seven wombs you fill with butter. Svaha !" 
(TS 4.6.5.5n) 


After the fire has been installed on the new altar, and encircling 
sticks have been placed around it, several oblations of the āhuti or 
juhoti type (see page 47) are made. The adhvaryu is generally 
seated during these oblations, but here he stands because he makes 
a Full Oblation (pūrņāhuti). After filling the ladle with butter 
scooped four times, he empties it entirely. | 


560 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


consist of cooked rice on twelve potsherds, and begin with the command to 
the hota: 


Address Agni Vaišvānara! amà ATTIE 1 


(BSS 10.52:55.12) 


At the end of the isti, the adhvaryu makes butter oblations over the rice cake, 
reciting: 


Like heaven, heat—svaha! чая =й: etel | 
like heaven, arka—svaha! gadā: aret | 
like heaven, splendor—svāhā! gai am: canal | 
like heven, light—svaha! gai sita T 


like heaven, sun—svāhā! о | 
(TS 5.7.5.2b) S448 


The yajamāna renounces to Agni each time. 

Finally, there are oblations of cooked rice on seven potsherds for the 
Maruts. The following mantras are recited in low voice, cyclically, and in 
overlapping pairs, the first mantra always followed by pranava (“о”) and 
the oblation made with the last, viz., as follows: 


o (ending: sabharo)—p—svaha ! 

p (ending: atyamho)—q—svaha! 

g (ending: gaņo)—r—svāhā! 

r (ending: vidharayo)—TA 4.25—svāhā! 
TĀ 4.25 (ending: viksipo)—s—svāhā ! 

s (ending: etano)—t—u—svāhā 

t—u (ending: bhavanto)—o—svaha ! 


The mantras are: oe e Ši 
StS ule Vales «і 
0. Such like, other like, thus like, nes «b fae ater ЖИ: N 
similar, measured, commensurate, harmonious! qafa Раад ая 
р. Of splendid radiance, varied radiance, true aaria Amea 
пл челт кет: il 


radiant, true, protector of order, beyond anxiety! 
q. Winning order, truth, conquering armies, 

with good army, enemies within, afar, gang! 
r. Order, true, safe, secure, 

supporter, upholder, upholding! 


mafia асаб ааб 
gaara аба атол: || 
жаң аен мая аата 

я fret d Ра: 1 

зия far vatraat . 

Terrible, roaring, veiled, wad vadu 


sound, ecd | = TT euge adma 
- i owerful; 
power-invoking, victorious, mighty, p ; S 


having come, departed, cast down! Meis 
(ТА 425) 99 ed (Әби: ni 


(TS 4.6.5.50-r) 


562 


FLOW OF WEALTH 


fewer ташын & y о: 
чеши: чїйчєштө mds | 


. Such like, thus like, come to us, 
similar and equal! 

t. Measure and commensurate, harmonious, Render dfilaraz a Kay | 

to help us at this ritual, Maruts! = x: TÀ = 
u. Divine people, Maruts, attend on Indra; 2 iw MODE Д 2 T 
just as divine people, Maruts, attend on Indra, fact KU sedisset 

m D eec N Ц 
so may people, divine and human, ayes Sita medtsgacaia 
attent on this yajamāna! | паба asa аг fārzīt 
(TS 4.6.5.65-ш) ұтыла warg и 


єл 


At each svāhā! the yajamāna renounces to the Maruts. 


Ninth Day: April 21, 1975 
EPISODE 2I 
Flow of Wealth (Vasor Dhara) 


THE PRASEKA, A large ladle, as tall as the yajamüna measured from the 
top of his head to his feet, is installed on the altar. It is supported by a pile 
of bricks and crossed bamboo sticks. The adhvaryu addresses the pratipra- 
sthātā: 


With complete concentration pour continuously AHA: SITIS 
while I shall recite Flow of Wealth! adtdni frafzenftt 1 
(BSS 10.54:56.10) 


The pratiprasthātā pours a continuous stream of clarified butter through the 
ladle into the newly installed fire. The adhvaryu touches the ladle with his 
right hand, his heart with his left, and recites TS 4.7.1-11, inserting svaha! 
after each occurrence of ca те, “апа for me!" This recitation is called vasor 
dhāra, “flow of wealth," or camakam, after the recurrent words ca me that 
follow each noun or noun phrase, but are omitted in the translation.! The 
adhvaryu generally recites four phrases, each beginning with svāhā, in one 
breath. 


1. a. Agniand Visnu, may these songs gladden you # are їгїт dieg at Rr: | 
together! aaa viera, | 


Come with radiance and strength. эре ania а saaa d цин È ātra 3 

b. For me strength, instigation, influence, in- Ata й aga a =н 8 tba a 
clination, thought, inspiration, speech, — MN I KE с id 
fame, renown, reputation, light, heaven, ama 8, aua H à Ма à чач 9 
expiration, inspiration, cross-breathing, ят} а Astra Ā sarma Язда й rt ч 


1 In the Sanskrit text, the sandhi of the printed texts is retained. It does not occur in 
the recitation after me, since each ca те is followed by svāhā. 


563 


PLATES 88,89 


PLATE 88 
Flow of Wealth 


“Agni and Visņu, may these songs gladden you both. 
Come with radiance and strength ” 
(TS 4.7.1.la) 


A continuous libation of clarified butter is made into the newly in- 
stalled fire through a large ladle called praseka. The ladle is sup- 
ported by a pile of bricks and crossed bamboo sticks. While the 
pratiprasthātā pours the butter and eases its flow, the adhvaryu re- 
cites a section of the Taittiriya Samhita called Flow of Wealth 
(vasor dhārā), or camakam after the recurrent words ca me, “and 
for me,” which follow each noun or noun phrase. Yajamāna and 
brahman are seen in front, watching from their usual places. At 
the end of the libation, the yajamāna will renounce to Agni and 
Visnu. 


565 


PLATE 89 | 
Flow of Wealth: Detail 


Flow of Wealth (vasor dhārā) from the east. 


566 
567 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


breath, mind, learning, voice, mind, eye, 
ear, skill, might, force, strength, life, old 
age, breath, body, protection, guard, limbs, 
bones, joints, and bodies for me! 


2. For me preeminence, overlordship, spirit, anger, 


violence, impetuosity, victorious power, great- 
ness, breadth, extent, greatness, length, growth, 
growing, truth, faith, world, wealth, power, 
radiance, play, delight, what is born, what is 
to be born, good words, good deeds, finding, 
what there is to find, what has been, what will 
be, easy road, good way, prosperity, pros- 
pering, agreement, agreeing, thought, and 
good thought for me! 


3. For me prosperity, comfort, desire, wish, long- 


ing, kindliness, good, better, superior, fame, 
good luck, riches, restrainer, supporter, peace, 
firmness, all, greatness, discovery, knowledge, 


begetting, procreation, plough, harrow, holy. 


order, immortality, freedom from disease, 
freedom from illness, life, longevity, freedom 


from foes, fearlessness, ease of going, lying Z 


fair dawning, and fair day for me! 


4, For me strength, righteousness, milk, sap, ghee, 


honey, eating and drinking in company, 
ploughing, rain, conquest, victory, wealth, 
riches, prosperity, prospering, plenty, lordship, 
much, more, full, fuller, imperishableness, bad 
crops!, food, freedom from hunger, rice, barley, 
beans, sesame, kidney beans, vetches, wheat, 
lentils, millet, Panicum miliaccum, Panicum 
frumentaceum, and wild rice for me! 


5. For me stone, clay, hills, mountains, sand, trees, 


gold, bronze, lead, tin, iron, copper, fire, 
water, roots, plants, what grows on ploughed 
land, what grows on unploughed land for me; 
may tame cattle prosper through the ritual for 
me, may wild cattle prosper through the 
ritual for me; for me wealth and gaining 
wealth, attainment and attaining, riches, 
dwelling, act, power, aim, strength, moving 
and going for me! 


1 I question Keith's translation, since it seems to be 
some kind of grain; recited ten times. 


568 


a add ч й ae cd й ada À чая 
MA ata Aas чон NA 
aka н чия Аяа ч я эпеп Чой 


— 


FA „Су. 


sai aah rest чой ada a ā п 
wet чон alae ч à mgA down 
Язда йз Ñ ma d Alwar ч 


4.47 a д 417,14 
4L a sy ay 4 4 
АРЕ "a. dL 1 
SH Soa. sq а 
А RE av 
A5 
Sapling} 
À aW. dL 
«a 
a 16 
a 


ap 
55. 
4] 
s I^ sy 
4 
py 
E 
Sod fv og jay 
124 17! 
19; 
аа 
$3 
3 1% 4. 
L H Aj 2 
aye V 
= 
d ds 
р 
d A 4 
147 H lt jy 


yal Se ay ay 
4 $1 
dii 
18 ! 
g a 
Gd. d. 
= 
a sp dv 


15? ! 


їшї «āsu 
Ei UE =Й qu 


L d- 
IE: 
eg 
(e 
E: 

а HN 
15! 
6ч 

rie 


2 
à es av 
Sw др 
" ap 
га 19 5 
4 а lt 
n 
TE 
x 


1 
ši 
ESI 
zB 
Hr 
a 
3 
S 
£y us 
qe 
2 
3 
X 


Wer dp Greba x Tar 
aada À fev a Ñs- 
я dia a aga gai чїй KZ ч 
поя a ata й ieda н iaaa T 
q ksazu чі d ятя d 
wat agt aana À чиш 


- 


дїї sedeat ач ч а Ata A wd 


FLOW ОЕ WEALTH 


6. For me Agni and Indra, Soma and Indra, Savitr 


and Indra, Sarasvati and Indra, Pūsan and 
Indra, Brhaspati and Indra, Mitra and Indra, 


Varuna and Indra, Tvastr the Indra, Dhātr + 


and Indra, Visņu and Indra, the Ašvins and 
Indra, Maruts and Indra, All-gods and Indra, 
earth and Indra, sky and Indra, heaven and 
Indra, guarters and Indra, head and Indra, 
Prajāpati and Indra for me! 


7. For me the amśu cup, the ra$mi, the adābhya, 


the master (cup), the upāmšu, the antaryāma, 
the (cup) for Indra and Vāyu, the (cup) for 
Mitra and Varuna, the (cup) for the Ašvins, 
the pratiprasthāna (cup), the $ukra, the 
manthin, the agrayaņa, the (cup) for the All- 
gods, the dhruva, the (cup) for Vaisvānara, the 
season cups, the atigrāhyas, the (cup) for 
Indra and Agni, the (cup) for the All-gods, the 
(cups) for the Maruts, the (cups) for Mahe- 71 
ndra, the (cup) for Aditya, the (cup) for Savitr, 
the (cup) for Sarasvati, the (cup) for Pūsan, 
the (cup) for (Tvastr) with the wives (of the 
gods), and the hāriyojana (cup) for me! 


8. For me kindling-wood, the strew, the altar, the 


lesser altars, the offering-spoons, the cups, the 
pressing-stones, the chips (of the post), the 
sounding holes, the two pressing boards, the 
wooden tub, the vayu cups, the (bowl) for the 
purified Soma, the mixing (bowl), the agnidh’s 
altar, the oblation holder, the house, the 
sadas, the cakes, the cooked (offerings), the 
final bath, and the cry of svagā for me! 


9. For me fire, the cauldron, the beam, the sun, 
breath, the horse sacrifice, earth, Aditi, Diti # 


sky, the Sakvari verses, the fingers, the 
quarters prosper through the sacrifice; may the 
rc, the siman, the hymn tune, the yajus, con- 
secration, penance, the season, the vow 
through rain of day and night, the brhat and 
rathantara for me! 


10. For me embryo, the calves, the one-and-a-half- 


year-old male and female, the two-year-old 
male and female, the two-and-a-half-year-old 
male and female, the three-year-old male and 
female, the four-year-old male and female, 
the draught ox and the draught cow, the bull 
and the cow that is barren, the steer and the 


569 


gaei co KA й ar ч 
freu я grra Азна ч A Зе 
Heda я зи а (ҮЙ чой Зат gg 
өй d a gera йз чон зда 
a ade и збя й feta я чени o 
qp A FF is gemi а rt а, 
asya A tia Asa Asfa a 


УМ 


x S saqma н Uerum R 


Y 

| 

4 

J 

4 

3 

EN 

5 
„а d 22 

a 

a 
Hin ig 5 414 


ba 


ea а за À Raada dH 
waht da aman À аяба 
m ў Farmed я жаиа Ñs- 
аи н cēlās X azad X E im 
ata й абзи я ятя а араз Ñ 
areata À ure À vietaa W ale 
заа EET 

зені а after й ala $t Aana 
ada й LITE Arata й ean 
sagata astuqa ч й glueega 
amem uo ga a aadota я 
ani a 8 gaat a Я теа й ager 
A gūsta À qaant asaya d am- 
Ha R N & 


+ Hag 


rH aia àsta й ogām а ятя 
sadad а чїйаї a Askar й pen 
а чёб өй festa а ird 
ROTATE ub й 18 чой «ня й чая 
4 ап А ача и жя A at ч A- 
зап dequeat b A яа art 
"uu 


wear а асып а safer d sadi ч 
feared Gp Бете чой gaita 
чапай + ir Расея ё Brace st & gare, 
ча йй a & чият À чїй da зап 
qà and я җчиз A aed Asaga 
Я aga я aged equi suut ga 
аечатачтаї яй“ жее паї aa 


sos 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


cow that miscarries, the bullock and the cow 
for me! May life prosper through the rite, 
may expiration prosper through the rite, 
may inspiration proper through the rite, may 
cross-breathing prosper through the rite, may 
the eye prosper through the rite, may the ear 
prosper through the rite, may mind prosper 
through the rite, may speech prosper through 
the rite, may the self prosper through the rite, 
may the rite prosper through the rite for me! 


amr чаа mer att яй 
saai Tal sub werd AAA BETA. 
arn gt «equi wat att четата | 
ча ча fat A data À ae чі A 
чачат ч ЙИ яй ч а чат ч 
и ааб ча aden aa чае 
а saita do чий x aa- 


PRESSING OF STRENGTH 


. Pressing of strength has pervaded 


this world and worlds on all sides. 
He goes around recognizing excellence, 
increasing our offspring and success—svaha ! 


. Pressing of strength rests on heaven, 


as emperor on all these worlds. 
Let the wise make misers generous 
and give us wealth full of heroes—svaha! 


. Agni, speak to us, 


be thoughtful for us; 
lord of the world, promote us, 


aeg suu эп aà- 

тт а feat чат чаа: 1 

a Rus df лпа 

sert gfe addini этен хәте} dd 
amiat saa: rie fad- 

Ben ч feat yan чыте | 
wees ача TTA, 

efi dt я: dde fr іа теі 
BR чег FE я: Ч я: Gaal ч | 


11. a. For me one, three, five, seven, nine, eleven, ausu a Ve ud bi ad = you give us wealth—svaha! HOt аео garā 
thirteen, fifteen, seventeen, nineteen, twenty- эй чч Я чеч as tā amu e. May Aryaman promote us, verat aia av. eal 11 
one, twenty-three, twenty-five, twenty-seven, Я Ger ча Regt A adata and Bhaga and Brhaspati, Bo read я ип: ч за | 
twenty-nine, thirty-one, thirty-three; Asena и кйш Pr чайгы may gods and the generous one, nā S < e 
b. for me four, eight, twelve, sixteen, twenty, ir aeaftesrt й TRANU Ase Goddess Speech endow us—svaha! gat чп d 
twenty-four, twenty-eight, thirty-two, thirty- „йөр x Ы Е f. To give us gifts impel я яй чата ч: 161 d 
six, forty, forty-four, forty-eight; SEM Aryaman, Brhaspati, Indra, Зай seer crate ae | 


c. Strength, instigation, the later born, in- 


ania saaal aper gaat gūt ч 


Speech, Visnu, Sarasvatī, 


ard fier radu 


CM 
spiration, heaven, the head, the vyašniya, the nija ds ip gs and Savitr the strong—svaha! fimt ч ата», net n 
offspring of the last, the last, the offspring of aaa gaaat | g. We hold on to King Soma, er x: 
being, being, the master! Varuna and Agni, Фах тй чёт ишга | 
(TS 4.7.1-11)! The Ādityas, Visņu, Sūrya, ARTA, (aene 94. 
Brhaspati the brahman—svaha! зп g IET «ате || 


PLATE 90 The entire recitation lasts just under half an hour. The yajamāna renounces (TS 1.7.10.1a-3g) 


to Agni and Visņu. Afterwards, the praseka ladle is put in the fire, one kiņdi 


anit st Ha afer 


with remaining clarified butter is poured over it, and the bricks and bamboo a. May strength help us through the seven direc- 
stand are taken down. The remaining clarified butter is added to rice cooked tions adet ат чач: | 
оп the domestic fire. This brahmaudana meal is eaten by adhvaryu, brahman, and four distances, aA at Praga - 
hota, and udgātā, sitting south of the tail. strength help us here with the All-gods, Aimada carat ц 
to gain wealth—svāhā! v Ep 
Ni A g. May all Maruts help us today, fail эги пай m. st 
inth Day : pril 21, 1975 may All fires be kindled, RA магач: ет: | 
EPISODE 22 may the all-gods come to help us, AN = Far agaissītara 
% S s SS AL cere >, 
Pressing of Strength, Holding of the Realm, and Other Oblations all wealth and strength for us—svāhā! {ичн fist arsit ore erat п 
(Vajaprasaviya, Rastrabhrt, etc.) e Come gods to press strength kar naa Bat айат чад | 
with your golden chariots, es Fe = 
THE PRESSING OF STRENGTH oblations (vajaprasaviya) are fourteen obla- Agni, Indra, В ee = Es vo on Т 
tions of all kinds of grains (sarvausadha), mixed with curds and butter, and oU to guns MM ARS x 
d. Help, us, steeds, for each prize, ягдатї<ча агї а 


offered to Agni. Sitting on the altar, the adhvaryu makes these oblations 
from the sruva ladle with fourteen mantras: 
a. In the beginning the pressing of strength pressed 

this King Soma in plants and waters. 

Let them be sweet for us, 

let us priests watch the realm—svaha! 


art leen jet edt 
siters atag | 

at orant иЧнФїйїчгт 

аз-ак šifra атг enel u 
1 In this last section, me “for me" is omitted, and svāhā follows each occurrence of ca 
“and.” Each numeral is recited twice. 


570 


o 


and rewards—intelligent, immortal, 
aware of cosmic order; 

drink honey and enjoy it, 

go happily on divine paths—svāhā! 


. Strength is in front and in our midst, 


gods shall have strength with the seasons; 
pressing of strength bows for us, 


571 


мач Гит enger RATE: | 
wey wea: fusa arated 

qar aia ЧЁ: «ате || 
atst: qariga нета At 
rst tars ЧЇЙ: ачат | 
ania R serat atA 


PLATE 90 
Conclusion of Flow of Wealth 


After Flow of Wealth is completed and the yajamāna has renounced 
to Agni and Visnu, the praseka ladle is thrown into the fire. Since it 
is soaked with butter, the flames flare up. The bamboo stand and 
pile of bricks are taken down by the pratiprasthata. The Prava- 
rgya implements continue to lie on the surface of the altar. 


572 


573 


PLATE 91B 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


may I be lord of strength in all guarters—svāhā! fear errant atstatums eat it 
f. Let me put milk on earth, on plants, qi dekai ча iteh 
in heaven, in the sky, a бы Ra qii au 
may the directions have milk for me—svaha! 3 aa 
g. І unite myself with milk, butter, queat nid: ep нег, eel u 
I unite myself with waters, plants, & ut anit qda gata 
may I gain strength, Agni—svāhā! dat gamat эй: 1 
(TS 4.7.12.la-2g) als ата». азлад «агі T 


At each svaha! the yajamāna renounces to Agni. There is a final oblation of 
milk with TS 4.7.12.3h = TS 4.6.5.2f (page 558), at which the yajamāna 
renounces to Agni. The remaining grain mixture is kept for later (below, page 
640). 

The Holding-of-the-Realm oblations (rāstrabhrt) are eleven butter ob- 
lations partly made with the help of a miniature cart (ratham) that has four 
spokeless wheels and is made of audumbara wood. A small copper pipe is 
vertically attached to the front of this toy cart. Made beforehand by the 
smith, this pipe is 2 1/2 Angulas long and as wide as a thumb (angusta). The 
first six oblations are made directly from the sruva ladle into the fire, with 
six mantras: 


a. Maintaining, abiding by cosmic order, sangas- 
Agni is Gandharva, his nymphs’ (Apsarases) 
plants called strength; 
may he protect brahman, ksatram, 

May they protect brahman, ksatram—svaha! 
(TS 3.4.7.1a) 


watt aa gd sut 
art wig ur md н 
er a we єє и 


The yajamāna renounces to “Agni Gandharva, nymphs’ plants”; 


b. The continuous, having all songs, as 9 Ferte qA 
Sun is Gandharva, his nymphs' чечет nit- 
rays called alive, etc. scart arri: | 


The yajamāna renounces to “Sun Gandharva, nymphs’ rays"; 


age: чини verter 
agarra ratu: 


The yajamāna renounces to “Moon Gandharva, nymphs’ lunar mansions”; 


c. Blessed sun-rayed moon! is Gandharva, 
his nymphs’ lunar mansions called bright, etc. 


d. The active bird ritual is Gandharva, wg: gi ust 


his nymphs’ sacrificial fees IRT (aro 
called praises, etc. NA: TAT N 


1 Sūryarašmi, “sun-rayed,” in RV 10.139.1 said of Savitr or the sun, here of the moon, 
indicating that it reflects the light of the sun? 


574 


HOLDING OF THE REALM 


The yajamāna renounces to “Ritual Gandharva, nymphs’ sacrificial fees": 


1 p. o "i 
e. Prajāpati, all-maker, язча ara Wet 
mind is Gandharva, his nymphs' MARAEA- 


verse and songs called hymns, etc. FACE ABA:..- 


The yajamāna renounces to “Mind Gandharva, nymphs’ verse and songs”: 


f. The swift, all-pervading, zu fire amt 
wind is Gandharva, his nymphs’ maias sui- 
waters called delights, etc. samedi HT... 


The yajamāna renounces to “Wind Gandharva, nymphs’ waters.” 

The remaining five Holding-of-the-Realm oblations are made from the 
sruva ladle through the copper pipe of the toy cart. Cherumukku Vaidikan 
holds the cart over the fire, while the adhvaryu makes the oblations, re- 
citing: 


; au ча aed a 3919 Ter sz dl 
g. World leader with homes above and here si теа che m 
: \ б а аї cama WaT 
give us increase of wealth, unfailing, DE Е T, 
abundant heroes, prosperity through the year! M ES Gaius erf rm t 
The yajamāna renounces to Agni: 
h. Supreme being, master, death is Gandharva, wreafitefairegiienrd- 


his nymphs are the universe, called worlds, etc. 


wea feat sri: ,,, 
The yajamāna renounces to “Death Gandharva, nymphs’ universe": 


siia: quizes 
giai, чигаї aea- 
au fadsagt qii +», 


i. With good home, wealth, doing good deeds, 
holding light, rain is Gandharva, 
his nymphs’ lightnings called radiant, etc. 


The yajamāna renounces to “Rain Gandharva, nymphs’ lightnings”’: 


aN 
k. With far-speeding darts, merciless, qane at TI- 
Death is Gandharva, his nymphs’ Яаа ST 
offspring called timid, etc. saat эйєя:... 


The yajamāna renounces to “Death Gandharva, nymphs’ offspring": 


"ire BIH 91 TT 
BATS SANS AE: 
Tada 9 zd н 

are ча a кї ны] are 
чї чей хатат 

(TS 3.4.7) TRA: BTEC 


575 


l. Beloved, looking with desire, 
Love is Gandharva, his nymphs' 
thoughts called burning; 
may he protect this our brahman, ksatram, 
may they protect this our brahman, ksatram, 
to him—svaha! To them—svaha! 


PLATE 91A 


PLATE 91A 
Holding of the Realm (Rastrabhrt) 
“World leader with homes above and here 
give us increase of wealth, unfailing, 


abundant heroes, prosperity through the year!” 
(TS 3.4.7.2 g) 


During some of the Holding-of-the-Realm (rāstrabhrt) oblations, 


the adhvaryu pours butter through the copper pipe of a miniature 
cart (ratham), which Cherumukku Vaidikan holds over the fire. 


PLATE 91В 
Fastening the Copper Pipe to the Cart 


Before the Holding-of-the-Realm oblations, Nellikat Nilakanthan 
Akkitiripad attaches the copper pipe to the minature cart. 


516 


577 


PLATE 92 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


The Yajamāna renounces to “Love Gandharva, nymphs’ thoughts.” 
The cart is thrown into the fire after its pipe has been removed. Then 

there are three Light (ruc) oblations of butter, recited with: 

ат эй ep wd set 

Rameraea «Зя: 1 

«прн: adhi zà 

Ha Ata eret А 

at at ят: qu Sat 

MAAT am ud: | 

зеді wit: «аай 

wa at ra gammā enel ll 


Your flames, Agni, rising in the sun, 

envelop heaven with rays, 

with all these bring us to light, to man—svaha! 
Your flames in the sun, o gods, 

flames in cattle and horses, 

with these, Indra and Agni, 

give us light, Brhaspati—svaha! 

Give light to our brahmins, 

place light in our chieftains, 


al 
light in tribesmen and servants, SS "m Wf mag 
with your flames give me light—svaha! а чеч l 
(TS 5.7.6.3d) ЖЧ RAS JAT 


als 


aft Sf жаг way Stat u 
At each svāhā, the yajamāna renounces to Agni. 

Finally, the adhvaryu makes three butter oblations from the palms of 
his hands, taking the butter from a dish (catti). These are called Wind’s 
Names (vātanāmāni, cf. the oblations of the beginning of Episode 19: page 
544). The mantras are: 


м] е t 
You are the ocean, full of mist, SISRISISI RS t- 
yielding moisture, blow over me, anala: aAA 


qir at nfà tN 
medish неї TT: 


granting happiness and delight—svaha! 
You are of the Maruts, the Marut troop, 


blow over me, ds. 

granting happiness and delight—svaha! abām | 
You are helper, worshipful, Sx ПЕ Sate | 
blow over me, маен gaa- 
granting happiness and delight—svaha! sangi: 


(TS 4.7.12.3) al ат tet | 


Each time, the yajamāna renounces to Agni. 

These concludes the oblations for the newly installed fire. It is about 1:30 
p.m. on the 9th ritual day, on which day numerous other ceremonies remain 
to be performed. 


578 


THE SOMA HALL 


Ninth Day: April 21, 1975 
EPISODE 23 
Setting Up of the Soma Hall and the Hall of Recitation; 
Construction of the Dhisnya Hearths 
(Havirdhanamandapakaranam; Sadahkaraņam; Dhisnyanirmanam) 


THE HAVIRDHANA OR Soma Hall and the sadas or Hall of Recitation 
have to be prepared (see Figure 19, page 262). These rites occur in all Soma 
celebrations. Two carts, prepared by the carpenter, are moved from the west- 
ern border of the mahāvedi and placed in the southern and northern parts 
of the havirdhāna. The Soma rites are performed under the southern cart; 
on the northern cart two large clay pots are kept: for water required for 
pressing Soma, and for pressed Soma. The two halls are prepared by the 
Sāmavedins and the adhvaryu. Holes are dug around their outlines, and also 
for the sacrificial pole at the center of the eastern border of the mahāvedi. 

At the center of the sadas, a hole is dug for the audumbari pole. This 
pole, with two-pronged top, is brought by the pratiprasthātā and erected in 
its hole with the prongs pointing east and west. Three Sāmaveda priests— 
udgātā, prastotā, and pratihartā—perform rites around it. After covering 
it with darbha grass and a cloth (vastra), a string made of darbha grass is 
wound 28 times around it, since 28 stutis or stotras will be chanted in the 
sadas (only one will be chanted outside the sadas, whence its name: bahis- 
pavamanastotra, “Outdoor Chant of the Clarified Soma”: Episode 25). When 
chanting these songs, the udgātā wears a ring of darbha grass (also called a 
stotra) consisting of two blades, around his finger. After each song, he inserts 
this stotra into the corresponding row of the string on the pole, so that “any- 
one can make out how many stutis have been chanted and how many remain 
to be chanted." In the Agnistoma Soma ritual, with twelve Soma sequences 
and stutis, the string of darbha grass is wound eleven times around the pole. 

The marjaliya and agnidhriya sheds are ritually made. Back in the havi- 
rdhana or Soma Hall, four uparava, or resounding holes, are dug to the east 
of the southern havirdhāna cart. These holes are joined together underground. 
Adhvaryu and yajamāna put their hands inside, ascertaining that they can 
touch each other. Sacrificial grass is put inside these holes and two wooden 
planks are placed over them and joined together. Bamboo pins are fixed in 
the ground so that the planks stay in position. The adhvaryu scatters soil 
and sacrificial grass around the planks and spreads a bullock skin over it. 

In the mean time, bricks for the dhisnya hearths have been placed inside 
the sadas. Each of these hearths, and also the agnidhriya and mārjālīya hearths, 
are square, with a side of one paficami or aratni (see pages 195—196). Each 
consists of one layer of bricks. First comes the hearth of the agnidhriya, 
which consists of nine square bricks, placed around the vainkannippara stone 
(or pršnir aman), put there during the Carrying Forth of Agni (Episode 20, 
page 552), see Figure 41. The adhvaryu consecrates brick no. 1 with: 


579 


PLATE 93 


PLATE 94 


PLATE 92 


PART IL THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


The Yajamāna renounces to “Love Gandharva, nymphs’ thoughts.” 

The cart is thrown into the fire after its pipe has been removed. Then 
there are three Light (ruc) oblations of butter, recited with: 
ot эй quud sat 
feaararatea «Ва: | 
ar жад rā 
TA AZT estet U 
ar at ат: egt «dt 
хайч ат ēd: | 
sext чайн: att 
TĀ A TT чача SUE te 
GEI EC 
SAX UAT AST | 

(TS 5.7.6.3) ч qug 
At Sf war «чк emat 
At each svāhā, the yajamāna renounces to Agni. 

Finally, the adhvaryu makes three butter oblations from the palms of 
his hands, taking the butter from a dish (catti). These are called Wind’s 
Names (vatanamani, cf. the oblations of the beginning of Episode 19: page 
544). The mantras are: 


Your flames, Agni, rising in the sun, 
envelop heaven with rays, 

with all these bring us to light, to man—svaha! 
Your flames in the sun, o gods, 

flames in cattle and horses, 

with these, Indra and Agni, 

give us light, Brhaspati—svaha ! 

Give light to our brahmins, 

place light in our chieftains, 

light in tribesmen and servants, 

with your flames give me light—svaha! 


emis «ier 


You are the ocean, full of mist, = Ў 
atkala: ечат; 


yielding moisture, blow over me, 
granting happiness and delight—svāhā! wat at efi «et u 
d are of the Maruts, the Marut troop, maiis agit 10: 
ow over me REN 
4 А meee SEAIHADI- 
granting happiness and delight—svaha! ЧЕНЕ 


boon 1 
You are helper, worshipful, aft at AE Sel à 
blow over me, emp den 


granting happiness and delight—svaha! ASELL G 
(TS 4.7.12.3i) sf al яп eet 11 


Each time, the yajamāna renounces to Agni. 

These concludes the oblations for the newly installed fire. Itis about 1:30 
p.m. on the 9th ritual day, on which day numerous other ceremonies remain 
to be performed. 


578 


THE SOMA HALL 


Ninth Day: April 21, 1975 
EPISODE 23 
Setting Up of the Soma Hall and the Hall of Recitation; 
Construction of the Dhisnya Hearths 
(Havirdhanamandapakaranam ; Sadahkaranam; Dhisnyanirmanam) 


THE HAVIRDHANA OR Soma Hall and the sadas or Hall of Recitation 
have to be prepared (see Figure 19, page 262). These rites occur in all Soma 
celebrations. Two carts, prepared by the carpenter, are moved from the west- 
ern border of the mahāvedi and placed in the southern and northern parts 
of the havirdhana. The Soma rites are performed under the southern cart; 
on the northern cart two large clay pots are kept: for water required for 
pressing Soma, and for pressed Soma. The two halls are prepared by the 
Sāmavedins and the adhvaryu. Holes are dug around their outlines, and also 
for the sacrificial pole at the center of the eastern border of the mahāvedi. 

At the center of the sadas, a hole is dug for the audumbari pole. This 
pole, with two-pronged top, is brought by the pratiprasthātā and erected in 
its hole with the prongs pointing east and west. Three Sāmaveda priests— 
udgātā, prastotā, and pratiharta—perform rites around it. After covering 
it with darbha grass and a cloth (vastra), a string made of darbha grass is 
wound 28 times around it, since 28 stutis or stotras will be chanted in the 
sadas (only one will be chanted outside the sadas, whence its name: bahis- 
pavamanastotra, “Outdoor Chant of the Clarified бота”: Episode 25). When 
chanting these songs, the udgātā wears a ring of darbha grass (also called a 
stotra) consisting of two blades, around his finger. After each song, he inserts 
this stotra into the corresponding row of the string on the pole, so that “any- 
one can make out how many stutis have been chanted and how many remain 
to be chanted.” In the Agnistoma Soma ritual, with twelve Soma sequences 
and stutis, the string of darbha grass is wound eleven times around the pole. 

The marjaliya and agnidhriya sheds are ritually made. Back in the havi- 
rdhāna or Soma Hall, four uparava, or resounding holes, are dug to the east 
of the southern havirdhāna cart. These holes are joined together underground. 
Adhvaryu and yajamāna put their hands inside, ascertaining that they can 
touch each other. Sacrificial grass is put inside these holes and two wooden 
planks are placed over them and joined together. Bamboo pins are fixed in 
the ground so that the planks stay in position. The adhvaryu scatters soil 
and sacrificial grass around the planks and spreads a bullock skin over it. 

In the mean time, bricks for the dhisnya hearths have been placed inside 
thesadas. Each of these hearths, and also the āgnīdhrīya and mārjālīya hearths, 
are square, with a side of one paficami or aratni (see pages 195-196). Each 
consists of one layer of bricks. First comes the hearth of the āgnīdhrīya, 
which consists of nine square bricks, placed around the vainkannippara stone 
(or ргёпіг aman), put there during the Carrying Forth of Agni (Episode 20, 
page 552), see Figure 41. The adhvaryu consecrates brick no. 1 with: 


579 


PLATE 93 


PLATE 94 


PLATE 92 


The Yajamāna's View 


Through most of the ceremonies at the Agni altar, the customary 
place of the Yajamāna is south of the altar. He sits on his antelope 
skin, his fists closed, with the brahman to his right. From this place 
he looks north over the altar, the six tips of the southern wing right 
in front of him. 


580 


581 


PLATE 93 
Fixing the Audumbari Pillar 


“I surround you who procures brahman, 


ksatra, good offspring and increase of wealth!” 
(JSS 6:7.13-14) 


One (ordinary) prakrama south of the center of the sadas hall of 
recitation (see Figure 19), a pole has been erected that supports the 
roof. Against this, the udgātā, assisted by the adhvaryu and under 
the smile of Nellikat Akkitiripad, fixes the audumbari pole, around 
which a string of darbha grass will be wound 28 times, once for 
each of the stotras that will be chanted in the sadas. The udgata 
pours butter on the pole, and then three times puts earth around 
it, reciting the above mantra. 


582 


583 


PLATE 94 
Preparing the Uparava Resounding Holes 


“T bestrew those that slay the demons 
that slay the secret charms 


that belong to Visnu." 
(TS 1.3.2.2k) 


Four uparava resounding holes are dug in front of the axle of the 
southern Soma cart in the havirdhana or Soma Hall. They are 
joined with each other under the ground. The adhvaryu puts sacri- 
ficial grass inside the holes. Later they will be covered with a plank 
and a bullock skin, and the Soma stalks will be pounded on top of 
these. 


ЖЕ 


584 


585 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


In rival invocations let radiance be mine, Agni, Haat aši frgātdeg, 
we will kindle you and nourish our body. = NEM 
Case ad сағҹічгечча Wu i 
Let the four directions bow for me. Giu c d 
на uat хітае 


With you as overseer may we win battles! ү ый: 
(TS 4.7.14.1a) RANSA ччат ан! 


Figure 41—Agnidhriya Hearth 


He consecrates the remaining bricks with the Space-Filler mantras (lokampr- 
na: TS 4.2.4.4n, page 341). 

The six dhisnya hearths in the sadas are constructed in a row from south 
to north. The dhisnya of the hota is on the east-west line (prsthyā), that of 
the maitrāvaruņa is to its south, and the others to its north, from south to 
north in the order: brāhmaņācchamsin, potā, nestā, and acchāvāka. See 
Figure 42. The dhisnya of the hota is constructed first. It consists of twelve 
bricks, as in Figure 43. The adhvaryu consecrates brick no. 1 with: 


Let all the gods be at my invocation, aa eat fie end ad 

the Maruts with Indra, Visņu, and Agni. gazlara} gadi б: | 
May the wide sky be my guardian, areae rada 

may the wind blow for my desire! ч T эи энд i 


(TS 4.7.14.1b) 


and the remaining bricks with the Space-Filler mantras. 

The remaining five dhisnya hearths consist each of eight bricks, in the 
same configuration. See Figure 44. Brick no. 1 of the dhisnya of the maitrā- 
varuņa is consecrated with: 


als 


N * 
May the gods offer me riches, ala Зат яїатаг Arat 


CN ы 


for me prayers and divine invocations. FETA aA canta | 


586 


THE HALL OF RECITATION 


Divine invokers of old shall gain for us, EC arate attara чї- 
let our bodies be intact, rich in heroes! < г ara чаі я: \ 
(TS 4.7.14.1c) à z 


and the remaining bricks with Space-Filler mantras. Brick no. 1 of the dhisnya 
of the brahmanacchamsin is consecrated with: 


Let them offer for me, which offerings are mine, чя asra ua att gt- 


the intent of my mind be fulfilled. ssdf gar 949 9 Ae | 
Let me commit no evil deed, сф ar б at тача 
let all the gods befriend me! qi LO PE CE пе S 
(S47 pro K S 
N 


\ 


Acchavaka |_| 
Nes?8 |_| 


Porta [| 


Brüáhmanpücchamsi L ] 


n | Hota [] ^£ 
A udumbari, @ 
Maitrüávaruna-* 


S 


Figure 42—The Dhisnya Hearths 
587 


PART II THE 1965 PERFORMANCE 


Figure 44—Dhisnya Hearths of Maitrāvaruņa, Brahmandcchamsin, 
Potā, Nesta and Acchavaka 


and the remaining bricks with Space-Filler mantras. Brick no. 1 of the 
Dhisnya of the potā is consecrated with: 


Six divine spaces, make room for us, зай: чщаїве ut: Hoe 

all gods be heroes here. RA zara gg «хая, 1 

Let T ba, our children e E пар ячат at 98 

nor suc о our enemies, Kin ! FEN = 
Pee реше al tara faa ata атяя п 


(TS 4.7.14.2е) 


and the remaining bricks with Space-Filler mantras. Brick no. 1 of the dhi- 
snya of the nesta is consecrated with: 


588 


THE HALL OF RECITATION 


Agni, avert anger ahead of us, чнага afte, queat- 
ease oc Dn us all around. -gge TII: чїй чт чача 
et your enemies be turned away, seil ag fuga: gaa- 


their plans be crushed by your foresight! 


Del Ae Я ` KI 
(TS 4.7.14.3f) SE Agar f aaa || 


and the remaining bricks with Space-Filler mantras. Brick no. 1 of the 
dhisnya of the acchāvāka is consecrated with: 


Creators’ creator, lord of the world, E tavit YATRA чєчїй- 
god Savitr overcoming hostility. Зах атйатеябтитГачтёң i 
Let both Ašvins and Brhaspati protect this ritual, та qgar ggf- 
gods guard the ritual patron from misfortune! Yan чїга TAA єлїгї 


(TS 4.7.14.3g) 


and the remaining bricks with Space-Filler mantras. 

The hearth of the marjaliya, where the Soma vessels and goblets will 
be cleaned, is constructed last. It consists of six bricks. See Figure 45. The 
adhvaryu consecrates its first brick with: 


ПШ el 5 
Let the broad bull be our refuge, rich in food, saaa) dt RIET: та ALA- 


much invoked in this invocation. «бия, cd gega: Чеш! 

You of bay steeds, protect our children, a a: Fa gāu CU 

don’t harm, don’t abandon us! m al afr ar qd ura 
(TS 4.7.14.3h) 


and the remaining bricks with Space-Filler mantras. 
After the construction and consecration of the hearths and two more 
Agnistoma rites, yajamāna and brahman sit south of the mahāvedi. The 


Figure 45—Marjaliya Hearth 
589 


PLATE 95 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


adhvaryu goes a little further east with a bundle of sacrificial grass, faces east 
and recites: 


pd i ) 
acus iue as wool dd 
í жойи car «тл 


a good seat for the gods! en 
(BSS 6.30:194.9-10; cf. TS 1.1.11.1h) 19 tas | 


Darbha grass is spread all over the mahāvedi, especially thick inside the 
havirdhāna and sadas halls, and on the āstāva area where the first stuti 
will be sung. 


Third and Ninth Day: April 21, 1975 


EPISODE 24 
Carrying Forth of Agni and Soma; Animal Sacrifice for Agni and Soma; 
Offerings for the Divine Instigators; Proclamation of the Yajamāna 
(Agnīsomapraņayanam; Agnisomiyapasu; Devasuvām Havimsi) 


THE CEREMONIES OF the ninth ritual day continue with the carrying forth 
of Agni and Soma from the Old Hall to the mahāvedi. During Agnipraņa- 
yana (Episode 20), Agni was carried to the new offering altar, and installed 
there. During the Agnīsomapraņayana he is connected with Soma and in- 
stalled on the new hearth of the āgnīdhrīya. Also, Agnisomapranayana is 
more of a family affair than Agnipranayana. Before the procession begins, 
the adhvaryu, yajamāna, the yajamana’s wife, and his children come to the 
Old Hall. The adhvaryu sits down in front of the new domestic altar, facing 
east. A long cloth is used to tie a turban around his head and to cover the 
yajamāna and his wife, who sit behind him. The hota sits to their right 
(south). All get up and leave the Old Hall in procession: the brahman in front 
with Soma on his head, the brāhmaņācchamsin always ready to take over the 
Soma, the unnetā with the droņakalaša and other vessels, a helper with ladles 
of clarified butter for the Agnisomiya animal sacrifice, the adhvaryu with the 
fire, the yajamāna, and his wife. Hota and prastotā join them with recitation 
and chant (of “Agni’s Will," page 492). The fire is installed on the āgnīdhrīya 
hearth. King Soma is deposited on the southern havirdhāna cart, and the 
ladles are put near the tail of the bird altar. 

For the sacrificial pole to be erected, it has to be felled first. This rite 
should have taken place on the third ritual day, the day that was lost. Most 
of the rites of the third ritual day were combined with those of the fourth 
(Episodes 8 through 12). The rites relating to the sacrificial pole have remain- 
ed unperformed until the ninth day, but now they are required. First the bil- 
ba tree is symbolically felled, a libation made on the stump, the branches cut 
off symbolically, and a pole measured of 9 aratnis, excluding the span of a 


590 


THE SACRIFICIAL POLE 


hand at the bottom and a special piece, the casāla, at the top (cf. above 
page 306). 

The carpenter has to make the sacrificial pole octagonal, and cut off its 
base. However, not being a brahmin, he cannot enter the ritual enclosure. 
Actually, he had already made the octagonal shape before the enclosure was 
consecrated (above page 207). So he merely waits for the pole to be carried 
outside the enclosure by brahmin helpers. There he symbolically makes 
the pole octagonal, and cuts off the base, actually ; from the base he will make 
a goblet, the šukra-pātram (see above page 215). After the carpenter has 
cut off the piece, the brahmin helpers carry the pole back into the sacred 
enclosure. 

The pole is erected in the hole that was previously dug—both acts be- 
longing to the ninth day. The helpers have difficulty getting it up. The rice 
cake, representing the Agnisomiya goat, is tied to the pole. All the other rites 
of the animal sacrifice are gone through. The dialogues of the isti, modified 
by the participation of the maitrāvaruņa priest (see above page 48) take 


М 


NE изат Prete ava: 
(AKTI SL M D RAAT ERA rr 


Figure 46—Position of the Priests During the Isti Ceremonies and 
Animal Sacrifices of the Agnicayana 


adhvaryu 
yajamāna 
brahman 
āgnīdhra 
hotā 

: maitrāvaruņa 


S mme 


591 


PLATE 96 


PLATE 95 
Arrival of Soma and Agni 


“Visnu, step wide, 
give us wide space to live in! 
Born in butter, drink the butter, 


lengthen the years of the ritual master 
(TS 1.3.4.1d) 


Soma and Agni are carried from the Old Hall to the Great Altar 
space by a procession consisting of the adhvaryu—who wears a 
turban wound from a long cloth that also covers the yajamāna 
and his wife—and several other priests. After arriving at the offer- 
ing altar, the adhvaryu makes a butter oblation into the fire. 


592 


593 


PLATE 96 | 
Erection of the Sacrificial Pole 


The sacrificial pole (уара) for the animal sacrifices is erected at the 
extreme east of the Great Altar Space. It has been there from the 
beginning, but had to be taken down for the carpenter to cut off a 
piece of its base. This is done outside the ritual enclosure, which 
the carpenter, a nonbrahmin, cannot enter. Afterwards brahmins 
carry the pole back, and erect it again. 


594 


595 


PART IL THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


place. The adhvaryu stands northwest of the Agni altar, the agnidh on the 
utkara near his āgnīdhrīya shed, hota and maitrāvaruņa in the sadas in front 
of their respective hearths. In all subsequent isti rites, the priests will occupy 
these positions. See Figure 46 on page 591. 

The subrahmanya priest, who has been chanting his Subrahmanya 
north of the altar each morning and afternoon since the purchase of Soma 
(Episode 8), chants it now adding the ancestors and descendants of the 
yajamāna: 

Aep ач |, 


Nilakantha Sarma sacrifices, X 
асч: Ч ача | 


The son of Vallabha Sarma sacrifices, 


The grandson of Vasudeva Šarmā sacrifices, агат: qr Mer | 
The descendant of Vallabha Sarma sacrifices, ATT AIT AAT | 
The father, grandfather, great-grandfather тєн frat fag: 
of those that will be born sacrifice. пае ял | 


Toward the end of the Agnisomiya animal sacrifice some Agnicayana 
rites are inserted. First come eight oblations generally called Offerings for 
the Divine Instigators (devasuvām havimsi). The Nambudiris and Baudha- 
yana’s Dvaidha and Karmānta Sūtras call them Istis for Various Seeds 
(nanabijesti). The agnidh prepares them on the domestic altar: 


(1) black rice (krsnavrihi; Malayalam: karuttanellu); 

(2) millet (Syamaka; Malayalam: kavutta) 

(3) swift rice (āšuvrihi; Malayalam: navaranella); 

(4) gavidhuka (Malayalam: celanni); 

(5) wild rice (nivara; Malayalam: varinelli); 

(6) large rice (mahavrihi; Malayalam: valiyanellu [kuttatam)); 
(7) àmba (Malayalam: marutandi); 

(8) barley (yava: Malayalam: yavam). 


The rites are prescribed in the Taittiriya Samhita: 


I. To Agni, lord of the house, ‚ wb qedad gent- 
he offers a cake of black rice -nedas fadufe 
on eight potsherds. Sonat diim, 


II. То Soma, lord of the forest, 
an oblation of millet. 

III. То Savitr, of true instigation, 
a cake of swift rice 
on twelve potsherds. 


diua agegdā атат чең! 
aR? wena geni 
AITAS ATT eflérous | 
IV. To Rudra, lord of cattle, > axd à arf 99а 
an oblation of gavīdhukā grain. > = 


V. То Brhaspati, lord of speech, gadi ятчетай 


an oblation of wild rice. AI 
TA AEH | 
VI. To Indra, the noblest, p katas 
gala SEPT 


596 


THE DIVINE INSTIGATORS AND PROCLAMATION OF THE YAJAMANA 


a cake of large rice 

on eleven potsherds. 
VII. To Mitra, truthful, 

an oblation of Amba grain. 
VIII. To Varuna, master of law, 

an oblation of barley. 
(TS 1.8.10.1a) 


RRC CORSE 
FETAL | 
fart «сатат. 
SSAA reu 1 
ят чача 
чча TE | 


The yajamāna renounces, respectively, to Agni, lord of the house; Soma, 


lord of the forest; Savitr, of true instigation; etc. 


The adhvaryu goes to the south of the altar, takes the yajamāna by the 


hand, and recites: 


b. May Savitr of instigations instigate you, 
Agni of lords of the house, 
Soma of lords of the forest, 
Rudra of cattle, Brhaspati of speech, 
Indra of nobles, Mitra of truth, 
Varuna of masters of law! 

c. Gods that instigate gods, | 
instigate him, 
descendant of Vallabha Sarma, 
to freedom from enemies, 
great lordship, great mastery, 
great rule over people! 

(TS 1.8.10.1b-c) 


The adhvaryu addresses all who are present: 


This is your Kašyapa king! 
(BSS 10.56:58.16; cf. TS 1.8.10.1d!) 


Өрт ta! SHY gaat- 


a guatgeapm- 
haa gat 
nee gart aga miaa 
WES HAUSA | 


тч d: BUY TTT 1 


The name Kašyapa is used because Kašyapa is the yajamana's gotra, or 


patrilinear clan. All those who are present reply: 


Soma is the king of us brahmins! 
(TS 1.8.10.142) 


The yajamāna recites: 


Earth! Sky! Heaven! 
e. This kingdom has been truly conferred, 
Varuna has diffused his own body, 
we have become obedient to pure Mitra, 
we have magnified the name of cosmic order! 


He wipes his face and continues: 


397 


GAS этатптат TT I 


apis gm 

ufa етет STAT 
eat 999 ausit чб 
ZA sen M- 
З Aga KARI AWA | 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


аз ятат AWHARTAT, 

fa fra ird fratt- 
agga auferat Kr 

ed frat dat 9 sU | 


f. They have all become hosts of Varuna. 
Mitra in his course has overcome hostility. 
The pious follow cosmic order, 

Trita has taken our old age! 


and wipes his face again. 
The yajamāna then takes three Visnu strides to the east, reciting: 


You are the stepping of Visnu, иту: ats 1 
you are the step of Visnu, B ЕТЕ 
you are the stride of Visnu! Vis ! 


(TS 1.8.10.3g) беча 


After this, the Agnisomiya animal sacrifice is completed with the offering for 
Agni Svistakrt. 

The remaining ceremonies are direct preparations for the next day, 
which is the pressing day (sutyāha). The pratiprasthata prepares milk, curds, 
and parched rice, powdered and not powdered. He also prepares darbha 
grass and fire sticks for the next day and for the isti for maitravaruna on the 
last day. The adhvaryu and yajamāna take the Soma vessels and implements 
and put them in their places in the havirdhāna, mārjālīya, and agnidhriya 
a With these activities the ceremonies of the ninth ritual day are com- 
pleted. 


Tenth Day: April 22, 1975 


EPISODE 25 
Continuation of the Soma Ritual; Outdoor Chant for the Purified Soma 
(Bahişpavamānastuti) — ' 


So FAR WE have met with relatively quiet days as well as very busy, even 
frantic days (such as the first, fourth, and ninth ritual days). From now on 
we are caught in a whirlpool of rites, often overlapping, which continue for 
three days and two nights through the twelfth and last day. Most of these 
rites belong to the Soma ritual and will be described only summarily. How- 
ever, specific Agnicayana rites occur along with the others, not to mention 
the fact that the bird-shaped Agnicayana altar continues to function as 
offering altar, and its fire as the main receptacle for the oblations. In the re- 
maining portions of the present description, Agnicayana rites will be singled 
out. 

For the Soma ceremonies the reader is once again referred to the work 
of Caland and Henry, which provides the relevant details. The material is 
also accessible in the Srautako$a. However, these works are confined to the 
prototype of Soma ritual, i.e., the Agnistoma. In the following pages atten- 
tion will therefore be paid to special features of the Atiratra, which modify 


598 


THE SOMA—PRESSING DAY 


or go beyond the Agnistoma. These features are mostly related to the 17 
Soma sequences of the Atiratra, which are added to the 12 Soma sequences 
of the Agnistoma (see above pages 49, 54). The differences, however, are 
not confined to these additions. Several of the first 12 stutis and Sastras 
of the Atiratra are different, or partly different, from the 12 stutis and Sastras 
of the Agnistoma. Differences in the stutis induce differences in the Sastras, 
which often begin with the same verses upon which the immediately preced- 
ing stutis were based. In sum, the amount of material from Rgveda and Sa- 
maveda incorporated in the Atiratra, which is not found in the Agnistoma, 
is enormous. I shall mention all relevant hymns, verses, chants, and songs. 
I shall translate only the sources (generally rks) from which the stutis are 
constructed, which are also the beginning verses of the accompanying Sastra. 
With the exception of the first, I shall not translate the remaining parts of 
the &astras, or $astras textually different from the preceding stutis. I shall 
concentrate on what is ritually significant, viz., the structure of the chants 
and recitations. This structure is generally arrived at on formal grounds, not 
on account of meaning. Many verses are included, for example, because of 
their meters or because they contain particular words or expressions. In some 
of the recitations (like the Soda$i Sastra) the entire composition is arrived 
at on formal grounds and a translation of the result would be meaningless. 
While the structure in such cases can be regarded as significant, in terms of 
meaning it makes no sense. 

The activities of the tenth day, the sutya or Soma-pressing day, start 
on April 22 at about 2:30 A.M. Implements for the eleven animal sacrifices 
(Episode 26) are prepared. When the ladles have been prepared, they are 
addressed by the adhvaryu: 


Sit on your dear seat [ш яш 
with your dear name! Ba ae «1 


(TS 1.1.11.2q°) 
The yajamana takes possession of the ladles with his usual mantras: 


Whatever, Agni, wed ий этет aged RAL- 
in my ritual is spoilt; emt apalna favit | 
whatever of butter, Visnu, Wd afta ачей йч. 


тау be spilt; kāši n ч 
with that I strike the enemy, die-hard, aa carer freer SIA N 


I place him in the lap of destruction! 
(TS 1.6.2.1e) 


An Agnicayana rite follows: Agni is “yoked” with three mantras, which the 
adhvaryu recites while he touches the five layers from top to bottom (as he 
did after the completion of the altar, above page 543, and will do again, be- 
low page 654): 


599 


PART П THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


a. I yoke Agni with glory, with butter, 
divine bird strong with power; 
may we fly the expanse of the ruddy one, 
mounting heaven beyond the highest vault! 
b. Your wings, bird, are unaging, 
you strike demons with them, Agni, 
let us fly with them 
to the world of the virtuous, 
where the first born seers live! ч XE 
c. You are piled, ocean-born drop, UD SAM 
clever and wise griffon, Rf agang- 
gold-winged bird, active and impressive, det: zip "aurai | 
who has sat in its place, firm! тача: amet gg- 
(TS 4.7.13.1а-) Agram] ga sm бүтө: N 


эйи даба тает get 
ач gut чает gera 
ая яй daa maed 99 
spat wat AR em TAA N 
gat 3 чапач ча 
FAS «йч ЕНИ 1 
«edt quu gud Sls 


The adhvaryu calls the yajamāna, as he does on all important occasions: 
Come yajamāna! uff азат 1 


Soma is taken off the southern havirdhāna cart and placed under it, the pres- 
sing stones are arranged upon the bullock skin on top of the planks, and the 
hotā begins to recite the Morning Litany (prātaranuvāka). This recitaton 
lasts for about an hour, and consists, among Kausitakins, of 360 Rgvedic 
verses, in which Dawn (usas) plays an important part (cf. SSS 6.2; translation 
in Caland-Henry 2.428-459): 


КУ 10.30.12 (3х) = 3 161 
1.74.1-9 = 9 КУ 4.52.1-7 ==; T, 
1.1.1-9 = 9 1.49.1-4 — 4 
6.16.15-27 = 13 7.77.1-6 = 6 
2.5.1-8 = 8 7.78.1-5 = 5 
4.7.2-11 = 10 7.79.1-5 = 5 
4.2.1-20 — 20 7.80.1-3 = 3 
7.12.1-3 = 3 7.81.1-6 — 6 

. 7.16.1-12 — 12 1.48.1-16 = 16 
3.16.1-6 = 6 1.92.13-15 = 3 
3.10.1-9 = 49 1.92.1-4 = 4 
8.23.1-30 — 30 5.79.1-10 = 10 
1.150.1-3 = 3 1.3.1-3 = КЗ 
1.140.1—7 = 7 1.22.1-4 = 4 
5.11.1-6 = 6 1.30.17-19 = 3 
5.6.1-10 = 10 8.85.1-9 = 9 
1.30.20-22 = 8.8.1-23 = 23 

161 272 


600 


MORNING LITANY 


272 328 

RV 5.74.1-10 = 10 RV 1.47.5 Sed 
5.76.1-5 = 5 8.26.1-5 = 5 
5.77.1-5 = 5 1.34.1-12 = 12 
1.116.1-25 = 25 10.41.1-3 = 3 
7.73.1-5 = 5 5.75.1-8 = 8 
7.74.1-6 = 6 5.75.9 (3 х) = 3 

328 360 


Soma vessels, cups, and goblets are arranged. The adhvaryu, accom- 
panied by yajamāna's wife and nesta, brings ekadhana waters in five pots (in 
the Agnistoma there are three). These waters will be used for pressing Soma. 
The adhvaryu offers a cup with curds (dadhigraha) and, as first Soma cup, 
the upāmšu cup, for which six Soma stalks have been pressed.! Assisted by 
pratiprasthātā, agnidh, and nesta, the adhvaryu presses a fair amount of 
Soma by pounding the stalks on the plank with the pressing stones. 

The chanters, udgātā, prastotā, and pratihartā, enter the havirdhāna or 
Soma Hall, touch the havirdhāna carts, and sit down. The udgātā chants: 


namah pitrbhyah parvasadbhyo · namas sākannisadbhyah | уийје 
vacam Satapadim gaye sahasravartanim gayatra traistubham jagat | 


višvā rūpāņi sambhrtam | devā okamsi cakrire // 
(JA 60.1-2) 


immediately followed by the Vi$varüpa chant, which is based upon it: 


namah pitrbhyah pürvasadbhyom | namas sakannisadbhaya уийје 
vacam sata hm bhà o và | yüfije vācām šatapadom | gaye sahasravar- 
tanim gayatran trayistubha hm bha о va | gāyatran traistubhan 


jagom | višvā rūpāņi sambhartan deva окат sayica hm bha o va || 
(Ūsāņi = RG 1.1; cf. JB 1.74; JSS 8) 


Homage to the ancestors, sitting in front, 
homage to those who sit together. 

I harness the voice of ahundred verse, 

I sing in a thousand turns, 

with meters gāyatrī, tristubh, jagati. 

All the assembled forms . 

the gods have taken up as their abodes. 


The udgātā wipes the droņakalaśa vessel and places it over the uparava 
holes. The adhvaryu offers the antaryāma cup and filters Soma through a 


1 The Nambudiris do not offer the optional adabhya and amšu cups. 


601 


PLATE 105 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


cloth into the various goblets, cups, and vessels. Several Soma cups are 
offered to pairs of deities (dvidevatya). 

The first stuti chant is about to begin. Starting from the uparava holes 
in the Soma Hall, adhvaryu, the three chanters (prastota, udgātā, pratihartā), 
yajamāna, brahman, and pratiprasthātā crawl on the altar, in serpentine 
movement and holding each other's shoulders, “аѕ hunters approach their 
prey." Each makes an oblation into the fire, but the Samavedins and the 
brahman make two. They crawl off the altar and move toward the astava 
spot, northwest of the altar. Three cloths have been placed on the ground 
for the chanters to sit on. They sit down, the prastota facing west, the udgatà 
north, and the pratihartà south. There they sing the Outdoor Chant for the 
Purified Soma (Bahispavamanastotra). This chant (stotra or stuti) consists 
of nine stotriyās. It is the first of the twenty-nine chants that characterize the 
Atirātra. 

A stotriyā is a unit of chant consisting of verse set to a melody (sāman). 
The verses are generally rks from the Rgveda. They are listed in the Jai- 
minīya Ārcikā. The melodies (with certain verses set to them) are listed in 
the Grāmageyagāna or Grāmegeyagāna (GG: “songs to be sung in the vil- 
lage") and Āraņyakagāna or Araņyegeyagāna (AG: “forest songs" or “songs 
to be sung in the forest”). Many of these chants are used in the Agnicayana, 
as we have seen. The ritual stotra or stuti chants, however, which are now 
beginning, are generally listed in the Ūhagāna (UG) or in the Rahasya (or: 
Ūhya)-gāna (RG; "secret songs", which the Nambudiris call: Usani). What 
characterizes these last two collections is that each three chants sung to the 
same melody are written out in full. 

In some cases, the correspondance between rks (or other underlying 
verses) and sāmans is complicated. A complex pattern, which is common, 
results when two rks are turned into three sāmans by a process of overlap- 
ping. Illustrations will follow. In other cases, the correspondance is simple: 
one rk is turned into one stotriyā. This applies to the Outdoor Chant of the 
Purified Soma. 

Like all sāmans, each stotriyā consists of five parts or portions (bhakti): 
prastava (“prelude”), udgitha ("chant"), pratihāra ("response") upadrava 
(“accessory”), and nidhana (*tail" or "finale”). In general, each of these 
five parts should be sung in one breath. Sometimes breathing is allowed with- 
in one portion. This is indicated in the manuscripts by a hyphen (-") and 
I shall indicate it by an oblique stroke (**/”). In the ritual chants, the text is 
generally preserved only in the prastāva. In the other four, it is fragmented 
and/or hidden by syllables, which is called “‘unexpressed chant" (aniru- 
ktagāna). Asa rule, the prastāva is chanted by the prastotā, the udgitha by the 
udgātā, the pratihara by the pratihartā, the upadrava again by the udgātā, 
and the nidhana by all three. Sometimes there is an “intermediate finale" 
(antarnidhana) following the udgitha and sung by the trio. There are other 


602 


OUTDOOR CHANT FOR THE PURIFIED SOMA 


variations. In singing these portions, the chanters often overlap. For example 
the udgitha starts almost always before the prastāva is over. 

The Outdoor Chant is sung in accordance with the melody of the gaya- 
tra sāman. The gāyatra melody is used in all the stutis of the morning pres- 
sing (nos. 1-5), in the first stuti of the midday pressing (no. 6), and in the 
first stuti of the third pressing (no. 11). It does not occur elsewhere in the 
Atirātra. In the gāyatra sāman, the prastāva contains the beginning words 
of the underlying text, and the udgitha is always: 

6 và 0 và 0 và hm bhà o va. 

This is chanted by the udgātā. The partiharta sings Am together with the ud- 
gata, breathes in, and chants vak while he holds his breath (and therefore 
almost inaudibly). Some of the other priests should also chant o together 
with the udgātā: yajamāna and brahman always; maitrāvaruņa, brahmaņā- 
cchamsin, and acchāvāka, whenever they do not recite the following $astra ; 
moreover, the acchavaka should abstain when the hota recites the succeeding 
$astra. 

At the beginning of each stuti, the three chanters sing “о hm.” As we 
have seen, the Outdoor Chant of the Purified Soma consists of nine stotriyās. 
These differ only with respect to the prastava, the remainder being chanted 
in the gāyatra manner, which has just been described. (There is one minor 
exception, which occurs in the first stotriya: its udgitha does not include 
hm bhā.) For each stotriyā, it is therefore sufficient to list the prastava, the 
source in the Jaiminiya Arcika (JA)!, and the (textual) source in the Rgveda: 


I. pavasva vaco agriyom (JA 72.1; RV 9.62.25) 
П. ат samudriya apom (JA 72.2; RV 9.62.26) 
ПІ. tubhyam ima bhuvanā kavom (ЈА 72.3; RV 9.62.27) 
IV. pavasvendo vrsa sutom (JA 72.4; RV 9.61.28) 
V. yasya te sakhye vayom (JA 72.5; RV 9.61.29) 
VI. ya te bhimanyayudhom (JA 72.6; RV 9.61.30) 
VII. pavamanasya te kavom (JA 60.9; RV 9.66.10) 
VIII. accha košam madhušcutūm (JA 60.10; RV 9.66.11) 
IX. accha samudram indavom (JA 60.11; RV 9.66.12) 


The prastāva always ends in -dm. The text differs slightly from the Rgvedic 
source. This Outdoor Chant of the Atiratra differs from the Outdoor Chant 
of the Agnistoma in the first six stotriyas; the last three are the same. For a 
general comparison of the stutis of the Atiratra and the corresponding stutis 
of the Agnistoma, the reader may compare those that are published in this 


1 [use the Nambudiri system of reference. The mantras can be found in Caland's edition 


(1907) without difficulty. Note the long 6 which is not marked in Sanskrit (where o 
is always long), but which occurs in the manuscripts of the J aiminiya Samaveda. 


603 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


volume with the Agnistoma stutis published in Staal 1968 (where the prac- 
tice of gāyatra singing, however, is described incorrectly). 

During the udgitha of the middle, i.e., fifth stotriyā, the prastota signals 
to the adhvaryu: UN аети: | 


This is the middle! х 
(JSS 11, ed. Gaastra, page 13, lines 15-16) 


In later chants, similar indications will be given (e.g., “This is the last") 
The underlying verses of the Outdoor Chant are: 


As leader of speech, Soma, 
purify thyself with thy bright aids 
to attain all poetic powers. 
As leader of speech, arouse the sea waters 
and purify thyself, 
thou who dost stir everything. 
Poet, these creations submit to thee 
and to thy greatness, o Soma. 
The rivers flow for thee. 
(RV 9.62.25-27) 


Purify thyself, drop, now that thou the bull art 
pressed. 
Make us glorious among the folk. 
Smash away all enemies. 
Under thy comradeship, under thy highest majesty, 
may we overwhelm those who wish to do battle. 
Protect us from the corn of each person 
with thy fearsome weapons 
which are sharp for destruction. 
(RV 9.61.28-30) 


Poet and winner, as thou purifiest thyself, 

thy discharges have been released 

like racehorses striving after fame. 

They have been released into the woolen sieve, 


to flow towards the bucket which drips with sweetness. 


The poems (of the priests) have bellowed (at them). 
Like milk cows to their stall, 
the drops have come to the sea, 
to the homestead of truth. 
(RV 9.66.10~12) 


qa ardt яба: 
а Раат аР: à 
за аят rent 
stat ard 599, | 
чача fais n 
JARA Baal wu 
alent aia аб | 
азада {а=ча: i 
qdededt qul ga: 
«чї al ачай зга | 
fon этч {ЧЇ afč u 
wed а аә at 
чает ga SUA | 
Aaa TARA |I 
«t d freres 
{атат aa чай! 
vut аач at fira: Ц 
чачтче A Ba 
AIK ARA | 
зага я ATA: i 
ме Bt AYA 
wat att aÀ | 
saraaa da: n 
asai agafa- 
зей Tal a Eee: | 
waaa ӘТ il 


When the chant is over, the udgātā prompts the yajamana to say: 


You are a griffon! 
Your meter is gāyatri. 


604 


Sa тазша 


OUTDOOR CHANT FOR THE PURIFIED SOMA 


I hold you, transport me safely. ag cal TH 

May the essence of the chant «af ar ачтеп 
come to me. "t «au enu arq- 
United with Indra we conquer, тағ чатах 
we acquire offspring and food. чаа. nnf- 


I have accomplished, fully accomplished, UK 
with the chant fully accomplished! | ян SONUS 
(ISS 11:13.10-13) RIT «9199 | 


Yajamāna and adhvaryu recite the Stuti Milking (stutadoha, **milking 
of the chanted"), a recitation that occurs after each stuti: 


g. You are the chanted of the chanted, gari «тане. 
may the chanted milk strength for me, я начата {Етп 
may the chanted of the chanted соте to me! яі gari tad 99191 
i. With power may we conquer, - Sater 
VOM eI ao did fae EAU emat 
k. May my wish be fulfilled among the gods! gémafà semp. —— 
1. May Brahma splendor come to me! ur 4 anssi яп 
(TS 3.2.7.1g, 21-1) FAITE ASSMAN | 


After other mantras, some muttered inaudibly, the udgātā throws a clay 
dish, earlier contemplated by the singers, on the cātvāla pit, “sending water 
back to the ocean.” He takes the yajamāna to the northern boundary of the 
Great Altar Space. Standing next to him, the udgātā makes the yajamāna 
repeat, within the sacrificial enclosure: 


Don't cut (me) off . Al SAN 
from the celestial world! за: | 


and outside the enclosure: 


Nor from this world! MEAT | 
(158 11:14.3-5) 


After several other rites, the agnidh takes fire from his hearth and in- 
stalls it on the dhisnya hearths in the sadas, and on the hearth of the ma- 
rjaliya. All the required fires have now been installed. 


605 


PLATE 97 


PLATE 97 
Udgata’s Council to Yajamana 


After the Outdoor Chant for the Purified Soma (bahispavamāna- 
stuti) has been completed, the udgātā chanter takes the yajamana 
to the northern boundary of the Great Altar Space (mahāvedi). 
Both face east. The yajamāna has not been outside the sacrificial en- 
closure since his consecration on the first day. Now the udgata, 
standing next to him, makes him spread his legs, put his right foot 
down within the enclosure, and repeat: 


Don’t cut (me) off 
from the celestial world! 


Then he makes him put his left foot outside the enclosure, and 
repeat: 


Nor from this world! 
(ISS 11:14.3-5) 


Photo A. Parpola 


"d 


606 


607 


PLATES 98-100 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


Tenth Day: April 22, 1975 
EPISODE 26 


The Eleven Animal Sacrifices and the Rest of the Morning Pressing 
(Savanīyapašu; Prātahsavana) 


ELEVEN GOATS, REPRESENTED by packets of rice flour folded in banana 
leaves (see page 303 and Volume II, page 465), are offered to Agni, Saras- 
vati, Soma, Püsan, Brhaspati, the Vi$vedevas, Indra, the Maruts, Indra-Agni, 
Savitr, and Varuna. These rites, which take up a great deal of time, continue 
through several of the following ceremonies. While the Sāmavedins are chan- 
ting their stuti chants, or the Rgvedins reciting their šastra recitations in the 
sadas, elsewhere the adhvaryu and pratiprasthātā, together with the šamitā, 
“pacifiers,” тау be performing parts of these animal sacrifices. The Nam- 
budiris do object to recitations or chants being bungled or rushed through. 
They do not mind them going on simultaneously. 

Before the chants and recitations begin, the priests enter the sadas, Hall 
of Recitation, and take up their appointed places: from north to south, 
acchavaka (who will enter later), nesta, pota, brahmanacchamsin, hota, and 
maitravaruna sit in front of their dhisnya hearths, facing east; yajamāna and 
brahman sit a little further south, facing north, as usual; the sadasya is to 
their left, also facing north; pratiprasthātā and adhvaryu, when not other- 
wise engaged, sit to the north and south of the eastern entrance, facing west; 
and the three chanters sit west of the audumbari pole, the prastota facing 
west, the udgātā north, and the pratihartā south. The priests occupy these 
positions during the following 28 chants and 29 recitations: see Figure 47. 

It may be useful to recapitulate briefly the structure of the Atiratra. 
As we have seen, there are 29 Soma sequences. Each Soma sequence consists 
of a chant (stotra or, as the Nambudiris call it, stuti), a recitation (Sastra), 
Soma offerings to the deities, which are made into the sacrificial fire on the 
bird-shaped altar, and Soma drinking (somabhaksanam) by the yajamāna 
and his chief priests in the sadas. Each stuti is chanted by the three sāmave- 
dins, prastotā, udgātā, and pratiharta. Except for the Outdoor Chant, all 
chants take place in the sadas. The $astra recitations generally come in groups 
of four, recited successively by hota, maitrāvaruņa, brahmandcchamsin, 
and acchavaka, sitting in the sadas in front of their dhisnya with folded hands 
and facing east. Soma for the Soma offerings is poured by the adhvaryu, 
with mantras, from the round pātram goblets (this is called graha); or 
it is poured by helpers (parikarmi) without mantras from the camasa cups 
(see pages 214-215). Only the latter form of Soma offering is used during 
the nocturnal rounds of the Atirátra. 

Table 16 provides a list of the stuti chants and šastra recitations that 
characterize the Atirātra (and therefore includes those of Ukthya and $o- 
dašin. Only Agnistoma and Atirātra are referred to in the Jaiminiya 


608 


STUTIS AND SASTRAS 


S 


Figure 47—Position of Priests in the Sadas 


Samhita and are performed in the Nambudiri tradition: cf. above, page 
185). The Soma sequences continue through the tenth and eleventh ritual 
days and nights. The final $astra should end after sunrise on the twelfth day. 

Let us return to the tenth day. After sunrise, the animal sacrifice conti- 
nues with the offering of cakes (savanīya-purodāša). The Two-Deity (dvi- 
devatya) Soma cups are offered to pairs of deities, each during an isti cere- 


609 


PLATE 98A 
The Eleven Animal Sacrifices 


“This victim, lord of cattle, is for you today. 
I bind it, Agni, in the midst of righteous action. 
Approve it, and let us sacrifice with a good offering 
May this offering be welcome to the gods.” 

Ё (TS 3.1.4.lb) 


The eleven goats, represented by packets of rice flour folded in 
banana leaves, are in a row north of the sacrificial pole. The adhvaryu 
touches each of them with a twig of the plaksa tree, while Cheru- 
mukku Vaidikan looks on. 


PLATE 98B 
The Agnidh Brings Fire 


The agnīdh brings fire from the a@havaniya offering fire. Thrice he 
carries it round (paryagni) the altar, the sacrificial victims, the 
sacrificial pole (yüpa) and the cātvāla. 


Ea 


610 


611 


PLATE 99 
Helpers Carry Fire 


The pratiprasthātā and ten helpers carry fire in dishes from the old 
domestic fire via the Mārjalīya shed to the Agni altar. 


612 


613 


PLATE IOO 


During the Animal Sacrifices 
The fire dishes have been placed on the northern wing of the 
Agni altar, together with large kalam vessels that will be used for 
cooking animal flesh. In the background, a row of helpers each 


holding the vapā “omentum” with its specific fork (vapasrapani), 
ready for the vapahoma oblation. 


PA 


614 


615 


STUTIS AND SASTRAS OF THE ATIRATRA 


PART IL THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


STUTI (STOTRA) SASTRA RECITER DEITY 
Morning Pressing 
1 outdoor first ājya šastra hotā Indra-Agni 
pavamāna stuti 
2 first ājya stuti praūgašastra hotā Višvedevas 
3 second ājya stuti second ājya šastra maitrāvaruņa Mitrāvaru- 
ņa 
4 third ājya stuti third ājya šastra brāhmaņācchamsin Indra 
5 fourth ājya stuti fourth ājya $astra acchavaka Indra-Agni | 
Midday Pressing 
6 midday pavamāna marutvatiyaSastra hota Maruts 
stuti 
7 first prstha stuti first niskevalya Sastra hota Mahendra 
8 second prstha stuti second niskevalya $astra maitrāvaruņa ` Indra 
9 third prstha stuti third niskevalya astra  brāhmaņācchamsin Indra 
10 fourth prstha stuti fourth niskevalya Sastra acchavaka Indra 
Third Pressing 
11 ārbhava pavamāna  mahāvaišvadeva hotā Indra 
stuti astra | 
12 agnistoma stuti āgnimāruta šastra hotā Agni-Maruts 
End of Agnistoma 
13 first uktha stuti first uktha šastra maitrāvaruņa Indra- 
Varuņa 
14 second uktha stuti second uktha brāhmaņācchamsin Indra- m 
Ѕаѕіта Brhaspati 
15 third uktha stuti third uktha Sastra acchavaka Indra- 
Visnu 
16 soda$in {ий sodašin šastra hotā Indra Sodasi 
17 hotā M 
18 first first maitrāvaruņa 
19 nocturnal round nocturnal round brāhmaņācchamsin 
20 acchāvāka 
21 hotā | 
22 middle middle maitrāvaruņa | Indra 
23 nocturnal round nocturnal round brāhmaņāccharmsin l 
24 acchāvāka 
25 hotā 
26 last last maitrāvaruņa 
27 nocturnal round nocturnal round brāhmaņācchamsin 
28 acchāvāka ! 
29 stuti āšvina Sastra hota Ašvins 


End of Atirātra 


TABLE 16 
616 


SOMA DRINKING 


mony. The first to be offered is the cup for Indra and Vayu; it contains filtered 
Soma. While the adhvaryu does this, the pratiprasthata offers a libation of 
Soma mixed with milk and flour, drawn from the droņakalaša vessel. The 
residue of these two is mixed. The second dvidevatya libation, for Mitra and 
Varuna, and the third for the A$vins, are offered in the same manner, the 
Soma being mixed with milk and flour, respectively. The cups of the cup- 
bearers, excepting for the acchavaka, are filled with mixed Soma from the 
droņakalaša and pütabhrt vessels. Then $ukra and manthin cups are offered 
to Indra, simultaneously by the adhvaryu and pratiprasthata. The $ukra- 
pātram, made from the base of the sacrificial pole (above, page 591) is 
used. Remnants of these offerings are drunk by the priests, beginning with 
the hotà and adhvaryu. Excluded is the remnant in the manthin cup, which 
the pratiprasthata pours into the sacrificial fire. Pieces of gold are put in all 
the cups. 


In general, Soma drinking follows a set pattern. I shall describe some of PLATES 101-102 


its salient features as they occur in the first Soma sequence. When the hota 
is about to drink from the cup for Indra and Vayu, he addresses the 
adhvaryu: 


Adhvaryu invite me! weal SIERA 
The adhvaryu replies: 
(You are) invited! SIRT: 


The hota drinks and recites: 


We have drunk the Soma, we have become immortal, 
we have come to the light, we have found the gods. 
What can the enmity, what can the intrigue 
of any mortal do to us now, o immortal one? 
Now that thou hast been drunk, drop, become benefit 
to our heart, become very kind like a father to his 


aula «ача! nur 
ra sifera Eum, | 
б \ In. 
Pb quare preti 
fart ufq we m 


at al wa gg эп фа deat 


son, Soma. | Rita dia чай gir: | 
Thou of broad fame, become steadfast like a comrade ada aot seta ee: 

to his comrade. OUS i) үн zm 
Soma, extend our life for us to live on! a Id 9 idu 


(RV 8.48.3-4; cf. page. 113) 


During the first verse, the hotā touches his face; during the second, his heart. 
While the hota recites, the adhvaryu intones his Long Drink (dirghabhaksa): 


wae ass ааг 
araga qaita 
aaa gaarart- 

R adt giat 


a. Come, beverage, enter me for long life, 
for health, increase of wealth, 
splendor, good offspring. 

Come here, Vasu, preceded by wealth, 


617 


PLATE IOIA 


Pouring Soma 


At the morning pressing, before each of the $astra recitations, a 
helper pours the Soma liquid into the wooden camasa cups, Soma 
cups of the "cupbearers” (camasin) that are characterized by the 
shapes of their handles (see page 214). The cups are lined up from 
south to north on the body of the bird. The leftmost, southernmost 
cup, which is bigger than the others, is the hotā's cup (hotrcamasa). 


PLATE IOIB 
Offering Soma 


“Agni, take possession of the Soma—Vausat!" 


The cupbearers and their assistants make a Soma oblation into 
the offering fire. Adhvaryu and pratiprasthātā stand on the left, 
and the chief helper (parikarmi) on the extreme right. In front of 
the offering fire, the Pravargya implements continue to lie in the 
shape of a man. 


619 


PLATE 102 


Drinking Soma 


During the morning pressing, Soma cups called rtugraha, ‘“‘season’s 
offering,” are offered to the twelve months. The remnants are 
consumed by the priests in the sadas. The adhvaryu drinks Soma 
from a goblet. He leans over the hearth (dhisnya) of the acchavaka 
and faces the acchāvāka priest himself. Earlier, he addressed him: 


Acchavaka invite me! 
and the latter replied: 


(You are) invited! 


To the right of the acchāvāka sit the nesta (holding his head), pota, 
brāhmaņācchamsin, and (behind him) hota priests, in front of their 
respective hearths. To the right of the hota is the audumbari pole, 
and further to his right, bending forward, the maitravaruna. The ya- 
jamāna sits on the extreme left, dimly visible; the three Sāmavedins 
sit on the right, looking at the Soma drinking. 


620 


621 


PLATE 102 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


you are dear to my heart. frat A gālsfā | 
b. Let me hold you with the arms of the Ašvins. — раје amgvad s ATA | 
c. Clear sighted let me look at you, = um 
Soma, who inspects mankind. 
d. Gentle control, banner of rites, 


ЦЕ E y Uu 
gadā cup Зя Фа Taal эт «йч! 
Asti: gast 


let speech accept and enjoy Soma. angam Фа qu 

Let Aditi, gentle, propitious, пеят edateafdfreetzeasftril 
with head inviolable, E Ka ои 
as speech accept and enjoy Soma. rem чан 


uff агада атачае: 
заба al ай л ча 
KĀ eiu «тач 
Чаа n 

m at чта, бг Strait 
at й 6109 Raa at: | 


e. Come here, friend of men, 
healing and refreshing, 
come safely to me, tawny-colored one, 
for skill, strength, increase of wealth, 
for good heroes. 
f. Don’t frighten me, king, 
don’t pierce my heart with radiance, 
for vigor, life, and splendor. ait gammssģā adā n 
g. Of you, Soma, with the Vasus in your gang, адат ln ga ā 
mind reader of the morning pressing, afafid; manare 
with your gāyatrī meter, drunk by Indra, 3 d Pier 
drunk by Narāšamsa, drunk by the fathers, Ms sa PAIS 
aaasta (чәчә 


full of sweetness and invited, LI 
invited I partake of you! agaa sqgaedtugst wena i 


(TS 3.2.5.1a-2g) 


During the midday pressing, the Vasus (in g) are replaced by Rudras, “morn- 
ing" by “midday,” and gāyatrī by tristubh; during the third pressing, by 
the Adityas, “third,” and jagati meter, respectively. After this first round of 
Soma drinking, the acchāvāka enters the Hall of Recitation. Soma cups, 
called rtugraha, "season's offering," are offered to the twelve months. Again, 
the remnants of the offerings are consumed by the priests. 

The first ritual recitation of the Rgveda, or $astra, is about to begin. 
The first astra of the morning pressing is the First Conquering Recitation 
(ājya-šastra) by the hota. It consists of eleven verses, made up from seven by 
repeating the first and the last verse thrice. At the end of each verse there is 
a lengthened recitation of the sound “о”, called pranava. It lasts three mā- 
tras (time beats). This is linked with the beginning of the next verse, for no 
breath is taken: breathing does not occur between the verses, but only in the 
middle of a verse. The šastra always ends in 6m, vowel and consonant lasting 
three beats each. These rules necessitate a great deal of breath, and some- 
times reciters are heard to run out of it. These breathing exercises are 
characteristic of all Sastra recitations and are similar to the samidheni 
recitation (above, page 311). The stutis require even longer breaths. 

At the beginning and before the last verse, the hota recites: šomsāvo, 
“Jet us both recite.” This is called āhāva. The remaining four $astra recita- 
tions of the morning pressing have the same structure. At the midday pressing 


622 


FIRST CONQUERING RECITATION 


the first āhāva of each šastra is: adhvaryo šomsāvo (the others are: šoņsāvo); 
at the third pressing the first āhāva of each $astra is: adhvaryo šošomsāvo 
(the others again: šomsāvo). In the remaining šastra recitations of the Ati- 
ratra we have šomsāvo. These āhāva recitations are addressed to the adh- 
varyu, who by this time has postured himself opposite the hota and maitra- 
varuna, facing them, while his right hand, the pratiprasthātā, has postured 
himself opposite acchāvāka and brahmaņācchamšin, facing them. When the 
hota recites his āhāva, the adhvaryu murmurs a response: šormsāmo daiva, 
“let us recite, divine one,” his hands folded. In practice, the adhvaryu’s res- 
ponse is whispered, at best. During the long o's at the end of each verse, the 
adhvaryu recites a response, called pratigara: athàmo daiva. When the hota 
recites om, the pratigara is: 6thamo daiva, the first o lasting thrice as long as 
in othamo daiva. These responses were inaudible during the 1975 performance 
and seem to have been inaudible in Kerala during the last 65 or 70 years.! 
As we shall see, there are special modifications of the pratigara responses in 
the marutvatiya (page 640), mahavaisvadeva (page 650), agnimaruta (page 
655), and sodasi (page 663) šastras. These are the “bizarres contorsions 
liturgigues” referred to by Caland and Henry (1906, I, 232, note 8). 

At the first Sastra, the hotā recites in a low voice immediately before his 
āhāva: - 


May father Matari$van make the verse flawless; far жайыт чїї- 
may Ušij create the asiya’s (?); в & 

q 
may Soma, knower of modes, lead the modes; M pr p ^ 
may Brhaspati recite the hymns and acclamations! S xe afe ek 


(665 7.9.1; cf. TS 5.6.8.6h, above page 542). #ЧЇй жөн CRISE i 


Immediately after his āhāva he recites, also in a low voice, the Prior Light 
(puroruc): 


Agni light, light Agni; Indra light, light Indra; sfide 1 
Sürya light, light Sürya. gray чч: 1 
Agni kindled by the gods. Agni kindled by men. qat а: qii: | 


Agni with good fuel. The hota selected by the gods. яа: 1 иаа: | aft: quf 


The hotā selected by men. > à 
Guide of the CHEN leader of the ritual service, ehm gaga: biu m | 
unhurt hota, eager performer of oblations. янга | CT] 
That the god may lead the gods, эга grat | qiiia | 
that the god Agni may sacrifice to the gods. sm жа Sm, TAT | 

It is he who performs the ritual service, Jatavedas. чае! Жат! 


(Rgveda Khila 5.7: SSS 7.9.2-3) x seagi ac orale: 3 II 


1 But see Volume II, page 759. 
623 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


He continues without any pause, in fact, without taking breath, with the 


First Conquering Recitation, which will be translated in full: 


I shall sing forth most exaltedly to this god Agni. 
He shall come hither with the other gods. 
Best at worship, he shall sit upon our sacrificial strew. 
He adheres to the truth, 
he whose ability both worlds 
and the help (of the gods) follows. 
(The priests) who offer oblations, 
the (warriors) who wish to win, 
call upon him for help. 
He the bard is leader of these (bards), 
he is leader of the worship. 
Indeed is he so. 
Befriend this Agni of yours, 
who wins and bestows gifts. 
Let this Agni extend the most beneficial refuge 
to this pursuit of ours, 
in consequence of which 
he shall sprinkle the goods found in heaven 
and in the waters upon our lands. 
Along with their good poems for him, 
the singers kindle the ever-shining Agni as never 
before, 
him who is the recitatory priest (hota) 
and the lord of all clans. 
Aid us both in our prayer and in our hymn 
since thou art the one who summons best the gods. 
Shine beneficently upon us as thou growest through 
the Maruts, 
o Agni, thou who art the first to win thousands— 
Let us both recite (Somsavo)— 
Grant now to us thousandfold goods 
along with offspring and prosperity. 
Agni, grant majestic heroism and let it be 
most wide and never failing. 
(RV 3.13) 


The hota adds the Sastra Strength (ukthavirya) in 


Splendor, luster, dawn, heaven! 
Light! You for glory!. 
The šastra has been uttered! ` 
(SSS 7.9.6) 


Yajamāna and adhvaryu supplement the Šastra Milking (éastradoha): 


624 


afer ака 9 Ul 
җатат чет ridi 
ga wed жал: | 
чнае аа 

& AASTA N 

a qn fast oat 

ч amaa fü 9:1 
aÑ d ai gaad 
qar A aA ATA N 
ая: ratā Sra- 
5ч atam 

adi я: taze 
fe Баа] эсеп 
&fzaiamdzi 
adia NAA: 1 
REN afters 
Aa Риза. AmA || 
sa чі яаа 
SANG зача: | 

at a: ata WET. 
SH аєнагія: N 
TA rer нашаа, 
Пача gazy | 
altigmdafaaa, t 


a low voice: 


at far gūt 
жа: 
SRA ANA || 


First CONQUERING RECITATION 


h. You are the recitation [i.e., Sastra] of the recitation, TAA UAA- 
may the recitation milk strength for me, я дах VS ЖЕТИ 
may the recitation of the recitation come to me! at eet sre sieur u 
(TS 3.2.7.2h) Е = 


followed by TS 3.2.7.2i-1 (above, page 605). This Sastra Milking parallels 
the Stuti Milking (stutadoha) that follows all stuti chants. In most of the 
later Soma sequences, where $astra follows immediately upon stuti, Sastra 
Milking follows immediately upon Stuti Milking. Unlike Sastra Strength, 
which varies, Stuti and Sastra Milking are always the same. 

The yajamāna adds another piece: 
eit Чия а эп ya 


The ritual has been, has been produced, e ; 
a a зї a TTT | 


itis born, it has grown, 


it has become king of the gods. а tamaaa 

Let it turn us into kings, dt ART яча «йа 

may we be masters of wealth! qu. vul dzīt «алта, і 
(TS 3.2.7.2) Ы 


A Soma libation is made for Indra and Agni, at which the hota recites RV 
3.25.4 as his offering verse (yājyā). During the remainder of the morning 
pressing, four Soma sequences are gone through. The first chant that is sung 
in the sadas is the second stuti, or First Conquering Chant (ājya-stuti). It 
will be described in some detail, since all chants are sung in a similar manner. 
A more detailed description of some of the melodies is given by Wayne 
Howard in Volume II (Part III, pages 311-342). 

First the udgātā has to receive the stotra, two blades of darbha grass 
that he will wear as a ring round his fingers and afterwards insert into the 
strings on the audumbari pole (above, pages 263, 579). This stotra is made 
from darbha grass that the adhvaryu fetches from the havirdhāna hall. If 
the following šastra recitation is by hota or maitravaruna, the stotra is given 
by the adhvaryu; if it is by brāhmaņācchamsin or acchāvāka, it is given by 
the pratiprasthātā; in either case, it is accompanied by the same recitations. 
Since the First Conquering Chant will be followed by the Praūgašastra of the 
hota, the adhvaryu initiates the action by sitting down and handing the stotra 
to the udgātā with the recitation: k 


You are the bed for the coupling of Rk and Sāman RITAREITA 


for the sake of procreation! тат sm 
(BSS 7.8:212.19-213.1) 


He continues: 


The maker of the sound HM is Vāyu, agimat- 

the prastotā is Agni, sfà: steatar 

the saman is Prajapati, saat: ara 

the udgata is Brhaspati, | жечї 
625. 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


the other chanters are the All-gods, fa жат durant 
the pratihartas are the Maruts, wed: sgait geal Fort 
the concluding portion of the chant is Indra. xat urā: ud 
May these gods who support breath PI Mi NM 
bestow breath upon me. SVS kal 

(TS 3.3.2.la) 
OM! Chant! ат GL 


During the last exclamation, the prastota asks permission from maitrāvaruņa 
and brahman: 


Brahman, shall we chant, prašāstā? FARTS ARTE 


They both answer: 

OM! Chant ша 
The First Conquering Chant consists of fifteen melodies, made up by 

repetitions from three basic stotriyā chants. Since the melody is gāyatra, as 

in the Outdoor Chant (above, page 603), it suffices to list the prastāva por- 

tions of the text, together with their sources (they differ from the sources of 

the First Conquering Chant in the Agnistoma: see Staal 1968, 417). The 


prastavas of the three basic stotriyās are: 


I. agnin datam vrnimahom (JA 73.1); 
II. agnim agnim havimabhom (JA 73.2) 
III. agne devam ihavahom (JA 73.3) 


The underlying verses are: 


We elect Agni, 

the recitatory priest who wins all possessions, 

as the very wise messenger of this worship. 

With their summons (the priests) shall always sum- 
mon every Agni, 

the lord of the clans, as the conveyer of their obla- 
tions 

who is dear to many. 

Agni, now that thou art born, 

convey the gods hither to the (priest) 

who has arranged the sacrificial strew. 

Thou art our recitatory priest (hotā) 

who is worthy of invocation. 

(RV 1.12.1-3) 


at ач 1 fi ~ 
dati Hager | 
эгет TT THA I 


oat аб 
dat gara Веча t 
gaë чача u 
wi dat ger dē 


TATA THAT | 
эй а! я Sed: i 


The three stotriyās of the First Conquering Chant are made into fifteen, 
three rounds of five, as follows: in the first round the first is repeated thrice; 


626 


FIRST CONOUERING CHANT 


in the second round, the second; and in the third, the third. Each round, 
moreover, is preceded by the syllable hm (called himkara), chanted by the 
three sāmavedins. A lengthened “о” precedes the first himkāra of the entire 
chant. Thus the following pattern results: 


o hm. 1.LLILIII; 
hm. LILILILII; 
hm. LILIILIILI. 


While similar modifications occur in all the chants of the Atirātra, the First 
Conquering Chant has a further particularity: when the first stotriyā is 
chanted for the first time, the udgitha is: 


dā dā ta tha hm ta hm bha o va. 


The pattern of the stotriyà structure is called vistuti. It is marked by the 
prastota with the help of kušā sticks, placed before him on a piece of white 
cloth, called vaistutam vasanam. Each of these sticks has a head (often slight- 
ly bent) and a tail. The heads should point only to the north or east. The 
three rounds are marked to the south, west, and east, subsequently. The 
fifteenfold vistuti of the First Butter Chant is pictured in Figure 48, where the 
heads of the sticks are marked as arrows, and the order in which the sticks are 
put down is expressed by numerals. At 1, the prastotā chants I; at 2 he re- 
peats I; at 3 he repeats I again; at 4 he chants II; and at 5 he chants III. At 
6 he chants I; at 7, 8, and 9, each time IT; and at 10, III. At 11 he chants I; 


N 


Ce 


Figure 48—Fifteenfold Vistuti of the Morning Butter Chants 
627 


PLATE 103 


PLATE 103 
Rounds of Morning Chant 


After the morning pressing, the three sāmavedins sing five chants: 
one outside the sadas, and the remaining four inside. In the sadas, 
the prastotā (center) faces west, the udgātā (right) faces north, 
and the pratiharta (left) faces south. The audumbari pole is to the 
right of the udgātā. Behind them, further east, some of the dhisnya 
hearths are visible, together with some of their priests (see Figure 
47). Seen from behind are the hota (right of the prastotā) and the 
brāhmaņācchamsin (left of the prastotā), both facing east. To the 
left of the latter is the pota, looking over his shoulder. In front 
of the three sāmavedins are the vistuti sticks, arranged in a con- 
figuration that marks the progress of the chant. The configuration 
will be completed as in Figure 48. On the plate, the first round has 
already been completed, and the last chant of the second round (no. 
10 in Figure 48) is about to begin. 


628 


et a ea 


АЕ ER 


629 


Part II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


at 12, II; and at 13, 14, and 15, each time III. In this manner he keeps track 
of the stotriyās. The stotra is subsequently put on the audumbari pole, and 
thus he keeps track of the stuti chants themselves. 

After the First Conquering Chant, the šastra recitation is the praüga- 
astra of the hota. It is complicated by the insertion not only of eight 
occurrences of šomsāvo, but also of seven pieces called Prior Light (puro- 
ruc: listed in Sankhayana Srauta Sūtra). If the Prior Light mantras аге re- 
ferred to as I-VII, the following pattern results: 


Somsavo; I (555 7.10.9); RV 1.2.1 (3 х); 1.2.2-3 
Somsàvo; П (555 7.10.10); ВУ 1.2.4-6 
Somsavo; Ш (555 7.10.11); ВУ 1.2.7-9 
šomsāvo; IV (SSS 7.10.12); RV 1.3.1-3 
Somsavo; V (555 7.10.13); RV 1.3.4-6 
šomsāvo; VI (SSS 7.10.14); RV 1.3.7-9 
$omsàávo; RV 1.3.10-11; Somsavo; 1.3.12( 3 x).! 


The Sastra Strength (ukthavirya) is in SSS 7.10.15b. The offering verse 
(yājyā) is RV 1.14.10. This praūga šastra is the same as in the Agnistoma. 

The third Soma sequence comprises a third stuti, the Second Conquer- 
ing Chant. Different from the corresponding chant of the Agnistoma, it has 
the same vistuti, but the prastāvas of its three basic stotriyās are: 


I. mitram vayam havamahom (JA 73.4); 
П. rtena yavrtavrdhom (JA 73.5); 
III. varunah prāvitā bhuvom (JA 73.6). 


The underlying verses are: 


rt at dard 

We summon Mitra and Varuna to the drinking of att eat 

Soma, TATA FETA N 
the knowledgeable ones whose ability is refined. MS x 

5 à а жая At - 
With truth I summon Mitra and Varuna who increase OMS darat 

through truth, quer =ч | 
those lords of the light of truth. ят fara zu n 
Varuna shall become our helper with every as- agn: mat day- - 

pe Mitra also. FF PRET frat Resin ait: | 
They shall unite us with their good solicitude. kia ча da: | 


(ВУ 1.23.4-6) 


The Second Conquering Chant is followed by the Second Butter Recitation 
(ājya šastra), recited by the maitravaruna: 


$omsavo; RV 1.23.4 (3 x); 1.23.5-6 
! The seventh puroruc (658 7.10.15a) is not recited. 


630 


SOMA SEQUENCES OF THE MORNING PRESSING 


šomsāvo; RV 5.71.1-3 
šomsāvo; RV 5.68.1-5; 7.66.1-8 
šomsāvo; RV 7.66.9 (3 x). 


This Second Conquering Recitation of the Atirātra differs from the corres- 
ponding Second Conquering Recitation of the Agnistoma in the first three 
verses, which in both cases are the source of the Second Conquering Chant. 
The offering verse is RV 5.71.3. 

The same pattern continues through the remainder of the morning 
pressing. The fourth Soma sequence comprises a fourth stuti, the Third 
Butter Chant: 


(1) indram id gathino brhom (JA 73.7; RV 1.7.1); 
(2) indra iddharyos sacom (JA 73.8; RV 1.7.2); 
(3) indra vajesu novom (JA 73.9; RV 1.7.4 (sic)). 


The underlying verses are: 


geaktraiftai ag- 
Th t ltedly (h lebrated) Indra, Mee c 
e songsters exaltedly (have celebrated) Indra redet: | 


the singers (have sung) to Indra with their songs, 


D al 
the musicians have resounded to Indra. Бех ARIAT li 
Indra is united with his golden steeds. Же gadt: aar 
Golden himself, the cudgel-bearing Indra shall mount diam э agat 
M aye ae a Td dm the bs word. seat чэй Віста: au 
ighty Indra, with thy mighty assistance ete 
help us in the contests and in the stakes for ux be 
ATATIA ч | 


thousands. PAIS S S 
(RV 1.7.12, 4) sa ШЕЙ: 1 


The accompanying šastra is the Third Conquering Recitation, recited by 
the brāhmaņācchamsin: 


šomsāvo; RV 1.7.1 (3 x); 1.7.2, 4 
šomsāvo; RV 8.17.4-6 

$omsàvo; RV 8.17.7-13; 3.40.1-9; 8.93.1-2 
šomsāvom; 8.93.3 (3 x). 


The offering verse is RV 3.40.2. 
The fifth Soma sequence comprises a fifth stuti, the Fourth Conquering 


Chant: 


I. indre agna namo brhom (JA 73.10; RV 7.94.4); 
IL. tā hi $a$vanta ilatom (JA 73.11; RV 7.94.5); 
Ш. ta vam girbhir vipanyavom (JA 73.12; RV 7.94.6). 


631 


PLATE 104 


PLATE 105 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


The underlying verses are: 


Reverently and exaltedly we shall raise our good җе чаг wi 99 
song style to Agni and Indra. datrtnamt 1 C 
Seeking kon e shall offer them) the milk È " st será: t 
streams along with our poems. SERERE 
d al te 5799 a 
Indeed the continual stream of poets zealously tā = M 
summon them in the correct manner Se 
for help and for the winning of contests. sime яшеп 1) 
Inspired in poetry and offering refreshment, ar ай «Пчела: 
we summon you two with songs, satasdt gamma | 
we who wish to win at the winning of the sacrifice. aaa абада: 1 


(RV 7.94.4-6) 


The accompanying šastra is the Fourth Conquering Recitation, recited by 
the acchāvāka: 


šomsāvo; R V 7.94.4 (3 x); 7.94.5-6 
šomsāvo; RV 3.12.1-3 

šomsāvo; RV 3.12.4-6; 1.21.1-5; 7.94.1-8 
Somsavo; RV 7.94.9 (3 x). 


The offering verse is RV 3.12.1. 

The vistuti for all the chants is the same (see Figure 48). At the end of 
each recitation, Soma cups are offered to the Višvedevas, Mitrāvaruņa, 
Indra, and Indra-Agni, respectively. The offering verses have already been 
indicated. Thus ends the morning pressing. 


Tenth Day: April 22, 1975 
EPISODE 27 


Midday Pressing and Anointing the Yajamana 
(Madhyandinasavana; Abhiseka) 


THE GRAVASTUT PRIEST enters the havirdhāna for the first time. He is 
blindfolded with cloth untied from the Soma cart. While Soma stalks are 
being pounded with pressing stones (grāvan), he recites the Rgvedic hymn 
to the pressing stones (text specified in SSS 7.15; translation in Caland and 
Henry, §175). The Midday Chant for the Purified Soma (madhyandinapava- 
mānastuti) is chanted. It consists of fifteen stotriyās, of which the first three 
are chanted to the gāyatra melody (the chants of the morning pressing), so 
that it suffices to mention their prastāva only. The others are chanted to 
various melodies, and the five parts of each stotriya will therefore be speci- 
fied. The texts are given in Ūhagāna 1.1-4. Sometimes three stotriyās cor- 
respond to three rks, but at other times two rks are turned into three stotriyās 


632 


MIDDAY PRESSING 


by a process of repetition and overlapping. This is common іп the ritual chant- 
ing of the Sāmaveda and occurs also in the ritual recitation of the Rgveda. 
The Midday Chant begins with a lengthened “о” and each triplet starts with 
the himkāra “hm”. This Midday Chant is the same as the Midday Chant of 


the Agnistoma: 


ohm | 


I. uccà te jatam andhasom (JA 62.1; RV 9.61.10) 
II. asya pratnàm anu dyutom (JA 70.1; RV 9.54.1) 
III. enā višvāny arya от (JA 62.3; RV 9.61.11) 


IV. prastāva: 


hm | 
иссӣ tà yi jatam andhasa | 


udgitha: 6 vau sat bhū o dà dà yi | 
pratihāra: ugram šarmā | 
upadrava: б havāvu và | 
nidhana: stause || 
V. prastāva: sa na à yindraya yajyavayi | 
udgitha: 6 yà o dā уар | 
pratihāra: varivovayit | 
upadrava: o havàvu và | 
nidhana: stause // (based upon JA 62.2; RV 9.61.12) 


V]. prastāva: 
udgitha: 


pratihāra: 
upadrava: 


nidhana: 


VII. prastāva: 


ēnā vā yi švāny aryayā | 
o mā o sa пат | 
sayisāsantāh | 

o mahāvu và | 

stause || (UG 1.1) 

hm | 

punānas somā dhārāyā | 


udgitha: à vasano arsasyā ratnadhā yoni б dā dā о hāvu và | 
pratihāra: utsd devo hirā hà o hàvu và | 
upadrava: o yà au ho bà | 
nidhana: Zo yi lā || 
VIII. prastava: utso devo hayiranya yah |! 
udgitha: 0/50 devē hiranyaya duhāna ūdhar divi à priyàm o hàvu 
và | 
pratihara: pratnam sadhastham à hà o hàvu và | 
upadrava: o dà au ho bà | 
nidhana: Лб yi là // 
IX. prastāva: pratnam sadhastham asa dāt | 
udgitha: 6 tnam sadhastham āsadad apycchyandharu 6 sāsā o 


hāvu va | 


1 After chanting this prastāva, the prastotā says: esa madhyamā, “this is the middle 


>> 
е 


опе 


633 


PLATE 104 
Enter the Gravastut Blindfolded 


“These (pressing stones) will speak, we shall speak. 
Speak to the speaking stones, 

when you rocks, you mountains, 

together and swift, 


resound Soma’s roar for Indra!" 
(RV 10.94.1) 


At the midday pressing, while Soma stalks are being pounded, the 
gravastut enters the Soma Hall blindfolded, and recites a long 
hymn to the pressing stones (grāvan). His blindfold and turban are 
made with cloth untied from the Soma cart. The tail of the offer- 
ing altar is on the right. 


634 


635 


PLATE 105 


Pounding Soma 


* Here! Here! Here!” 
(BSS 8.1:234.13) 


Under the Soma cart, Soma stalks are pounded on the bullock 
skin on top of the plank that covers the uparava resounding holes. 
During the midday pressing, the adhvaryu shouts ihā ihā iha “here, 
here, here!” while the pratiprasthata pounds. Soma goblets stand 
ready, covered by a cloth. The tail of the altar is on the right. 


636 


637 


XI. 


XII. 


XIII. 


XIV. 


XV. 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


pratihāra: nrbhirddhauto vicā ha o hāvu va | 

upadrava: o ņa au ho bà | 

nidhana: Лб yi [a // (UG 1.2 based upon JA 62.45; RV 
9.107.4—5) 


hm | 


. prastāva: punānās soma dhārāyā | 


udgitha: 6 pē na yā | 
antarnidhana: $02 si / 
udgitha: 6 rātnadhā yoni о sya sa yi | 
antarnidhana: dā sī / 
pratihāra: utsah / 
upadrava: o hirā / 
nidhana: ууд ya |] 
prastava: utso devo hiranyaya | 
udgītha: ētsē hirā / 
antarnidhana: nya уд | 
udgitha: 6 hà na ūdhardivi om ma dha | 
antarnidhana: priyam / 
pratihāra: pratnam / 
upadrava: ē sthamā | 
nidhana: sā dāt // 
prastāva: pratnām sādhāstham asa dāt | 
udgitha: 6 tna о sthama 
antarnidhana: sā dat / 
udgitha: о parcchiyandharu o jaya | 
antarnidhana: 50 sī / 
pratihāra: nrbhā yih / 
upadrava: o vi ca / 
nidhana: ksā nah [|] (UG 1.3) 

hm / 
prastāva: pra tū | 
udgitha: ovaorionisidao bhāyih | punano abhi vajam йа | 
pratihāra: a$vanna tvā vājinam mārjayāntāyi | 
upadrava: ē barhāyi rašanābhā yirnnā yā / 
nidhana: tā yi // 
prastāva: su vā / 
udgītha: 6 dhā ē va o va indüro šāstihā | vrjana raksamanah | 
pratihāra: pita devanafijanità sudā ksah | 
upadrava: om bho dāyivo dhāruņāh pārtthā yi | 
nidhana: vyāk // 
prastāva: ārsīh / 
udgītha: ē prā ð rā о janānāmo bhuh | dhīrā ušanā kaviyena | 
pratihāra: sa cid viveda nihitāyyadāsām 


638 


MIDDAY PRESSING 


upadrava: 6 ciyam guhyanna mā go | 


nidhana: nam // (UG 1.4, based upon JA 62.6-8; RV 9.87. 


1-3) 
The underlying verses are: 


Although the origin of thee, the (Soma) stalk, is on high, 
being in heaven, I take for myself here on earth 
thy mighty refuge and great fame. 

(RV 9.61.10) 


Following his ancient shine, 
they richly milk the thousand-winning seer for his 

bright milk (viz., Soma). 
(RV 9.54.1) 


We who wish to win shall gain through him 
all the majesties of the stranger 
and of the offspring of Manu. 
Finding freedom, flow round for Indra, our com- 
rade, 
for Varuna and for the Maruts. 
(RV 9.61.11-12) 


Soma, purifying thyself with the stream, 

thou flowest clothed in water. | 

As bestower of wealth, thou sittest on the homestead 
of truth 

(which) is the golden source, o god. 

Milking the heavenly udder for its proper honey, 

he has sat upon his ancient station. 

Cleansed by the priests, 

the broad-seeing racer flows to its sought-after 


support. 
(RV 9.107.4—5) 


Run thou forth, round the bucket; then take thy seat. 
Purified by the priests, rush forth to the prize. 
First cleansing thee like a racehorse, they lead thee 
forth by the reigns to the sacrificial seat. 

The heavenly drop purifies itself. 
Well-weaponed it destroys what is not praise, 
while it guards the community. 
It is the father and very skillful begetter of the gods, 
the prop of heaven and the support of the earth. 
Wise seer, guide of people, 
able artisan with vision like Ušanas, 
He discovered what had been hidden, 
the secret name of the cows. 

(RV 9.87.1-3) 


639 


sat oreet 
RA ager 941 
эй wa wf ич: N 


эе хсатач gd 
gr 228 eua 
чї: METRA, | 


wat {дедй эп 
sett ATONE | 
fiat amat 1 
TIE 
quu ARTA: | 
avatars, Ч aa i 
чата: dia wur 
dt чаа enifat | 


‚эп Seat Чаа tg- 
wgedl ža feed: u 


gent аә иЗ Di 
печ TACT | 
PE 


ol © 


finds faber: N 


т Ra ЧЇ tat fr aig 
alt: чятаї at ага | 
wai ч cab asta miad- 
seal 981 тайда і 
atga: dau ga gag- 
«абаат gad аро: | 
faa Затей sitar ачы? 
(aee Rat rev: чїй: a 
RA: gua aara- 
BBA SAAT grēda | 

a litrā fee ager 
wired; еї ята rea |! 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


When the Midday Chant is completed it is actually about 6:30 P.M. The 
adhvaryu offers 2 cup of curds (dadhigraha) to Indra. Arrangements are 
made for the ritual payment of the sacrificial fee (daksiņā) to the priests (for 
the nonritual payment of the priests, see Volume II, page 459). Two Soma 
cups are offered to Indra Marutvat. The hotā recites the marutvatīya-šastra, 
which is the same as in the Agnistoma. As in other recitations of the midday 
and third pressings, one or more Indicatory Verses (nivid) are inserted, which 
refer to deities. Like the Prior Lights (puroruc) we met with before (pages 
623, 630), these are listed in the Sankhayana Šrauta Sūtra. 


adhvaryo šomsāvo; RV 8.68.1 (3 x); 8.68.2-3 
$omsaávo; RV 8.2.1-3 

$omsavo; RV 8.53.5-6 (made into three mantras) 
šomsāvo; RV 1.40.5-6 (made into three mantras) 
šomsāvo; RV 3.20.4 

šomsāvo; RV 1.91.2 

Somsavo; RV 1.64.6 

šomsāvo; RV 10.73.1-6 

šomsāvo; SSS 8.16.1; 

RV 10.73.7-10; 

šomsāvo; RV 10.73.11 (3 x). 


The pratigara of the adhvaryu at the first stop during the recital of RV 10.73.1 
is madamo daiva, “let us enjoy, divine one” (cf. SSS 7.19.16). After the ša- 
stra, a third cup is offered by the adhvaryu to Indra Marutvat. The offering 
verse is RV 3.47.4. 

Next come Agnicayana rites. The adhvaryu offers six oblations to Agni, 
Soma, Savitr, Sarasvati, Püsan, and Brhaspati. After these oblations, past 
11 P.M. (on the night of April 22), comes the anointing (abhiseka) of the ya- 
jamāna, at his usual place south of the large altar. A small silver plate is plac- 
ed upon the krsņājina skin, upon which he always sits. Cloths are tied 
around his head, forming a turban. The adhvaryu pours a mixture of grains 
(sárvausadha), kept from the Vajaprasaviya on the 9th day (above, page 
574) over the turban, reciting: 


- I €. Ц 
On the instigation of god Savitr, SGT CAT 9199; siad- 
with the arms of the Ašvins, sfiritalgeat 
with the hands of Pusan, qa SAMAK 

qs al 


with the bond of Sarasvati, ad ате а=. 
an сри о 4 d Heal яти Naf- 

with the government of Agni I anoint you, acres MU ue 
with the government of Indra I anoint you, AA саг Spe INEST 
with the government of Brhaspati I anoint you! ЖЕП ‚гый тён u 


(BSS 10.58:60.12-15; cf. TS 1.7.10. 3h) 
640 


ANOINTING THE YAJAMANA 


The turban is removed, the plate is picked up, and the adhvaryu continues: 


Anointed is that Nilakantha Sarma, зда 9154 Aera 
of the Kasyapa clan, arpa: 
son of Vallabha Sarma, 


e 
Е AGATA: gut 
grandson of Vasudeva Sarma, ОО 


descendant of Vallabha Sarma, om чї р 
by the Agni ritual! agaa aAA N 


(BSS 10.58:60.15-16) 


All shout, at the top of their voice, three times: 


Akkitiri! (erodes) ©) 


The yajamana pronounces: 
Earth! Sky! Heaven! зң: a: 


He wipes his face, stands up, and takes three Visnu steps east with the usual 
mantras (cf. above, page 324). The adhvaryu concludes the ceremony with 
six more oblations, for Indra, sound, verse, Amša, Bhaga, the master of the 
field (ksetrapati), and twelve libations to remove beings or spirits (bhüta). 
The rest of the midday pressing service proceeds as in the Agnistoma, 
but with differences in some of the stutis and Sastras. The seventh stuti or 
First Back Chant (prsthastuti) is not rathantara (as in the Agnistoma), but 
brhat. It consists of seventeen melodies, constructed from three stotriyās in 
accordance with the seventeenfold vistuti illustrated in Figure 49. 


N 
|7 €AM——— 
{2 ————— a | G —— дрва 
15 ————— 
9[ 10] li 7 
Ww 14 Е 
4} 5] 6 
в U 3 
тай 
Z ee 
or == 
[== == 
S 


Figure 49—Seventeenfold Vistuti of the Midday Back Chants 
641 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


The three basic Stotriyas are: 


І. prastāva: аи ho yi tvamiddhi havamaha г | 
udgitha: аб tau vajasya kāravastūvā au ho va / vrtrà yi su và 
yindrà sa otpatinnarah | 
pratihara: tū vanka stha au ho va | 
upadrava: o varvata ho và hà vu và | 
nidhana: has // 
II. prastāva: au ho yi ій và me | 
udgītha: ао stha sū varvātassatvā au ho valnasca yi 
tra vajra ha o sta dhrsnu ya . 
pratihāra: mahastava au ho và | 
upadrava: o à dra yi va ho va ha vu va | 
nidhana: has // 
III. prastāva: au ho yi maha г | 
udgītha: a o va no à dra yi va gama au ho va | šuvam ratha 
уй mà б yindrā san ka yi rā | 
pratihāra: satrā vājā au hō và | 
upadrava: 6 jā yi вуй sa yi ho và hà vu và | 
nidhana: has // (RG 1.4, based upon JA 74.7-8) 


The underlying verses are: 


Only thee do we singers summon in the winning of 


the contest. 


Thee, Indra, who art master of the stead, 
the warriors (summon) at the time of obstacles, 


aak кан. 

CUA VHT HITE: | 
cat gaan ае az. 
wat ите: 1 


thee (the driver) of the course in the racetracks. 


Since thou, wondrous cudgel-armed (hero), 

art praised as the great one, unshakable one, 
scatter upon us boldly cattle and chariot horses, 
like booty for one who has completely conquered. 


« cd бия ana quar 
нё: «ічг эйт: 1 
пай блед d Rex 


(RV 6.46.1-2) аят ята a Farge || 


The accompanying šastra is the First Exclusive Recitation (niskevalyašastra) 
—exclusively belonging to Indra, that is—recited by the hota: 


adhvaryo šomsāvo; RV 6.46.1-2 (made into three, the first recited 


3 x) 


šomsāvo; RV 8. 


61.7-8 (made into three) 


MIDDAY PRESSING 


49) is vamadevya, the same as in the Agnistoma. The three basic stotriyās 


are: 
I. prastāva: kā ya našcāyi tra ya bhuvat | 
udgitha: 64 bu hau ho haa | 
pratihāra: stayau ho hm ma | 
upadrava: vāk o / 
nidhana: Aa yi // 

II. prastāva: kās tvā satyo mādānām / 
udgītha: од bu hau ho hā / 
pratihāra: rujau ho hm mā / 
upadrava: vāk o / 
nidhana: Aa yi // 

III. prastāva: abhi su nas sakhinam | 
udgitha: 64 bu hau ho haa | 
pratihāra: siyau ho hm mā / 
upadrava: vāk o / 
nidhana: ha yi // 


(UG 2.1, based upon JA 63.3-5) 


The underlying verses are: 


With what help shall our wondrous, always strength- 
ening comrade (Indra) be present? 

With what most able regiment? 

Which true one among stimulants, 

which most gratifying part of the (Soma) plant shall 


exhilarate thee, 


in order to break open even those goods which are 


wat afar at ya- 
gūt ачты: aut | 
= al 

жат жїїнї gar п 
seal edt яң 
ARN Acard: | 
goat fares ag | 


solid? a Ч о: adla- 
As helper of us singers, thy comrades, ачат «йан, 1 
thou shalt be superior in help to even a hundred EM c 
ae жапе: 11 


(others). 


(RV 4.31.1-3) 


The accompanying astra is the Second Exclusive Recitation, recited by the 
maitravaruna: 


šomsāvo; RV 10.74.6 

Somsavo; RV 8.61.1-2 

Somsavo; RV 6.18.1-8 

šomsāvo; SSS 8.17.1; RV 6.18.9-14 
Somsavo; RV 6.18.15 (3 x). 


The offering verse is RV 7.22.1. 
The eighth stuti, or Second Back Chant, with the same vistuti (Figure 


642 


adhvaryo Somsavo; RV 4.31.1 (3 x); 4.31.2-3 
$omsavo; RV 8.93.19-21 

šomsāvo; RV 7.32.14-15 

$omsavo; RV 3.48.1-5; 4.19.1-10 

Somsavo; RV 4.19.11 (3 x). 


The offering verse is RV 4.20.4. 


643 


The ninth stuti, or Third Back Chant, with the same vistuti, is not nau- 
dhasa (as in the Agnistoma) but $yaitam. The three basic stotriyās are: 


PART П THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


I. prastava: abhi pravas surādhāsā au ho và | 
udgitha: | ondram arccha yatha vayida o hāyi | 
6 jārāyitrbhyā o và purovasuh | 
pratihara: sahasreņāyi và šā | 
upadrava: hm mà yiksata au ho và | 
nidhana: và su // 
II. prastāva: sahasrenevà siksata au ho và | 
udgitha: о/а srāyiņāyi va šā yiksata o hāyi | 
б tānāyi kayiva o gāti dharsnuya | 
pratihara: hanti vrtrani da | 
upadrava: Ат mā yišūsā au ho va | 
nidhana: và su // 
IIT. prastava: hanti vrtrani dā šūsā au ho va | 
udgitha: — ontà yi vartranayi da šūgā о hayi | 
б rāyi rayi và pra о āsya payinvayi rayi | 
pratihara: datrāņi purubho | 


MIDDAY PRESSING 


The offering verse is RV 5.40.4. 
The tenth stuti, or Fourth Back Chant, with the same vistuti, is kāleya, 
the same as in the Agnistoma. The three basic stotriyās are: 


I. prastava: tarobha yirvo vidadvasum | 

udgitha: 6 sā o dha ū o brhāt | gaya o sutasomedhvarayi | 
pratihāra: huvayi bharau và o và | 
upadrava: o karinam | 
nidhana: ho yi lā || 

П. prastāva: huve bhārām su karinam | 
udgitha: 6 bha 6 su kā о nā yandudhrah | б rante su sthirā 

marah | 

pratihāra: madayisu Sau và б và | 
upadrava: 6 āndhasah | 
nidhana: ho yi lā // 

III. prastāva: madesii šāyiprām andhasah | 
udgitha: Osu pra mā o ya ādrtyā | б hamānāya sūnvā tà yi | 
pratihāra: data jarau va 6 va | 
upadrava: o akthiyam | 


upadrava: hm ma yijasa au ho va | 
nidhana: và su // 
(UG 9.6, based upon JA 74.9-10) 


The underlying verses are: 


Sing forth to your good Indra of good solicitude, asis Ч s a: gardar- 
well known, fucks uut 

the liberal one of many goods who exerts himself in at tat нча! geag: 
a thousand ways, as it were, for the singers. agada тї il 

Like a hundred-faced (weapon), We S 

he goes forth daringly and smashes (all) obstacles aeaa ap TIT 
for his worshipper. Bled quus TY | 

Like the great rivers of the mountain, RRR q vut меа бах 

the gifts of him swell up, as he offers many benefits. malta, чч: N 

(RV 8.49.1-2) | 


ra? 
«7 


The accompanying šastra is the Third Exclusive Recitation, recited by the 
brāhmaņācchamsin: 


adhvaryo šomsāvo; RV 8.49.1—2 (made into three, the first recited 
3x) 

šomsāvo; RV 8.50.1-2 (made into three) 

$omsávo; R V 8.3.15—16 

somsāvo; RV 10.104.1-11; 7.23.1-5 

ботѕӣуо; RV 7.23.6 (3 x). 


644 


nidhana: ho yi lā // 


(UG 2.3, based upon JA 63.89) 


The underlying verses are: 


Intensely (we summon) Indra who finds wealth swift- 
ly, for your aid, 

as we sing on high at this ceremony in which the 
Soma is pressed. 

I summon him like one who wins the battle. 

Him (I summon) whom neither stubborn nor endur- 
ing hindrances shall stop 

when the lovely lipped one is in the stimulation 
of the (Soma) plant, 

who, once he has robbed it, 

shall grant a praiseworthy (prize) to the ministrant, 
to the presser and to the singer. 

(RV 8.66.1-2) 


alat Rara- 

fred uard sedi 
TERT: TAMA Tear 

=ч чё я mira 

я ® чыт ated я Ran gi 


Ae TATA: | 


a OETA AAA Grae 


aal TRA SHAT N 


The accompanying šastra is the Fourth Exclusive Recitation, recited by the 


acchavākā: 


adhvaryo šomsāvo; RV 8.66.1—2 (made into three, the first recited 


3 x) 


$omsàávo; R V 7.32.20-21 (made into three) 


$omsàvo; RV 7.32.12-13 
Somsavo; RV 6.30.1-5; 3.36.1-10 


645 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 
ботѕауо; RV 3.36.11 (3 x). 


The offering verse is RV 3.36.3. 

In these four Soma sequences, the first cup is offered to Great Indra 
(Mahendra) and the three remaining cups to Indra. Thus ends the Midday 
Pressing at about 3:30 A.M. on April 23, 1975. 


Eleventh Day: April 23, 1975 


EPISODE 28 
The Third Pressing (Trtiyasavana) 


THE THIRD PRESSING which, in the Agnistoma, takes place in the evening 
of the pressing day (the fifth ritual day of the Agnistoma), marks the begin- 
ning of the eleventh ritual day of the Atiratra. It follows the ceremonies of the 
tenth day without a pause and starts around 4 A.M. on April 23, 1975. 

After pressing Soma and offering a cup to the Adityas, the eleventh 
stuti, Chant of the Skillful Gods for the Purified Soma (ārbhavapavamāna- 
stuti) is chanted, without vistuti sticks (which are covered with a cloth). It 
consists of seventeen stotriyās, two of which (IX and X) are different from 
those in the Agnistoma. The first three are chanted to the gāyatra melody, 
so that it is sufficient to list the prastāva: 


ohm | 
І. svadisthaya madisthayom (JA 64.1; RV 9.1.1) 
П. raksohā visvacarsanom (JA 64.2; RV 9.1.2) 
ПІ. varivodhatamo bhuvom (JA 64.3; RV 9.1.3) hm / 
IV. prastāva: svadisthaya ma dā yisthaya / 
udgitha: 6 svāsēū/ 
pratihāra: ā yindra / 
upadrava: o pā tavā hāvu và | 
nidhana: sū tah // 
V. prastāva: raksohā vīšva carsanayih | 
udgitha: 6 yo nim ē | 
pratihāra: drē ne / 
upadrava: ē dhā sthamā hāvu vā | 
nidhana: sā dāt // 
VI. prastāva: varivodhata mē bhuvah | 
udgitha: 0 sthovr o / 
pratihāra: parsi / 
upadrava: ē dhē mā hāvu vā | 
nidhana: gho nām // 
hm / 
VII. prastāva: aya pāvāsva da yi va yuh / 


646 


udgitha: 
pratihāra: 
upadrava: 
nidhana: 


VIII. prastāva: 


IX. 


(UG 14.4, first 


X. 


udgītha: 
pratihāra: 
upadrava: 
nidhana: 


prastāva: 
udgītha: 
partihāra: 
upadrava: 
nidhana: 


prastāva: 
udgītha: 


pratihāra: 
upadrava: 
nidhana: 


THIRD PRESSING 


б pavāyitrām paryā yisi vayisvatah | 
madhoh | 
ö hö ā to | 
ha yi |/ 
(UG 3.2, based upon JA 64.4; RV 9.63.7) 

hm | 
pāvāte haryato harih | 
6 hvarām sa yi ramha ya | 
abhayi | 
6 stotrbhyo ba | 
ra và дуа Sah || 

(UG 3.3, based upon JA 64.5; RV 9.65.25) 


hm | 

purējitī vo andhāsās sütaya madayitnavayi | 
б pa švānam šūathistānā ohayi | 

sakhayo da yi | 

б jo bahvayam | 

hàyi || 


sāman, based upon JA 64.6-7; RV 9.101.1-2) 


hm | 

sakhāyē dirghajihviyame | 

б dhārayā pavakaya ha ha au ho va ayihi | 
pariprasyandatayi sūtā ha hà au ho va ayihi | 
indurāšvā hà hà au hō và ayihi | 

6 kārtvāyā au ho và | 

madhūšcūtah |] 


(UG 27.19, second siman, based upon JA 64.6-7; RV 9.101.1-2) 


XI. 


XII. 


prastava: 
udgitha: 
pratihāra: 
upadrava: 
nidhana: 


hm / 

indūrāšvās sukrtvā ya ehiyā | 

o darosama bhi nara o ho iya somam | va yīšvā ci ya | 
dha ya | 

o ho 0 hö iya yajfia о samtü à dra yo | 

hà yi || 


(UG 34, third sāman, based upon JA 64.7; RV 9.101.2) 


prastava: 
udgitha: 


hm | 
purüjiti va ya ondhasah | 
6 ta ya mada ya hm ma | 


antarnidhana: tnave apa švānam sfathistana | 


pratihara: 


upadrava : 


nidhana: 


sakhavu va | 
6 dirgha ji hviya au ho ba | 
ho yi lā || 


647 


| ERP eee 


XIII. 


XIV. 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


prastāva: sakhayo dirghaja о hvayam / 
udgitha: о dharaya pāvā hm mā / 
antarnidhana: kaya pari prasyandate sutah | 
pratihāra: ayindavu va | 
upadrava: o švās sū kartviya au ho ba / 
nidhana: o yi la | | 
prastāva: indur ašvas su ka ortvayah / 
udgitha: o duro sama bhi hm mā / 
antarnidhana: naras somam visvaciya dhiyà | 
pratihāra: yajīāvu va | 
upadrava: 6 santa à draya au ho ba / | 
nidhana: ho yi [a // 
(UG 3.5, based upon JA 64, 6-7; RV 9.101.1—2) 


hm | 


nidhana: ma // | 


XV. prastāva: abhyo va | 
udgītha: o yani pavatayicano 6 mani / yam hvē adhiyayi su 
va ū | 
pratihāra: a sūryasya brhato brhann adhi / 
upadrava: à tham vayisvaficama o жей ksà | 
XVI. prastāva: rto va | 
udgitha: о jihva pavatayi mādhū о kta patih / dha yo sya 
dà 6 
pratihara: dadhati putrah pitrēr apicayam | 
upadrava: o mā tārttī yama o nāndā yil 
nidhana: удр // 
XVII. prastāva: avēvā 


udgitha: — o tanah kālāšam aca o bhih / yemanah kūšā hira o | 
pratihāra: abhi rtasya dohana anusata / И 
upadrava: o dhayi trayiprstha п o yi rā ја | 
nidhana: sā yi // 
(UG 3.6, based upon JA 64.9-11; RV 9.75.1-3) 


THIRD PRESSING 


Further the solicitude of our patrons. 
(RV 9.1.1-3) 


Purify thyself with this stream 
with which thou didst make the sun shine, 
as thou didst drive forth the waters 
destined for the offspring of Manu. 
(RV 9.63.7) 


The golden steed is sung by Jamadagni, 
as he drives forth upon the steer-hide. 
(RV 9.65.25) 


Comrades, drive away with barbs the long-tongued 
dog, 
with predominant conquest for the (Soma) plant, 
for the stimulating juice. 
Like a horse trained for victory is this drop, 
this juice which runs forth and around along 
the purifying stream. 
(RV 9.101.1-2) 


The desired (Soma) purifies itself according to his 
proper names, 

under which the youthful one grows up. 

The lofty one of broad vision 

has mounted the lofty chariot of the sun 

which drives in different directions. 

The dear honey purifies itself, 

now that it is the tongue of truth 

and the undeceivable speaker and master of this 
hymn. à 

The son bestows on his parents 

his secret third name 

in the luminous realm of heaven. 

The shining one has bellowed down to the buckets, 

as he is held in the golden container by the priests. 

The cows of truth have resounded towards him. 

The triple-backed one shines upon the dawns. 


чїй «гай тата н 


зат data ANAT 
ят AAT TA | 
{к=п атачдич: і 


чаа чай «јла! чаап 
ficat «ТУ a п 


ЧОВ аг эгечи: 
Bart атара | 
ач att абя 
TAA RATA |1 
at mn чта 
Reed ga: | 


PEA A med: || 


err {їй vad saat 
1 єх. М ada 

атай «гү зх ач ача! 

эп айе eat quafi 

T4 Тн ча: || 


жае Кат tad ну а 
ачы чЇїїйаї эгеп ergteg | 
gatfā ga: Ге + 
"td geri Tata Ra: 1 


эта Yara: жей aha 
tfe: ate эт {төр | 
ages deat agaa- 


The underlying verses are: 


Soma, purify thyself with this most sweet and purify- 
ing stream, 

now that thou art pressed for Indra to drink. 

The smasher of evil forces, known to all the peoples, 

has sat upon his iron homestead, 

upon his station made of wood. 

Become the first of those who create freedom by 
smashing all obstacles, 

the one who is most gratifying. 


648 


ret 


«neat nea 
чаш GT AAT | 
grata чай ga: d 
wetter Pade a 
zfir “їйї | 
gt чәге | 
aitātaraāt эт 
WEN Trade: | 


(RV 9.75.1-3) 


The eleventh stuti, composed upon these verses, requires breaths of extreme 
length. According to the chanters, throughout this chant, the “о” of the 
udgitha should last 14 mātrās (time units). As in all these chants, each of the 
five portions (bhakti) should be chanted in one breath. The chant is over by 
about 5:15 A.M. After a few more mantras (Caland-Henry, $221c) and Stuti 
Milking, there is an interval of about one hour and a quarter. 

The ceremonies resume with the continuation of the animal sacrifice. 
The rice cakes representing cooked portions of the animals, and the purodasa 


649 


sf& fage зчёт fr asf u | 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


cakes are offered. After Soma oblations by hota, maitrāvaruņa, brāhmaņā- 
cchamsin, potā, nesta, acchāvāka and agnidh, followed by Soma drinking, the 
cupbearers put the sacred thread over their right shoulder, and portions of the 
cakes are placed next to the Soma cups: nine next to the cup of the hota, and 
three next to each of the other cups. These are offerings of the yajamāna and 
his priests to their ancestors. This is followed by offering a Soma cup to Savitr. 

The First Evening Recitation, the Great Recitation to the All-Gods 
(mahāvaisvadevašastra), the same as in the Agnistoma, is recited by the hota: 


adhvaryo šošomsāvo; RV 5.82.1 (3 x); 5.82.2-3 
$omsávo; RV 5.82.4-6 

$omsávo; RV 4.54.1-5 

šomsāvo; SSS 8.18.1; RV 4.54.6 
Somsavo; SSS 8.3.10! 

Somsāvo; RV 1.159.1-4 

Somsavo; SSS 8.19.1; RV 1.159.5 
Somsāvo; RV 1.4.1 

somsavo; RV 1.111.1-4 

šomsāvo; SSS 8.20.1; RV 1.111.5 
Somsavo; RV 10.123.1 

$omsavo; RV 10.63.3 

Somsavo; RV 4.50.6 

šomsāvo; RV 1.89.1-8; SSS 8.21.1 
somsavo; RV 1.89.9 

Somsāvo; RV 1.89.10 (3 x). 


The pratigara of the adhvaryu throughout the recital of RV 1.159.1-5 
(excepting the nivid) is madāmo daiva, “let us enjoy, divine one." When the 
hotā recites om, it is modāmo daiva (cf. SSS 8.3.12). After Sastra Milking, 
etc., the adhvaryu offers, with RV 6.52.13 as offering verse, a cup to the All- 
gods, and cooked rice to Soma. Clarified butter is poured into the remnants 
of this offering, and yajamāna, brahman, adhvaryu, pratiprasthātā, and 
agnidh try to see their faces reflected in it. The dish is then offered to the 
chanters who try the same. The patnivata cup of Soma is offered in the fire 
for the goddesses. 

Before the remnants of the Soma offering are drunk, preparations are 
begun for the last stuti chant. The adhvaryu issues an order (praisa): 


Agnidh, sit on the lap of the nesta. аваат | 

Nesta bring forward the wife, ee a 

inform her through the udgata pid Bis garu 
зага AFITTT 


how many times she has to use 


1 This is not a nivid, but a mantra that happens to be lacking in the Rgveda “par un 
hasard inexplicable” (Caland and Henry, page 355). 


650 


THIRD PRESSING 


the water for washing. ч sadana | 

Let the washing be done NC ae i 
via the thighs. \ i 
Having denuded them, яй ger Tegaserd qat, t 
let the washing be done. SlGAMAATAALAT | 
(To all the cupbearers:) TRAUEN 
Together with the hotā, raise your cups. YARA FRITI 
Pratiprasthātā, leave space for the dhruva пб этїї 


in the hota’s cup. 
Yajamāna, come! 
(BSS 8.14:254.13-17, omitting one phrase) 


The Soma drinking begins, and the agnidh sits on the lap of the nesta. Then 
the nesta fetches the wife, and the stuti begins. The wife sits down inside 
the Hall of Recitation, to the right (west) of the pratihartā, facing the 
udgata (south). She has brought a small vessel with water. A mat with a 
hole in it is put around her. 

The last chant of the third pressing is the Yajñāyajñīya or Agnistoma 
Stuti, the same as in the Agnistoma (which derives its name from it). It is 
interspersed with special rites that also occur in the Agnistoma, and one 
ceremony that is specific to the Agnicayana. The chant consists of twenty- 
one stotriyas with the structure: 


о hm. 1ААЛ.П.П.П.Ш; 
hm. Y. AE. TE. TT.TTE.TIE TIT; 
hm. LAAT. TIE TIT ITI. 


The sticks are laid down in accordance with the twenty-one-fold vistuti of 
Figure 50. 
The three basic stotriyàs are: 


I. prastáva: yajūā уајӣа vo gnayayi | 
udgitha: ēyirā ihà cà dāksā sayi vo prim | 
vaya 6 amrta 6 và hm mayi | 
pratihāra: dāyi vam | 
upadrava: б yam māyitrānnū šāmsisā bu | 
nidhana: và // 
II. prastāva: prayam | 
udgitha: о trānnū šāmsi sa mūrjē nu | - 
pa tamsa һуа уй ma hm māyi | 
pratihāra: sma yuh | 
upadrava: o $emà havyadataya bu | 
nidhana: và // 
III. prastāva: dase / 
udgitha: о havyadatayayi bhuvād | 


651 


PART П THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


№ oļioļ и 7am is E. 


В e—————— dán DI7——————Áá— 
| Go > 
3 ——— mne | 5 Hà 
eme 
| ee Yu 


З 


Figure 50—Twenty-one-fold Vistuti of the Yajūāyajūīya 


vājesvavitā bhūvāddhm тауі | 
pratihāra: varddhah | 
upadrava: 6 tā trata bāhūna ā bu | 
nidhana: va // 
(UG 3.7, based upon JA 64.12—13) 


The underlying verses are: 


i NI 
With every worship, with every song чп at qaa 
(strive) for Agni to be skillful for you. RRN 4 aAA | 
We shall praise the immortal Jātavedas like a friendly яя aaga waz 
ally. Bey fra a aia || 
Because he is disposed to us, gait aulā ч fantana- 


may we worship the offspring of strength, EN fies 

for him to distribute (EIOS. (to x gods). RACE | ! 

He shall be our helper in contests, I Uer 

our strengthener, and the savior of our persons. зч AL ATA N 
(RV 6.48.1-2) 


While this Yajfidyajfiiya Stuti is being sung, several other ceremonies take 
place. During the udgitha of the first stotriyā of the first round (paryāya), 
the adhvaryu recites the Seven-Hota formula: 


The hota wields large oblations, етае 
the adhvaryu efficient libation, ачекей: 


652 


THIRD PRESSING 


the agnidh unshakable strength, ATJAN AAT 1 
the assistant unshakable spirit, Agata STAKT | 
the respondents of the ceremony ayaan 
beyond attack and irresistible, с BI 
the udgata indefatigable! BE Paes, 

AA SEAT | 

(ТА 3.5.1) ^ 

followed by: 
Vācaspati Hrdvidhenāman! NOS БЫ TAR | 
May we honor your name! waa а "TA | 
May you honor our name! йан AR | 
Vācaspati has drunk Soma. atgtuft: SAAT 1 
d bI е not break, - КЫСА 
and neither the human. — | 
Homage to heaven— SEN 

wal eat | 


Homage to earth—svaha! i, | 
(ТА 3.5.1) WH 9199 TET ll 


In spite of the svāhā exclamation, this is pure recitation, without rite or obla- 
tion. 

During the second stotriyà of the first round, prastāva and udgitha are 
sung in the aniruktagàna manner of rathantara: 


prastava: yajfia yajfia vo agnayom | 
udgitha: ēyirā іла cà daksa sayi Бла Бла Бла 
bhà 6 āmrtā 6 vo hm mayi | 
(RG 1.7, in accordance with JSS 19:24.7) 


In the Agnistoma, the last stotriyā is sung in this fashion. After this, viz., 


before the third stotriyā begins, the wife puts her finger through the hole in 
the mat that surrounds her. The udgātā gazes upon it and says: 


You are lovely in appearance, mft ra ет] 
may we absorb all that is lovely! fier amfa arate | 


The wife's reply is first recited by the udgātā, then repeated by her through 
the hole: 


From you, male, full of male force, gr geraat 
may we absorb all the seeds! Rear Фа чїнї n 


(JSS 19:24.8-10) 
Then the wife, prompted and accompanied by the nesta, recites: 


i. Seeing you Agni, who is all, fade q faatadt 
who possesses all and manly power, attrragaalā 


653 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


like de ст. Sb: атай artĒr 
may I receive all seeds! m 

k. The ritual has come to the gods, Har sis Refer 1 
the goddesses have left the ritual зніч Заа srt 
For the gods! f За аза aR- 
To the Yajamāna pressing Soma, attregralā asian 
blessings accompanied by svāhā! atra: жп ЕТ: 


Standing in the ocean 
follow the Gandharvas 
on the path of the wind, 
food that is praised (?)! 


agau deam Agag 
ames qae gea: Ц 


(TS 3.5.6.3i-k) 


During this recitation, the wife washes herself between the thighs a number of 
times. Afterwards, she puts the water vessel upside down on the ground so 
that the remaining water runs out and can be seen outside the mat. Then 
the chant continues with its third stotriyā. 

When the chanting of the stuti is nearing its end, the adhvaryu performs 
an Agnicayana rite, standing at the northern hip of the bird and touching the 
five layers from top to bottom, as he did before on the eighth day (end of 
Episode 18, page 543) and on the tenth day (beginning of Episode 25, page 
599). While doing so he recites: 


d. Homage to you—do not harm me! яне Weg wr Al fées 
You ү bags d of all, Ее aga Re Pre: | 
your heart, your life are in the ocean, HN 
heaven and earth are placed on the worlds! SUA я Casey: 


eal iN iN 
e. Give some water, split what holds water. gai gii lt 
From heaven, Parjanya, sky, earth Sal 4091 ea 
help us with rain! Ra: чата та, giren- 
You are head of heaven, navel of earth, wal sr geatsza | 


strength of waters and plants, 
extending protection to all life, 
homage to the way! 


at gatstā grea miN- 
winrar | 
(TS 4.7.13.2d-e) 8919: arā auru seri || 


Finally the hota recites the Second Evening Recitation, the Recitation 
for Agni and the Maruts (āgnimārvutašastra), the same as in the Agnistoma: 


adhvaryo šošomsāvo; RV 3.3.1 (3 x); 3.3.2-10 
Somsavo; SSS 8.22.1; RV 3.3.11 

šomsāvo; RV 2.33.1 

5отѕӣуо; RV 1.87.1-5 

šomsāvo; SSS 8.23.1; RV 1.87.6 

$omsavo; RV 6.48.1-2 (made into three) 


1 Following Caland and Henry, page 371 contra Keith, page 284. 
654 


THREE UKTHYA SOMA SEQUENCES 


somsavo; RV 7.16.11-12 (made into three) 
$omsávo; RV 1.143.1-7 
Somsavo: SSS 8.24.1; RV 1.143.8 
somsivo; RV 10.9.1-3 

$omsavo; RV 6.50.14 

$omsávo; RV 5.46.7-8 

$omsávo; RV 2.32.4-5 

somsivo; RV 6.44.7—9 

šomsāvo; RV 10.15.1-3 
somsāvo; RV 10.14.4,3,5 
šomsāvo; RV 6.47.1-3 

šomsāvo; AV 7.25.1 

šomsāvo; RV 1.154.1 

šomsāvo; RV 10.53.6 

šomsāvo; RV 4.17.20 (3 x). 


This šastra is recited fairly quickly, with the clear exception of R V 10.9.1-3 
(= TS 4.1.5.1b-d, recited frequently, e.g., page 282), and the preceding āhā- 
va. The pratigara of the adhvaryu throughout the recital of RV 6.47.1-3 
is: madāmo daiva. When the hota recites om, it is: modamo dāiva (cf. SSS 
8.6.15). After the usual recitations following the šastra, a Soma cup is offered 
to Agni and the Maruts. The offering verse is RV 5.60.8, which is also recited 
more slowly, like the previous šastras. 


Eleventh Day: April 23, 1975 


EPISODE 29 
The Three Ukthya Soma Sequences and the Sixteenth (Sodasi) 


BY 2 P.M. ON APRIL 23 the twelve Soma sequences, which correspond to 
the Agnistoma, have been completed and the three Soma sequences of the 
ukthya begin. Each of these is sung in accordance with the twenty-one-fold 
vistuti of Figure 50. The First Ukthya Stuti (the 13th stuti) is based upon: 


I. prastāva: 8 hyu su bravana yi tayi | 
udgitha: ð gna itthētarā gāyira ye bhayir varddha | 
pratihāra: sa ya ha yi/ 
upadrava: o bho | 
nidhana: ha yi // 
II. prastāva: yatra Куй ca tē тапар | 
udgitha: 6 ksan dadhasa ūttarām tatrā yonayim | 
pratihàra: krņā ha yi | 
upadrava: ē sē / 
nidhana: ha yi // 


655 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


III. prastava: nā hi tē parttam aksayipat | 
udgitha: 6 van nēmānām pata athā duvah | 


THREE UKTHYA SOMA SEQUENCES 


pratihara: sakhāya indra sa ha yi | 
upadrava: 0 sā au ho va | 
nidhana: ak // 


pratihāra: vanā hà yi | 
upadrava: o so / 
nidhana: Aa yi // 
(UG 4.1, based upon JA 65.1-3) 


The underlying verses are: 


Come and I shall speak well to thee; ua yg sal &- 
—Agni, though the other songs are proper, sa gadu fin: | 
thou shalt grow strong upon our drops. vārīta geet: ц 
Whenever thou shalt turn thy mind thy highest A a as ES 
" a q Fal 
capability, ad E 


then thou shalt make thy seat. 


Because thy gift shall never be annoying, аят 98: атаа || 


good one of our side, aR X чаабиче, 
therefore thou shalt win our friendship.! waaArat adii 


(RV 6.16.16-18) ererr 291 air |! 


The thirteenth śastra is recited by the maitrāvaruņa: 


adhvaryo šošomsāvo; RV 6.16.16 (3 x); 6.16.17-18 
Somsāvo; RV 6.16.19-21 

šomsāvo; RV 3.51.1-3; 8.42.1-3; 7.82.1-10; 7.84.1-4 
$omsavo; RV 7.84.5 (3 x). 


The first ukthya cup, made up from one-third of the Soma mixture in the 
Ukthya vessel, as in the preceding two pressings, is offered to Indra-Varuņa. 
The offering verse is RV 6.68.11. The Second Ukthya Stuti (the 14th stuti) 


(UG 4.2, based upon JA 65.4—5) 
The underlying verses are: 


Seeking aid, like those carrying something heavy, aag EIE G 
we summon thee in the contest, foremost one, en a HT wediad: 1 
br i id rte one. ant fast dara? || 
o aid in this enterprise, Е ЕСЕ Я 
ааа T- 
that youthful and strong one has approached thee, sd a P шы 
who (actest) with daring. or s ku т l 4 
Indra, we comrades choose thee for our winning гата чн 
helper. wala ge атайн || 
(RV 8.21.1-2) 


The fourteenth šastra is recited by the brāhmaņācchamsin: 


adhvaryo soSomsavo; RV 8.21.1 (made into three, 

the first recited 3 x) 

šomsāvo; RV 8.21.9-10 (made into three) 

$omsavo; КУ 1.57.1-3; 6.73.1-3; 10.42.1-10; 10.68.1-12 
$omsavo; RV 10.42.11 (3 x). 


The second ukthya cup, from the second third of the ukthya Soma mixture, 
is offered to Indra-Brhaspati. The offering verse is RV 7.97.10. The Third 
Ukthya Stuti (the 15th Stuti) is based upon: 


I. prastava: adhā hindra girvana г 


is based upon: 


I. prastāva: vayāmū tvàm apürvi yo và | 
udgitha: о rannakacchit bharantah | а và ho syavah | 
pratihara: vajrimácitram hava ha yi | 
upadrava: 6 hà au ho và | 
nidhana: ak // 

П. prastāva: vajrayimscayitram havama ho và | 
udgitha: дра tvā karmannütayayi | sa no ho yuva | 
pratihara: ugrascakrama yo ha yi | 
upadrava: 6 $2 au ho và | 
nidhana: ak // 

П. prastāva: ugrascakrama yo dhrsē va | 
udgitha: 6 middhya vitārām | vavrho ma ha yi | 


1 ЈА 65.3 has pate, "master" for RV vaso, “good one.” 


656 


udgitha: ора tva kama īmāhāyi | 
pratihāra: sāsrgmāhā au ho au һо và | 
udgītha: odéhayi/ 

pratihāra: vāgmāntā ya au ho au ho va | 
upadrava: o bhi re hi ya ha | 

nidhana: ho yi lā // 

II. prastāva: vārņa tvā yavyabhire | 
udgitha: ērddhāntī šūra brahmani | 
pratihāra: vavrddhvam sā au ho au ho và | 
udgitha: o à hà yi | 
pratihara: drivo dà yi và au ho au ho và | 
upadrava: 6 và e hi ya ha | 
nidhana: hod yila/ 

Ill. prastāva: уийјапіі hari i girā ē 
udgītha: 0 gāthayā vu rau rà the uro yugayi | 


657 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


pratihāra: vacē yū jā au hē au ho va | 
udgitha: ēndrā ha yi | 
pratihāra: vaha suva au ho au ho va | 
upadrava: 6 dā ē hi ya hà | 
nidhana: ho yi lā // 
(UG 4.3 based upon JA 65.6-8) 


The structure of the stotriyās in this stuti, with two occurrences of udgitha 
and.pratihara, is not found anywhere else. 
The underlying verses are: 


Indra, lover of songs, erar lex ап 
we have released our desires upon thee, sd car тиң we: darat | 
like those going along the waters (release) the waters. СЫ азер Gee 
Sea wed saa: tt 

Hero, our prayers strengthen thee, NEL A 
like water in the brooks, чот сат Seat a 
although thou growest strong (by thyself) day by day. ata A нп | 
(The singers) yoke with their song areata абат Маа ui 
the two steeds of swift (Indra) - 
on to his broad chariot of broad yoke, qwe «i кы 
the steeds which convey Indra пча er su 
and are yoked by our (holy) words. waa TATA ll 

(RV 8.98.7-9) 


The fifteenth Sastra is recited by the acchāvāka: 


adhvaryo šošomsāvo; RV 8.98.7 (3 x); 8.98.8—9 
Somsavo; RV 8.98.10-12 

šomsāvo; RV 2.13.1-13; 1.154.1-6; 1.155.1-6; 6.69.1—7 
$omsavo; R V 6.69.8 (3 x). 


The third ukthya cup is offered to Indra-Visņu. The offering verse is RV 
6.69.3. 

The priests are ahead of their schedule and wait for about three hours 
until 6:30 P.M. When the sun is half set, the Sodasi Stuti (the 16th Stuti) 
begins. The dark horse is tied to the eastern entrance of the new havirdhāna. 
Since the Sodaši Sastra will be recited by the hotā, the adhvaryu will hand 
over the stotra (see above, page 579). For this stuti only, it consists of two 
grass blades and two blades of gold. Like the grass blades, these are long 
and thin. The adhvaryu puts them on the back of the horse, leads the horse 
toward the sadas, ties it to the eastern entrance of the sadas, and hands 
the stotra to the udgātā. The vistuti for the Sixteenth Chant is again the 
twenty-one-fold pictured in Figure 50. Afterwards, the horse will be given to 
the adhvaryu, and a similar horse to the udgata. 

The SodaSi is based upon strange mantras, full of interpolations, which 


658 


THE SIXTEENTH SOMA SEQUENCE 


are not found in the Rgveda though they are referred to in the Srauta Sūtras 
and Brahmanas of the Rgveda, and occur in the Sāmaveda and Atharvaveda. 
Both chant and recitation are complex and are considered particularly sacred 
and powerful. Many Nambudiris who don’t wish or are unable to attend 
the entire Atiratra ritual, make enquiries when the Sodašī will take place, 
and take care to be present at least then. The chant contains the largest num- 
ber of long syllables and the longest syllables. While some single syllables 
last as long as 18 seconds, the longest portion (bhakti) that has to be sung 
in one breath (the pratihara) lasts about thirty seconds (see also Staal 
1961, 83). There is a belief among the chanters and reciters that those who 
make a mistake when singing this chant or reciting the $astra will go mad. 

Before the adhvaryu takes the stotra, the yajamana, prompted by his 
elder brother Vasudevan Akkitiripad, recites: 


Than whom no other is born higher, sep sie чї APA ofer | 
entering all beings, Prajapati, g saat аат Prat | 
joined with his creatures, associated with three vardēm: manīt afa: 


n Sodašī! Ai ev era а іе и 
This proper brahmin, called Indra, чч mar segui: | 

renowned among his followers, rei ara at om 

I shall praise your tawny horses in great assembly! x Ẹ at 22 serae qiti 
Privileged I love your favorite drink, Indra, g бач: я ағ | 

E butter, which is poured with tawny (Soma ач e яа | | 

Renowned among your followers, let the chants v чта Е 3 ч: eram ādā 1 
enter you with your tawny appearance! st ж эт edt Rara | 


(TB 3.7.9.5-6) aad fm: u 


This recitation from the Taittiriya Brahmana intertwines a verse from the 
Reveda (10.96.1) with another mantra (given in SSS 9.6.6). These mantras 
recur in the Sodasi Sastra (Part VI), which is characterized throughout by 
the same process of intertwining or transposition (viharanam). 

The chant begins. The three basic stotriyās are: 


I. prastava: indrà jūsāsvā pravaha | 

udgitha: буй hi Sara hariha pa yi ba | 
sitasya mātirņā madhoh | 

pratihāra: cà kā nāšcā | 

upadrava: o mē ba dā yo | 

nidhana: ha yi // 

П. prastāva: indra jatharannavyanna | 

udgitha: o nasva madhor divo nā sya | 

sūtāsyā sūvarņā ū pa | 


659 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


pratihāra: tvā mādāssū | 
upadrava: o со bà à sthuh | 
nidhana: hā yi // 
ПІ. prastava: indrastü ra san mitro na | 
udgitha: 6 ghana vrtra yatirna bà yi Бра | 
davalam bhrgir na sa sa | 
pratihāra: ha yi šātrūn mā | 
upadrava: 6 so bà mā уб | 
nidhana: hà yi // 
(UG 4.4, based upon JA 65.9-11) 


The underlying verses could well have been composed under the influence of 
Soma: 
TR GI + agr 
Indra enjoy—drive on, alfè - ERE 
come, hero—with your two steeds, Ral Чч SC 
drink of Soma—like a sage, IK: eke 
loving the sweet, pleased with inebriation! aūtagrarsdalu [| 


Y of 

Indra, your belly—like one to be praised, ga ace uel т 
fill it with sweet—like heavens, quer ач wa 
with pressed Soma—like paradise, мєч garu ens T- 
ee inebriants p x ši you! d car на gardi эт: n 
Indra fast conquering—like a frien , = 

e : : ? gauna 
killing the demon—like ascetics, x m m i К 
he split the cave—like Bhrgu, ay aam чїч | 
he conquers his enemies inebriated with Soma! fats аё эла 


(AV 2.5.1-3) dae maa aÈ Әнет n 


The same technique of transposition or intertwining underlies the con- 
struction of the Şodaśi Sastra. It can be divided into ten parts: 


I. The first part is the same piece that underlies the Stuti: 


šomsāvo | indra jusasva pra vaha yahi Sara hari iha | piba sutasya 
тайт na madhva$ cakānaš cürur madayo || (3 x) indra jatharan 
navyan na prnasva madhvo divo na | asya sutasya svarņopa tvā madās 
suvāco astho [[ indras turasan mitro na jaghāna vrtram yatir na | 
bibheda valam bhrgur na sasāhe šatrūn made somasyo || 


This first part consists of three verses in the svarāj meter, which consists of 
34 syllables. As the first verse is repeated thrice, there are 5 x 34 = 170 
syllables. Traditionally, the Sodaši Sastra is held to consist of anustubh me- 
ters. An anustubh consists of four octosyllabic verses, or 4 X 8 = 32 syl- 
lables. Part I is interpreted as consisting of five anustubh verses, 1.e., 5 x 
32 = 160 syllables. This leaves an excess of 10 syllables. 


660 


THE SIXTEENTH SOMA SEQUENCE 


II. RV 8.46.1: 
tvāvatah purūvaso vayam indra pranetah | smasi sthatar harino || 


This verse is in an irregular gāyatrī meter. The regular gāyatrī consists of 
three octosyllabic verses, or 3 X 8 = 24 syllables. RV 8.46.1 is a gāyatrī 
pada nicrt, which has one syllable less in each pada, viz. 24 — 2 = 22 syl- 
lables. Add to these the 10 syllables left from Part I, and we obtain 22 + 
10 = 32 syllables. These are interpreted as constituting one anustubh. 


III. The next piece consists of six verses in the anustubh meter, which are 
put together by intertwining three verse in the gāyatrī meter and three verse 
in the pankti meter. This can be done because the anustubh consists of four 
octosyllabic verses, the gāyatrī of three, and the pankti of five. The first 
underlying mantra in the gāyatrī meter is: 


à туй vahantu harayo vrsanam somapitaye | indra tvā šūracaksasah || 
(RV 1.16.1) 


The first underlying mantra in the pankti meter is: 


svādor ittha visūvato madhvah pibanti gauryah | ya indrena sayāvarīr 


vrsna madanti sobhase vasvir anu svarājyam || 
(RV 1.84.10) 


The first two mantras in the anustubh meter, which result from intertwining 
these, are: 


ā tva vahantu harayas svador itthā visūvatah / vrsanam somapitaye 
madhvah pibanti gauryo // indra tvā šūracaksaso уй indrena 
sayavarih vrsņā madanti šobhase vasvir anu svarājyo // 


In the remaining six mantras in the anustubh meter, the portions from the 
underlying gāyatrī verses (R V 1.16.2—3) are in italics, and the portions from 
the underlying pankti merses (RV 1.84.11-12) are in Roman: 


ima dhānā ghrtasnuvas tà asya pršanāyuvaļ / hari ihopa vaksatas 
somam srīņanti prsnayo // indram sukhatame rathe priya indrasya 
dhenavah / vajram hinvanti sayakam vasvir anu svarajyo // indram 
pratar havamahe tà asya namasa sahah / indram prayaty adhvare 
saparyanti pracetaso // indram somasya pitaye vratany asya sašcire // 
purüni pürvacittaye vasvir anu svarajyo // 


IV. Six anustubh mantras result from intertwining three verses in the usnih 
meter (RV 8.98.1-3) and three verses in the brhati meter (RV 3.45.1-3). The 


661 


PART П THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


usņih consists of three verses in 28 syllables (64812), and the brhati con- 
sists of four verses in 36 syllables (8-+-8+12-+8). Portions from the former 
are italicized: 


indraya sama gayata mandrair indra haribhih / vipraya brhate brhad 
yahi mayūraromabho // dharmakrte vipašcite mā tvā kecin ni yaman 
vim / 

panasyave na pasino ‘ti dhanveva tam iho // tvam indrābhibhūr asi 
vrtrakhādo valamrujah / tvam sūryam arocayah purān darmo apām 
ajo // vi$vakarma višvadevas sthātā rathasya haryoh / талат asy 
abhisvara indro drdha cid ārujo // vibhrajam jyotisa svar gambhīrām 
udadhimriva / agaccho rocanan divah kratum pusyasi gā ivo // devas 
ta indra sakhyā pra sugopā yavasan dhe / ya yemire navo yatha 
hradam kulyā ivāšato // 


V. Two anustubh mantras result from intertwining a twenty-syllable verse 
(RV 7.34.4) with a verse in the tristubh meter (RV 6.47.8). The tristubh 
consists of four verses of 11 syllables each: 


à dhūrsv asmā urun no lokam anu nesi vidvān / dadhātāšvant svarvaj 
jyotir abhayam svasto // indro na vajry rsva ta indra sthavirasya 
baht / hiranyabahur upa stheyāma šaraņā brhanto // 


VI. Six anustubh mantras result from intertwining three verses consisting 
of 16 syllables each (given in SSS 9.6.6) and three verses in the jagatī meter 
(RV 10.96.1-3). The jagatī consists of four verses of 12 syllables each: 


esa brahmā pra te mahe vidathe Samsisam hari / ya rtviyah pra te 
vanve vanuso haryatam mado // indro nàma ghrtan na yo haribhi$ 
саги secate / $ruto gana à tvā visantu harivarpasam giro // visrutayo 
harim hi yonim abhi ye samasvaran / yatha patho hinvanto hari 
divyam yatha sado // indra tv adyann à yam prnanti haribhir na 
dhenavah / ti rātaya indrāya šūsam harivantam arcato // tvam iccha 
so asya vajro harito ya ayasah / vasaspate harir nikamo harir 
à gabhastyo // yanti giro dyumni sušipro harimanyusayakah / 
na samyata indre ni rüpà haritā mimiksiro 


VII. Four anustubh mantras result from reciting three gayatri verses (RV 
1.84.13-15), consisting together of 3 x 24 — 72 syllables, as if they consist- 
ed of two anustubh verses (2 x 32 — 64 syllables) with 8 syllables left. 
These remaining eight are followed by a verse (RV 10.133.1) in the Sakvari 
meter, which consists of 7 x 8 — 56 syllables, together recited as if they, 
too, consisted of two anustubh verses (64 syllables): 


662 


THE SIXTEENTH SOMA SEQUENCE 


indro dadhico asthabir vrtrany apratiskutah | jaghāna navatir nave- 
cchann asvasya yac chiro || parvatesv apasritam tad vidac charyaņāvati/ 
atraha gor amanvata пата tvastur apicyo || ittha candramaso grhe 
pro ‘sv asmaipuroratham | indrāya sūgam arcatabhike cid и lokakrto || 
samge samatsu vrtraha ‘smakam bodhicodita / nabhantām anyakesam 
jyākā adhi dhanvaso || 


IX. Somsavo; nivid (cf. SSS 8.25.1); RV 8.69.15. 
X. šomsāvo; RV 8.69.7 (3 x). 


The total number of anustubh verses in the Sodasi Sastra is forty: 


Parts I and II: 
Part III: 

Part IV: 

Part V: 

Part VI: 

Part VII: 

Part VIII: 
Part IX: 

Part X: 


ш ке ©\ > D3 0 ос 


401 


The pratigara of the adhvaryu throughout the recital of the verses in parts 
III through VI is: othamo daiva made. When the hota recites om, it is modamo 


daivotho (cf. SSS 12.11.10). 
Finally a Soma cup is offered to Indra Sodasi with RV 10.96.13 as offer- 


ing verse. The adhvaryu uses the sodaši-pātram (see page 215). This is the 
last graha (see page 608). 


Eleventh Day: April 23 and 24, 1975 
EPISODE 30 
The Three Overnight Rounds (Rātriparyāya) 


AT ABOUT 8:00 P.M. the three nocturnal rounds (rātriparyāya) of the Ati- 
ratra begin. Each consists of four Soma sequences. The structure of all the 
chants is the same, the fifteenfold vistuti of Figure 48. Within each round, 
the four šastras are recited successively by hota, maitrāvaruņa, brāhmaņā- 
cchamsin, and acchavaka. The offerings are all for Indra and are made by 
adhvaryu and pratiprasthātā together with the cupbearers from camasa cups 
without mantras. 


1 This is one of the very few places where even Caland got lost. 


663 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


The first stuti of the first round (the 17th stuti) is based upon: 


I. 


II. 


II. 


The underlying verses are: 


Sing forth to Indra who drinks up your (Soma) 


plants, 


the all-prevailing (hero) of a hundred intentions, 

the most gratifying (ruler) of the peoples. 

By the name ‘Indra’ address him who is summoned 
and praised by many, 

who leads the song and is famed of old. 

Indra shall grant great booty to our warrior. 

The great one shall hold it up to his knees. 


prastāva: 
udgītha: 


pratihāra: 
upadrava: 


nidhana: 
prastava: 
udgitha: 


pratihara: 
upadrava: 


nidhana: 
prastava: 
udgitha: 


pratihara: 
upadrava: 


nidhana: 


pāntām ā vē andhasah | 
ondram a bhà yi pragayata višvāsāham | šātākrā- 
tüm | 
mamhisthaū carsana yi | 
o mā au ho và | 
o кар |] 
purūhūtām pūrūstutam | 
6 rūhūtām purūstūtam gathanayam | sānāšrūtām | 
ā yindra iti brava yi | 
6 nā au ho và | 
6 kah |/ 
indra innd mahonam | 
ondra inno mahonam data vājā | nan nārtūh | 
māham abhijava | 
o mā au ho và | 
o кар || 
(UG 5.1, based upon JA 66.1-3) 


чаа! ат ste 
зехни m ata | 
Pera erent 
ае aiaa 1 
дын dert 
TMT 3 qup 
хек gfe ahaa ц 
зе Bal wur 
ата arts 99: 1 


(RV 8.92.1-3) Het ARARAT Aa, |! 


In the second and third stotriyā of this seventeenth stuti, the first pada 
(“foot”’: third or quarter verse) of the mantra is repeated (with slight varia- 
tions, e.g., the first syllable is replaced by “‘o’’): it occurs first in the prastāva, 
then again at the beginning of the udgitha. In the seventeenth šastra, recited 
by the hota, the same practice is followed in RV 8.92.2-6 (cf. S$S 7.26.12 
and 9.7.2) among the mantras that constitute the Sastra: 


$omsavo; RV 8.92.1 (3 x); 8.92.23 
$omsavo; RV 8.92.4—6 

šomsāvo; RV 8.92.7-33 

šomsāvo; 1.51.1-14 


664 


THE NOCTURNAL ROUNDS 


šomsāvo; RV 1.51.15 (3 x). 


The offering verse is RV 2.14.1. 
The second stuti of the first round (the 18th stuti) is based upon: 


I. prastāva: 


II. 


Ш. 


udgitha: 


pratihāra: 
upadrava: 
nidhana: 
prastāva: 
udgitha: 


pratihāra: 
upadrava: 
nidhana: 
prastāva: 
udgītha: 


pratihāra: 
upadrava: 
nidhana: 


pra va indrāya mādānam | 
б và indrā au hō | ya mādānam hara à švā au ho | 
уй gāyāta | 
sakhāyās so au ho | 
б pē và уйу nno | 
ha yi [| 
Samséd uktham sudanava yi | 
ūmsā yid ūkthā au ho | sūdānāvā uta dyuksā au ho | 
yatha narah | 
cakrmā sā au hē | 
б го bà dha so | 
hà yi |] 
tvan na indra vajayuh | 
б van na уй au hō | dra vājāyus tuvām gavya au ho | 
šātākrātā bu | 
tuvām ha yi rā au hē | 
б уб bārvā so | 
ha yi [| 
(UG 5.2, based upon JA 66.4—6) 


The underlying verses are: 


Comrades, sing forth a stimulating (song) to Indra 


of the golden steeds, 


to the drinker of Soma. 

Recite a hymn to the giver of goods, 

and a majestic one at that, 

just as we men have composed it for him of real 


solicitude. 


Indra of a hundred intentions, 
thou art eager for booty, 


for cattle and for gold. 


In this chant, the first pada (“ооё”) of each verse is again repeated, with 
similar variations. This first pada is also repeated in RV 7.31.1-3 and 8.32.1- 
3 among the mantras of the eighteenth Sastra, recited by the maitrāvaruņa: 


я ч galā uud 
Saag MITA 1 
gala: ач и 
аячы gara 
эч get wat афі 
яи genti i 
md 
cdd ger n 
wed Tem: ажа | 
ed Ruada Ц 
(RV 7.31.13) Ж 


Somsavo; RV 7.31.1 (3 x); 7.31.2-3 


665 


PLATE 106 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


$omsávo; RV 8.32.1-3 

šomsāvo; RV 1.4.1-10 

šomsāvo; RV 1.52.1-8; 1.52.10-12; 1.52.14 
$omsávo; RV 1.52.13 (3 x). 


The offering verse is RV 6.44.15. 
The third Stuti of the first round (the 19th Stuti) is based upon: 


I. prastāva: vayam ū tvà tadidartthah | 
udgitha: ai hi Ао yi vayam и tva tadidarttha indra Туй yantas 
sākhāyah | 
pratihāra: kanvah / 
upadrava: o ktha yi bhir jo bà | 
nidhana:  rantà уа || 
II. prastāva: na ghem ānyad à papana | 
udgitha: ai hi ho yi na ghem anyad à papana vajrinn apaso navā 
yi stau | 
pratihāra: tā ve / 
upadrava: o sto mai$co bà | 
nidhana: ketā ya // 
III. prastáva: icchanta yi devas sunvantam | 
udgitha: ai hi ho icchanti devās sunvantan na svapnaya 
sprhayamti | 
pratihāra: yanti / 
upadrava: ē mādāmo bā | 
nidhana:  tandrà уа || 


(UG 5.3, based upon JA 66.7-9) 


THE NOCTURNAL ROUNDS 


šomsāvo; RV 8.2.16 (3 x); 8.2.17-18 
S0msavo; RV 8.64.6-8 

S$omsávo; RV 3.37.1-10 

$omsávo; RV 1.53.1-10 

$omsávo; RV 1.53.11 (3 x). 


The offering verse is RV 6.24.1. 
The fourth stuti of the first round (the 20th stuti) is based upon: 


I. prastāva: indrāya madvane sutam indraya mo và | 
udgitha: ēnā yi sitam pari stobha hà hāntū no gà yi rah | 
pratihāra: arkam ārcā ha ha yi | 
upadrava: o karavah | 
nidhana: ē yi [a // 

II. prastāva: yasmin višvā adhi šriyē yasmin vivo và | 
udgitha: о dha yi <ғауа rāņanti sa hà hà pta sāmsādah | 
pratihāra: āyindrā sate ha ha yi | 
upadrava: 6 vamaha yi / 
nidhana: o yi lā // 

III. prastava:  trikadrukesu cétana trikadruko và | 
udgitha: — o cà yi tananda yi và so ya hà ha jfiam atnata | 
pratihara: tam id varddha hà ha yi | 
upadrava: 6 no gà yi rah | 
nidhana: ð yi lā // 


(UG 5.4, based upon JA 66.10-12) 


The underlying verses are: 


Indra, we Kanvas who are thy devoted comrades aug сат agat 

sing to thee with hymns, зең сатта: |9; | 

having that as our only purpose. — suadet \ 

I do not admire anything else ši i 

in this new quest of my work, cudgel-bearer. B TT : 

I think only of thy praise. «aaa Maer | 

The gods seek only the man pressing (Soma); чат «аа Fata t 

they аге not eager for sleep. =ч Зар gari 

Untiring they go after their exhilaration. а Mala ezeufea | 
(RV 8.2.16-18) afi saremo: | 


Again, the practice of the stuti is adopted in the Sastra: the first pada of the 
verse is repeated in RV 8.2.16-18 and 8.64.6-8 among the mantras of the 
nineteenth $astra, recited by the brāhmaņācchamsin: 


666 


The underlying verses are: 


Let our songs resound around to Indra who is wild 
for the juice. 

Let the bards sing their song. 

We summon Indra to the pressing, in whom reside all 
splendors, 

in whom rejoice the seven assemblies. 

The gods performed a notable sacrifice among the 
Trikadruka people. 

Let our songs increase it. 

(RV 8.92.19-21) 


galu ngA ЧЧ 

aft ehieg at fire: 1 
aaia BA 1 
afaa fran afer frit 
wit au аа: | 
qe gd darat ц 
frega чая 

хатат азая | 
agda at fat: 1 


The first pada of the verse is repeated in RV 8.92.19-31 and 1.7.1—3 (partly 
translated above, page 631) among the mantras of the twentieth šastra, 


recited by the acchāvāka: 


šomsāvo; RV 8.92.19 (3 x); 8.92.20-21 
667 


PLATE 106 
Nocturnal Recital by Brahmanacchamsin 


During the Atirātra (“overnight”), there are three overnight rounds 
(rātriparyāya), each consisting of four Soma sequences. Each 
sequence includes one chant by the three sāmavedins, and one re- 
cital from the Rgveda. During each round, the four recitals are suc- 
cessively rendered by the hota, maitravaruna, brāhmaņācchamsin, 
and acchavaka priests. They sit in front of their dhisnya hearths, 
facing east, and recite with their hands folded. On the plate, the 
brāhmaņācchamsin recites his $astra. 


[20 SIN 


668 


669 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


šomsāvo; RV 1.7.1-3 
somsavo; RV 1.7.4-10 
somsavo; RV 1.54.1-10 
šomsāvo; RV 1.54.11 (3 x). 


The offering verse is RV 6.44.16. 


The first nocturnal round is over. The first stuti of the second round 


(the 21st stuti) is based upon: 


I. 


II. 


ПІ. 


The underlying verses аге: 


Indra, this Soma has been purified for thee upon 


prastava: 
udgitha: 


pratihāra: 
upadrava: 


nidhana: 
prastāva: 
udgītha: 


pratihāra: 
upadrava: 


nidhana: 
prastava: 
udgitha: 


pratihāra: 
upadrava: 


nidhana: 


the sacrificial strew. 


Come—hurry—and drink ofit. 


āyan ta indra soma u va ha yi | 
o pūtē adhi barhisy и và ho yi nipūtē adhi barhisy и 
và ho yi | 
à yi him asya | 
б và pa yi ba | 
suvrkkibhir nrmadanam bhare su va [| 
šācigē šācipūjana u va hà yi | 
б yam raņāya tē suta u và ho ayam raņāya tē suta и 
va ho yi | 
akhandala | 
dha ya sā yi | 
suvrkkibhir nrmadanam bhare su va [| 
yas te $rmgavrso napad и va hà yi | 
o napat kundapayya u va ho yi pranapat kundapayya 
и và ho yi | 
này asmin da | 
o à mà nāk | 
suvrkkibhir nrmadanam bhare su va |] 
(UG 6.1, based upon JA 67.1-3) 


эй а geg ist 

{Чат эЧ ят | 
тён zat ra | 
anti тч гәт 


Sacigu, Šācipūjana, this has been pressed for thy si la x ga: | 


delight. 


Akhandala thou art summoned. 
Offspring of Srigavrs, descendent! 
—he has fixed his mind on thy kundapayya offering. 


In this stuti, the second pada of each verse is repeated, with variations, in the 
udgītha. The second pada is also repeated in RV 8.17.11-13; 8.64.10-12 


MAIS S ENT | 
Wu BAAN aura 
SOT, give red: | 
(RV 8.17.11-13) — AR ҹи er ar: | 


among the mantras of the twenty-first gastra, recited by the hota: 


670 


THE NOCTURNAL ROUNDS 


šomsāvo; RV 8.17.11 (3 x); 8.17.12-13 
Somsāvo; RV 8.64.10-12 

$omsávo; RV 8.93.1-33 

šomsāvo; RV 10.48.1-10 

šomsāvo; RV 10.48.11 (3 x). 


The offering verse is RV 2.19.1. 


The second stuti of the second round (the 22nd Stuti) is based upon: 


1. 


II. 


IIT. 


prastāva: 
udgītha: 


pratihāra: 
upadrava: 


nidhana: 
prastāva: 
udgītha: 


pratihāra: 
upadrava: 


nidhana: 
prastāva: 
udgītha: 


pratihāra: 
upadrava: 


nidhana: 


à їй na indra ksumāntām | 
o tram grabham sam grbhāyā citram grābham sam 
gr au hō yi bhā ya | 
ai hà yi mahāhastī daksā һо yi | 
au ho và ho bà na yi nē | 
ha yi || 
vitmā hi tva tūvikūrmim | 
б vidēsņan tūvīmāghāntū videsnan tava au ho yi mā 
gham | 
ai hà yi tūvimātram à ho yi | 
au ho và ho bà và bho | 
hà yi || 
nahi tvà $ura dà yi vah | 
o martāsē ditsantan na martàso dā au ho yitsantam | 
ai hà yi bhiman na gam vara ho yi | 
au ho và hà bà yanto | 
hà yi || 
(UG 6.2, based upon JA 67.4-6) 


The underlying verses are: 


aT 9 е BARĀ 


Indra, with thy great right hand seize a wondrous fast ata a dem l 


handful of cattle for us. 


aege aera u 


We know that thou art one of mighty enterprises "зп fe ca 
; В : € taag 
mighty gifts, T 


mighty liberality and mighty portions through thy gazo qiias, | 
assistance. gera T 

Like a fearsome bull, neither gods nor mortals í afg сат R Зат 

can stop thee when thou wishest to give, o hero. ч audet бсйгащ | 


Following the stuti, the second pada of each verse is repeated in RV 8.81. 1-3; 
4.32.1-3 among the mantras of the twenty-second šastra, recited by the 


maitrāvaruņa: 


(КУ 8.81.1-3) fura at ааа 


671 


w, 


PLATE 106 


PART П THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


šomsāvo; RV 8.81.1 (3 x); 8.81.23 
Somsāvo; RV 4.32.1-3 

šomsāvo; RV 1.8.1-10 

šomsāvo; RV 2.16.1-8 

šomsāvo; RV 2.16.9 (3 x). 


The offering verse is RV 6.44.14. 


The third stuti of the second round (the 23rd stuti) is based upon: 


I. prastāva: abhi tva vrsabhā sutē sutam srjo và | 
 udgitha: ð pitaya yi sutam srjami pitaya yi | 
pratihāra: trmpa | 
upadrava: o yà au ho và | 
nidhana: šūuhī madam || 
П. prastāva: mā tva mūrā avisyavē mopahasvo và | | 
udgitha: | o a dābhān mopahasvana à dābhān | ` 
pratihāra: mā kim / 
upadrava: om hmā au ho và | 
nidhana: dvisām vānah || 
ПІ. prastāva: іла гуй goparinasam mahē mandē”vā | 
udgitha: о rādhāsā yi mahē mandantū rādhāsā yi | 
pratihāra: sarah / 
upadrava: ē rā au ho và | 
nidhana:  yathà ра || 


(UG 6.3, based upon JA 67.7-9) 


THE NOCTURNAL ROUNDS 


Somsavo; RV 3.41.1-9 
šomsāvo; RV 2.17.1-8; šomsāvo; RV 2.17.9 (3 x). 


The offering verse is RV 10.112.2. 
The fourth stuti of the second round (the 24th stuti) is based upon: 


I. prastāva: idam vasē sutam andhā e | 
udgitha: ē bā supūrņām udarau ho và | pibā supürnam udarau 
ho và | 
pratihāra: à nabhayin | 
upadrava: 6 rimā tā au ho ba | 
nidhana: ho yi [à // 
П. prastāva: nrbhir ddhautas suto āšnā e | 
udgitha: — o vyà varaih pāripūtā au ho và | 
avyā varaih pāripūtā au ho và | 
pratihāra: āšvē nā ni / 
upadrava: o nadisi au ho bà | 
nidhana: hd yi lā // 
IIl. prastava: tan te yavayyatha gobhir e | 
udgitha: 6 dum akarmā šrīņāntā au ho và | 
svadum akarmā šrīņāntā au ho và | 
pratihāra: indrā tvāsmīn | 
upadrava: 6 dhamā dā au ho ba | 
nidhana: Ao yi lā // 


(UG 6.4, based upon JA 67.10-12) 


The underlying verses are: 


£4 чат ganu; 


The underlying verses are: 


Bull, I release the juice for thee to drink at this afa eat SAC gu 
pressing. ga amà drad | 
Enjoy, and reach exhilaration. gear ваш ada N 
ti not a, jās ш scornful deceive thee at cal gu здат 

ecause they desire thy help. E 
Love not the enemies of the priests. ERIT a pu 
With their plentitude of milk, Bd ERE U 
let (the drops) stimulate thee here for our solicitude, хе еш meer 
Drink a lakeful of it, like a buffalo. нё agra waa | 

(RV 8.45.22-24) яй sr aat бча ц 


The second pada of reach verse is repeated in RV 8.45.22-24; 8.69.46 among 
the mantras of the twenty-third Sastra, recited by the brāhmaņācchamsin: 


Somsavo; RV 8.45.22 (3 х); $omsávom; RV 8.45.23-24 
somsavo; RV 8.69.4—6 


672 


Good one, drink the noble and full juice of the plant. 
Fearlessly we bestow it upon thee. 
It has been cleansed by the priests, pressed by rocks, 
purified by the strainer, and washed in the rivers like 
a steed. 
Mixing it, like barley, with milk, we have sweetened 
it for thee. 
Indra, (we summon) thee to this comraderie. 
(RV 8.2.1-3) 


fear giganta 1 
зага да, «feat 8 u 
PRESA gat aÈ- 

vit aii: qR: | 
arā a Гаї wae и 
a а aa aar wif: 
гадай Уға: | 
ged rats RANAR u 


The second pada of each verse is repeated in RV 8.2.1-3; 1.9.1-3 among the 
mantras of the twenty-fourth $astra, recited by the acchavaka: 


Somsavo; RV 8.2.1 (3 x); $omsavo; RV 8.2.2-3 


Somsāvo; RV 1.9.1-3; šomsāvo; 1.9.4-10 
$omsavo; RV 5.34.1-8 
Somsavo; RV 5.31.3 (3 x). 


673 


THE NOCTURNAL ROUNDS 


The offering verse is RV 3.35.1. 
The second stuti of the third round (the 26th stuti) is based upon: 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


The offering verse is RV 10.112.6. 
It is shortly after midnight, and the third nocturnal round begins. Its 
first stuti (the 25th stuti) is based upon: 


І. prastāva: 2 tū гіа ni sidata | 
I. prastāva: idam hy anū ājasā | udgitha: ēndram abhayi pra gāyatā sākhāya stūmavā au ho | 
udgītha: — o tam rādhānām pātau ho va ha yi | pibā tū vasya gà a uc ji = e tens 
yirvanau ho va ha yi | pratihara: haya yi sākhāya ѕіотауд au ho | 
pratihāra: pibā tu vau ho va ha yi | ira ki mā hà so | 
upadrava: 0 gà yirvāņā au ho và | Ren MEA Ļu m 
nidhana: ghrtascatah || II. prastāva: purütamam purūņām | 
II. prastāva: pra tē aśnotu kuksyoh | udgitha: о Sanam varyanama yindram some saca au ho | 
udgitha: — ondra brāhmaņā šā yirau ho và hà yi | pra bāhū sūra Mr Ss уі | к PEE TE IE - 
radhasau ho va ha yi | pratihara: haya indram some sacā au ho | 
pratihāra: pra baha šau ho và hà yi | up D sēd i be, sū to | 
upadrava: 6 rādhāsā au hé va eee ae Ш к ES в 
nidhana: ghrtascatah | III. prastāva: sa ghā nē yoga ā bhuvāt | 
Ш. prastāva: y ЕУ УТУР / udgitha: ē raya yi sa purandha yam gamad vājēbhir à au ho | 
E A AE X 5 asanah 
udgitha: 6 tā yi ni yaccha tānū vau hö và ha yi | sa tva mā- : ате LI. 
: » dec pia yau ho và hà "T vil 5 pratihara: haya yi gamad vajebhir à au ho | 
pratihāra: sa tvà mamau hō và hà уі | um ene sā no | 
upadrava: o somaya au hà va | n 06 
nidhana: ghrtāšcūtah Il (UG 1.25 based upon JA 68.4—6) 
(UG 7.1, based upon JA 68.1-3) The underlying verses are: э eat Pr hen 
10 чол | 
The underlvin . Come here and sit down. ST 
underlying verses are E REL Sing forth to Indra, аі: MATE N 
Lord of successes, this has been pressed for thee gd aami qd i ye comrades who convey our praises. gea зел. Н 
with might. ат eaten а: n шо а the very first Mari arion | 
à a Е f the many (gods), + ao ач аа 
Drink of it, thou lover of songs. п X ate mu: О у . А we aa au ga Ц 
Along with our prayer, let it reach your sides, БЕ ae E | that lord of boons, to this ae Р a ai at ata er яч, | 
your head, your arms, for our solicitude, hero. CMS Js He will be present in this undertaking of ours, RED 
Stop by this pressing, which conforms to your sals A ira for wealth, for excellence. = fa 
independence. eq Ad CAT, He shall come to us with booty. пашта ga 


Let it exhilarate thee who art devoted to Soma. gà іч deg аган, | (RV 15.123) 


CBS LES TD) ч еї чир анан d The third pada is repeated in RV 1.5.1-3; 8.82.46 among the mantras of 


the twenty-sixth šastra, recited by the maitrāvaruņa: PLATE 107 
In this stuti, the third pada of each verse is repeated, with variations, in the 
pratihāra and upadrava. The third pada is also repeated in RV 3.51.10-12; 
8.6.1-3 among the mantras of the twenty-fifth Sastra, recited by the hota: 


$omsávo; RV 1.5.1 (3 x); 1.5.2-3 

šomsāvo; RV 8.82.4-6 

Somsāvo; RV 1.5.4-10 

$omsávo; RV 10.49.1-10; $omsávo; RV 10.49.11 (3 x). 


$omsaávo; RV 3.51.10 (3 x); 3.51.12,11 
$omsávo; RV 8.6.1-3; $omsávo; 8.6.4—45 
Somsavo; RV 2.21.1-5; $omsávo; RV 2.21.6 (3 x). 


674 675 


The offering verse is RV 2.15.1. 
The third stuti of the third round (the 27th stuti) is based upon: 


PLATE 107 
Nocturnal Recital by Maitravaruna 


The maitrāvaruņa recites a šastra during each of the three over- 
night rounds (rātriparyāya). Facing east he sits in front of his 
hearth (dhisnya). The hearths of the hotā (which is bigger and has a 
clay dish on it), brāhmaņācchamsin, potā, nesta, and acchāvāka 
are to his left. In front the yajamāna, his fists still closed, has finally 
fallen asleep. To the right are three wooden Soma goblets, each 
placed within a small clay dish. 


Photo А. Parpola 


676 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


THE NOCTURNAL ROUNDS 


I. prastāva: yogeyoge tava hà bu stārām | nidhana: 6 yi lā [| 
udgītha: б jēvāje havāmāhā ē hū va au ho va | II. prastāva: sa prathame viyomani | 
pratihāra: sak. hay ga dr GI e hü va au ho va | udgitha: о vanam sadane vrdhās supārās sasravastamak | 
upadrava: б khāya ya hū và au ho bà | pratihāra: samapsijit | 
nidhana: dr iid ataye || е upadrava: 6 mapsuja уй | 
II. prastava: à ghā gamad yadi ha bu Sravat | nidhana: o yi lā [| 
udgitha: о hasrinibhir ata yi bha г hū va au ho va | Ш prastāva: tamu hia vājasātāyā yi | 
pratihāra j vajebhir «p anos havam hū va au ho va | udgitha: ēndrām bharaya sasminam bhavānāssūmnē antamah| 
upadrava : б jebhir à ha và au ho bà | pratihāra: sakha varddha yi | 
nidhana: ра nē havam || М upadrava: o kha vrdha yi | 
ПІ. prastava: anu pratnasyau ha bu kasah | nidhana: ē yi a // 
udgitha: буг tüvipratà yin nàram ha va au ho va | | ; 
pratihara: yan te pürvam pita hava ē hū và au ho và | шолар оно 
upadrava: on tē pūrvām hū và au ho bà | The underlying verses are: 
nidhana: pita hūve || 


Indra purifies his praiseworthy intention 
among the pressed Soma offerings. 
He is known to be of mature capability because he 


(UG 7.3, based upon JA 68.7—9) wa: gag dni 
жа gta ЗН | 


The underlying verses аге: RÈ quer quiet 


E TA is great. : 

As comrades we summon most mighty Indra ania -—1 He became strong in the highest heaven, mem ft ы; Uu 

for our help in every undertaking, ‚м in the seat of the gods. a Ч=й stai 

in every contest. ma Sa p He is successful, of very great fame, gani «89 ga: | 

If he shall hear, SUCHE Ha dil fully conquering in the waters. ачы: amata: 99691 
he shall come with this thousandfold help to our call, абга: 1 I summoned aggressive Indra to this battle, TO с NN VE 

he shall come with booty. fred at etl for the winning of the contest. we AC 
Following ancient custom, er] ясай Be thou nearest to us in favor, gez wa RU | 


. LJ * l e ыз 1 + p 1 g 
I summon the warrior of great opposition, a comrade for our increase. чаг а: ча Sera; FA JA ll 


whom thy father summoned formerly. 
(RV 1.30.7-9) 


g afta vērti (RV 8.13.1-3) 
3 gud (yar gg 
In this 28th stuti, the last four syllables of each of the underlying verses 
(viz., mahān hi sah, “от he is great;" samapsujit, “conquering all the waters;" 
and sakha vrdhe, "for friend's growth”) are first intoned in the pratihāra 
and then repeated in the upadrava. The last four syllables of these three verses 
(RV 8.13.1-3) and also of the following three (RV 8.13.16—18) are repeated 
among the mantras of the twenty-eighth $astra, recited by the acchāvāka: 


The third pada is repeated in RV 1.30.7-9; 1.6.1-3 among the mantras of the 
twenty-seventh $astra, recited by the brāhmaņācchamsin: 


Somsāvo; RV 1.30.7 (3 x); 1.30.8-9 
šomsāvo; RV 1.6.1-3; 
Somsavo; ВУ 1.6.4-10 | 
Somsavo; КУ 1.102.1-10; | Somsavo; RV 8.13.1 (3 x); 8.13.2-3 

| Somsavo; RV 8.13.16-18 

| Somsāvo; RV 3.42.1-9 

$omsavo; RV 10.96.1-12; 
Somsavo; RV 10.96.13 (3 x). 


$omsavo; RV 1.103.5 (3 x). 


The offering verse is RV 6.37.2. 
The fourth and last stuti of the third round (the 28th stuti) is based upon: 


I. prastāva: indra sutésu somesu | 
udgitha: 6 tim punayisa ukthiyam vide varddhasya dak sasya | 
pratihāra: maham hayi sah | 
upadrava: 6 ham hi sah | 


The offering verse is RV 10.104.3. 

Thus ends the third and last nocturnal round. Throughout these rounds, 
the šastra begins with the three verses upon which the stuti was based, and 
repeats the padas of its verses in these three and also in the next three verses 


678 679 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


in the same way it was done in the stuti. As a result, the first padas are re- 
peated in the first nocturnal round, the second in the second, and the third 
in the third, with a special modification in the final sequence where the re- 
petition is confined to the last four syllables. Throughout the nocturnal 
rounds the principle that the Kausitaki Brāhmaņa formulates is followed: 


As it is chanted, so it is recited. an garage wale 


(KB 17.5.7) 


Eleventh Day: April 25, 1975 


EPISODE 31 
The Chant and Recitation for the Ašvins 
(Ašvinastuti; Ašvinašastra) 


ĪT IS ABOUT 2:30 A.M. on April 25. Preparations are made for the twenty- 
ninth and final Soma sequence. A pile of bricks is made west of the hearth of 
the hota, and covered with towels. It will serve as back support for the hota, 
who will recite the one thousand verse of the Recitation for the Ašvins 
(āšvinašastra). But first comes the Chant for the Ašvins (āšvinastuti as the 
Nambudiris call it, rather than sandhistotra, Twilight Chant). It consists of 
nine stotriyās from the Usani (Rahasya-gana): 


ē hm / 
I. prastāva: à yi nā vē agnin nàmaso và | 
udgitha: ērjē napātam à hūvē priyaū cétistam aratim su 
āddhvarām | 
pratihara: visvasya “шат | 


upadrava: i lā б marta mo và hà vu va | 
nidhana: ās / 
П. prastāva: višvē va] 
udgitha: 0 ашат amrtam sa yējatē arusā višvabhējasā | 
pratihāra: sa dūdrāvāt su | 
upadrava: i lā o hata 6 va hà vu va | 
nidhana: ās // 
III. prastāva: sa dēvā / 
udgitha: 6 vat svāhutas subrahmā yajūas sušamī vasūnām | 
pratihāra: dēvam rādhē jā | 
upadrava: i [a о nama o và hà vu và | 
nidhana: ās // 
(RG 2.3 based upon JA 69.1-2, made into three) 
hm / 
IV. prastāva: prāti vē daršyāyatē va | 
udgītha: dcchanti duhītā divo po mahi vrnute caksusa tamah | 


680 


CHANT FOR THE ASVINS 


pratihara: jyētīh krnoti | 
upadrava: i [à 6 nari о và hà vu va | 
nidhana: as // 
V. prastāva: jyētē và | 
udgitha: o noti sanari udusriyās srjate sūriyās sacā | 
pratihāra: udyan nāksātrām | 
upadrava: i ļā ērcā yi va dē va ha vu va | 
nidhana: ās // 
VI. prastāva: udyē va | 
udgitha: о ksatram arcivat taved uso vyusi sūriyāsya ca | 
pratihāra: sam bhaktēnā ga | 
upadrava: i lā 6 mahi б và ha vu va | 
nidhana: ās // 
(RG 2.4, based upon JA 69.3-4, made into three) 
hm / 
VII. prastāva: à yi mā u van divistayē và | 
udgitha: 0 sra havante švinā yam vāmahvaya vase šacīvasū | 
pratihāra: vi$amvisam hi | 
upadrava: i lā б cchatha о và hà vu và | 
nidhana: ās // 
VIII. prastāva: viso va] 
udgītha: 6 sam hi gacchathē yuvaū citran dadathur bhajanan 
narā | 
pratihàra: cēdēthām sūnf | 
upadrava: i ļā 6 vātē 6 va ha vu va | 
nidhana: ās // 
IX. prastāva: cēdē vā / 
udgitha: 0 sūnrtāvatērvāg ratham samanasā ni yacchatam | 
pratihāra: pibatam sēmi / 
upadrava: i lā б mādhū о và hà vu va | 
nidhana: ās // 


(RG 2.5, based upon JA 69.5-6, made into three) 


Though there are no repetitions, the stotriyās are marked by vistuti sticks as 
in Figure 51. 

The underlying verses are addressed to Agni, Dawn (usas) and the A$vin 
twins successively: _ | : 


Reverently I summon in this way 
the offspring of strength, | ait statt gā 1 
our most understanding friend, as CE d 

the leader skilled in the ceremonies, 9 "2809 
the immortal messenger of everyone. «deat fener WATIA tt 
He shall yoke his two ruddy foxes 


wat al эй ar- 


681 


PART П THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


N 
6 ————————= 
J 
w 5 3 
| —e————————À 
S 


Figure 51— Vistuti of the Chant for the Ašvins 


which bring enjoyment to everyone, 

and he shall run hither 

now that he has been properly poured upon. 

This worship offering good prayers and rites 

belongs to the Vasu gods; 

divine solicitude belongs to the peoples (in return). 
(RV 7.16.1—2) 


(Dawn), the daughter of heaven has appeared now, 
shining as she draws near. 

The noble lady rolls up! 

the great darkness 

and produces the light in order for us to see. 

The sun frees the ruddy cows 

while it, the ray-filled star, rises on high. 

May we be united with our share 

as thou, o Dawn, and the sun 

come into shining. 


(RY 7.81.1-2) , 


These matinal (rites) summon you two A$vins 
hither to the quest for (winning) this day. 
I myself have summoned you two for help, 
ye who are rich in abilities. 
Indeed ye come to every clan. 
Ye have given wondrous enjoyment, ye warriors. 
Inspire yourselves for the nobility. 
Direct in harmony your chariot near to us. 
Drink the honey mixed with Soma. 
(ВУ 7.74.1-2) 


ч dist crea Aaii 
U aga, TATA: | 


Sd атый HR i 


neg aaga 9 - 
serdi ga fra: | 
чт aie eraf urā adit 


Зере sed u 


agia: aad =: а 


зачара | 
ча чі січ «йө ч 
& want адаи 


заг d ат 96а 

sur бағ зау | 
эй аїн&<Чё utar 
fastfasr ft medu: u 
At азая | 


маја «ачат f dese 
“fat atri ag ui 


1 JA 69.3 has vrņute "chooses" (not mentioned in Caland's edition) 


682 


CHANT AND RECITATION FOR THE ASVINS 


It is still long before sunrise and the hotā continues immediately with the 
Recitation for the Ašvins (asvinasastra). His recitation is fast, but clear and 
succinct. This is a tour de force not only because of the length of the recital 
(1,000 mantras), but also because of its complexity. There is one āhāva at 
the beginning and one before the last verse. The structure of the stuti is fol- 
lowed in the six mantras that have just been translated, and that are their 
underlying verses. Since these occur wide apart, they will be marked with an 
asterisk in the following list. In RV 7.16.1—2, the two are made into three by 
repeating višvasya dūtam amrtam and sa dudravat svahutah. In RV 7.81.1-2, 
jyotis krņoti sūnarī and udyan naksatram arcivat are repeated; and in RV 
7.74.1-2, višamvišam hi gacchathah and codetham sūnrtāvate. 

On the whole, the Recitation for the A$vins follows the Morning Litany 
(prātaranuvāka), which is recited by the hota at the beginning of the Pres- 
sing Day (see above pages 600-601). However, a specific number of mantras 
are omitted from each group of meters, and others are inserted, to arrive at 
the required number. Sankhayana Srauta Sūtra (9.20) specifies the numbers, 
but not the mantras. In the following list, the position of the omitted mantras 
will be indicated by capitals; they will be listed subsequently: 


šomsāvo 

КУ 6.15.13 (3x) = 3 RV 7.9.1-6 = 
1.74.1-9 = 9 7.10.1—5 == 5 
1.1.1-9 = 9 7.11.1-5 LS 
1.12.1-22 = 12 10.1.1—7 — i 
1.27.1-10 = 10 10.2.1—7 0 

1.75.1-5 = 5 10.3.1-2 = C) 
1.78.1-5 E 9 7.12.1-3 ES 
3.11.1-9 = 9 7.16.1*,2*,3-12 = 13 
4.8.1-8 LIES 1.36.1-20 = 20 
4.9.1—8 = $ 1.44.1-12 = 12 
5.13.1-6 = 6 3.9.1-8 = 8 
5.14.1-6 = 6 8.103.1-4 = 4 
7.15.1-15 = 15 3.16.1—6 = 6 
8.43.1—33 E3533 3.10.1-9 == 9 

8.44.1-26 = 26 (A) 8.23.1-19 = 19 (D) 
6.16.1—27 ==27 1.150.1-3 S. 
2.5.1-8 S 1.140.1-7 = 7 
6.2.1-7 = 7(B) 1.144.1—7 7, 

4.7.2-11 = 10 2.2.12 = 2(Е) 
4,2.1-20 = 20 5.11.1-6 E 
4.3.1-16 = 16 5.6.1-10 = 10 
4.4.1-15 = 15 1.30.20—22 ==) 
7.7.1-7 7 4.52.1—7 = 
7.8.1-7 A 1.49.1-4 = 4 
281 456 


683 


PART П THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


RECITATION FOR THE ASVINS 


456 784 A few comments on the omitted mantras: 
- = = (А) ВУ 8.44.27-30, 10.156.1-5, 10.187.1-5, fourteen gayatri, mantras, 
i: s = : a ds = | prescribed for the Morning Litany (prātaranuvāka) in $$$ 6.4.1; 
7.19.1-5 = 5 6.50.10 Zi omitted in accordance with SSS 9.20.8, which states that fourteen 
7.80.1-3 = 3 6.62.1-7 cu gāyatrī mantras have to be omitted. 
7.81.1*,2*,3-6 = 7 6.62.10-11 y (B) RV 6.2.8-9, two anustubh mantras, prescribed in SSS 6.4.3, omitted in 
1.48.1-16 == 16 6.63.1—9 2 9 accordance with SSS 9.20.9. 
1.92.13-15 == 3 7.61.1-10 = 10 (C) RV 10.3.3-7, 10.4.1—7, 10.5.1—7, 10.6.1-7, 10.7.1—7, thirty-three tristubh 
1.92.1-4 = 4 7.68.8-9 22.89 mantras, prescribed in SSS 6.4.5, omitted in partial accordance with 
5.79.1-10 = 10 7.69.1-8 =g SSS 9.20.10, which states that 113 tristubh mantras should be omitted. 
1.3.1-3 =— 3 2:097 II (D) RV 8.23.20-30, eleven usnih mantras, prescribed in SSS 6.4.9, omitted 
122154 S 7.71.1-6 ERIE- in accordance with ŚŚS 9.20.17. 
1.30.17-19 = 7.72.1-5 KS (E) RV 2.2.3-13, eleven jagati mantras, prescribed in S§S 6.4.11, omitted in 
1.46.1-15 = 15 10.106.1-11 = accordance with SSS 9.20.18. 
2.41.7-8 = 72.731155 NT (F) RV 1.158.1-3, three tristubh mantras, prescribed in SSS 6.6.5, omitted 
8.5.1—36! 5736 7.14.1*,2*,3-6 = 7 in partial accordance with SSS 9.20.10. So far, 36 of the required number 
8.73.1-18 = 18 1.47.1-8 = $ of 113 tristubh mantras have been omitted. | 
8.85.1—9 = 9 8.26.1—5 = 5 (С) According to SSS 9.20.13, 103 "suparna" verses should be inserted 
8.8.1—23 = 23 1.34.1-12 ex after the (presumably: last) Agastya hymn, viz., 1.184. Caland says: 
5.73.1-10 = 10 1.112.1-25 = 25 “It is certain that some Valakhilya hymns are meant . . . but how the 
5.74.1-10 = 10 10.39.1-14 = 14 number of verses is to be explained escapes me.”” The next sūtra (9.20. 
5.76.1-5 5 10.40.1-14 = 14 14) states: “ОҒ as many other verses addressed to the Ašvins.” Since 
5.77.1-5 5 10.41.1-3 = nothing is inserted here, but many other verses addressed to the Ašvins 
1.116.1-25 = 25 5.75.1-9 = 9 are inserted later, these later verses may be the “‘suparna”’ verses. There 
1.120.1-9 = 9 1.50.1-9 at) are thirty-three, viz., RV 3.54.16, 4.45.7, 5.78.4, 6.62.1—7, 6.62.10-11, 
1.117.1—25 = 25 1.115.1-6 aa) 6.63.1-9, 7.67.1-10, 7.68.8-9. How the number of verses is to be ex- 
1.118.1-11 = 11 (В 10.37.1-12 = 12 plained escapes me, too, unless we read trayastrimšat (“thirty-three”) 
1.180.1-10 = 10 7.32.26-27 = СЭ for trišatam (“103”) in SSS 9.20.13. 
ti s ES j sss RE Kā = | It might be asked why omitted mantras should be part of the description 
1.184.1-6 = 6(G) Šomsāvo of the 1975 performance. This is not because the hotā uses Sankhayana 
2.39.1-8 = $ RV 223.15 (3 ETT. Srauta Sūtra, though he belongs to the same tradition. However, only the 
3.54.16 = 1 HON Le omission and insertion of particular mantras can explain the extraordinary 
3.58.1-9 Ee 1000 | feat of memory that is here on display. The hota knows thoroughly the 
4.43.1—7 E 7 Rgveda Samhita, from beginning to end. Throughout the recitation, he 
4.44.1—7 = x) never hesitates when he is within a hymn, or at the end of a hymn when he is 
4.45.7 = | about to recite the next hymn. But when he is about to recite another hymn, 
i or other verses than the ones that traditionally follow, he pauses at his last 


breathing pause, i.e., in the middle of the last verse. At that time, obviously, 
he concentrates on what is to be done next. Once he remembers it, he con- 
tinues with the next part of the verse, and continues immediately, without 
taking breath, with the other hymn or verses that are prescribed. Since any 
priest who can officiate in the Atirātra can certainly officiate in the Agni- 
stoma, and since, in this particular case, the hota has already recited the Morn- 


1 The reciter jumps from RV 8.5.20 to 8.5.30 (the beginning of both verses is the 
same)—presumably by mistake. 


684 685 


PART II THE 1975 PERFORMANCE THE TAIL OF THE RITUAL 


ing Litany (prātaranuvāka) on the tenth day, his memory operates through 


KR SALE : ceremonies (addressed to the wind: TS 1.1.13. 3u-v), three in the animal 
at least two stages. The Recitation for the Ašvins is similar to the Morning 


sacrifice (TS 1.4.44.3g-k), nine in the Agnistoma (adding TS 1.4.44. 1a-2f), 


Litany. Since he has learnt how to recite the Morning Litany by deviating 


and nineteen in the Agnicayana by adding the following ten: 


from the order of the Rgveda Samhita as it is handed down, he has learned S аатбатт ян 
to further deviate from the litany when he recites the Recitation for the a: What has town sincerely, ee aay ols 
Weans Sanhs vana таша Sitra 1 d T uen S or gathered with intent or open eyes, at aid gūt IT | 
ES Vane mapu ООС СО ов UP follow it to the world of good acts qua AR gered wis 
spective: its rules pertain to this process of memorization. where the firstborn seers of old dwell. аата ш: 
In the meantime, dawn has come, the sun has appeared, birds have b. Present there, I place the treasure utem un xu 
started twittering and the daily heat begins. Most people have also woken that Agni Omniscient has conveyed. a ae 
up, producing their habitual noises. Pots are broken, announcing the im- The ritual patron will follow, vga ач 
pending destruction of all ritual implements. you will know him in the highest firmament! Saat mifit sa 
After the recitation has been completed, cups are offered to the A$vins. c. Know him in the highest firmament, wd чта чей edle u 
The offering verse is RV 3.58.7. At the same time, the pratiprasthata offers gods there present, know his form; siftardst quit edle, 
a cake prepared by the agnidh on two potsherds to the Ašvins. The final when he comes by the paths, divine ways, Wal: waren frr wae | 
sequence is over before 6:30 A.M. on April 25. reveal to him the fruits of sacrifice! детте. чча? 
d. Move forward, go along together, REST " e o 1 
Agni, make the paths, divine ways, s pe 
Twelfth Day: April 25, 1975 be present in this highest abode, es =н d ч aa- 
you All-gods, sit with the yajamana! H wait Jarata PAAR | 
К EPISODE 32 А е. With prastara bundle, enclosing stick, afters атеяч ну. 
The Tail of the Ritual (Yajfiapuccha) with ladle, altar, and sacred grass, RA Bar гїї fa и 
EP ? 4 : with recitations, carry this ritual of ours es 2r 
THE REMAINING RITES are like in the Agnistoma with some Agnicayana to go to heaven among the gods! stat urat erat ет a «Чї | 
peculiarities and insertions. The animal sacrifices continue with eleven f. What is offered, what is handed over, қай эг a ag 
after-offerings (anuyāja) by the adhvaryu and eleven accessory offerings what is given, the sacrificial fee, gadās dā н 
(upayāja) by the pratiprastāthā for each of the eleven animals represented May Agni Common-to-All-Men, on our behalf, аре да Se _. 
by their packages of rice flour. The hota recites the samyuvaka benedictions place it in heaven among the gods! ce vi чатат KU ат ч afar | 
while the adhvaryu casts away the prastara bundle and the enclosing sticks g. That by which you carry a thousand, «анаа: 
on the fire. The unnetā priest pours the remaining one-third of the Soma all our property, Agni, чаа at =ча і 
liquid from the clay āgrāyaņa pot into the wooden droņakalaša vessel, pours use it to carry our ritual Fat асе asti Aad айан | 
parched barley into it, puts the droņakalaša on his head and makes two овоон осие the gods) а ast ay як PE 
copious offerings to Indra Harivant, standing west of the fire with his legs h. That by which our able priests, Wr mua 
ha x à : М carry the fees, the ritual, Agni, gazag Wate li 
crossed. Standing like that, with the pot on his head, he looks like the cātaka der I ual m. — 
bird (Malayalam: cattan: Cucculus melanoleucus). The yajamana makes an pu eae AH Te spur AT 9850: | 
: : S SU to go to heaven among the gods! come 
offering of parched barley by itself. This is followed by ancestral rites in the i. That by which doers of good deeds, ED “it ag 
marjaliya, and numerous expiation rites (prāyašcitta), for errors committed obtain the flow of honey, Agni, Чач Was | 
and not committed, in the āgnidhrīya and on the main altar. The priests use it to carry our ritual Жай aaa: we Waal э: | 
take a few drops of curds in the āgnidhrīya and come out muttering the to go to heaven among the gods! EUN RE Ex 
words with which the priestly alliance of friendship (tānūnaptra: above, k. Where are the never-ending streams SEPT TA 
page 358) is dissolved (sakhyavisarjanam). of honey and of melted butter, чаан E | 
In the meantime the animal sacrifices approach their final stage. The take us there, Agni Common-to-All-Men, чя wur ят ae чї ап: | 
offerings for the divine consorts (patnīsamyāja) are made into the offering in heaven among the gods! «ийт: 
fire. The last oblations of the animal sacrifices аге butter oblations made from Cu a) 999 a чча 


darbha grass dipped in the dhruvā ladle. They are accompanied by the for- 
mulas of completion (samistayajus): one occurs in the full- and new-moon 


686 


For the first time since the consecration, the yajamāna and his wife 
bathe. This final bath, the avabhrtha, takes place in the pond of the 


687 


PLATE 108 


PLATE 109 


PART IJ THE 1975 PERFORMANCE 


Ayyappan temple in Panjal. This temple is open to all Hindus, unlike the 
Visnu temple in Panjal, which was used for the final bath on former occasions, 
but which is for all practical purposes reserved for Nambudiris. The idea is 
that not only the yajamāna and his wife have a bath, but all others, including 
visitors. Prior to the bath there is a procession from the sacred enclosure to 
the temple bank, protected by guardsmen with swords and shields. The isti 
ceremony is performed for Varuna in the water, which is treated on this 
occasion as though it were the offering fire. After an oblation shared with the 
Agnistoma, there is an Agnicayana oblation offered with: 


Homage to the waving ocean, agar sueta 
to the master of the Indus streams! Repi quip а: | 


To the father of all streams, all-maker, патча fx 
sing through all days! ign frei 
pons Ai Rranserssicirs efi n 


(TS 4.6.2.6r) 


All return to the Old Hall where a few other Agnicayana rites take place. 
The adhvaryu unyokes Agni (agni-vimoka; cf. above page 599) with a butter 
oblation accompanied by: 


TAY RAMA TAT 
sarai Aver AF | 
чей gua WE 
«gas «яаг fares ц 


Suck this mighty breast of waters, 
filled in the midst of flood, Agni. 
Ocean, enjoy the fountain of sweetness, 


enter your seat in the sea! 
(TS 5.5.10.6e) 


The yajamāna addresses Agni: 


Fires of mud 
that have entered the earth, 
you are their highest, 
urge us to life! 
I have obtained you, Agni, with my mind, 
I have obtained you, Agni, with effort, ağ asi Sterat i 
I have obtained you, Agni, with consecration, end cars squat: 
I have obtained you, Agni, with days of observance, ана e 
I have obtained you, Agni, by a day of pressing, 2 
I have obtained you, Agni, by sacrificial fee, 
I have obtained you, Agni, by the final bath, 
I have obtained you, Agni, by a barren cow, 
I have obtained you, Agni, by shouting svaga! 

(TS 5.5.7.4—-5) 


sad: Чаї: after: verdad i 
ачї dem: я Ф stadt ҷа ui 
ard case AAT | 

ant can ачап! 


эп ease (тий: | 
emi ensisi t 
эпф cant arat t 

ard ASH «аЙ | 


The Concluding Offering (udayaniyesti) is performed; it corresponds to the 
Introductory Offering (prayaniyesti) on the fourth ritual day. A final animal, 
a she-goat, representing a barren cow, is sacrificed to Mitra and Varuna. 


688 


THE TAIL OF THE RITUAL 


Itself represented by a package of rice flour, it is combined with an offering 
of sour milk (ērniksā). This is followed by oblations to minor deities (de- 
vikahavimsi) that might have been neglected. In the Agnistoma this is done 
with clarified butter; in the Agnicayana, with rice. 

The yajamāna consigns his three fires to the kindling woods: he takes 
them, and leaves the Old Hall. He stops on his way home. The adhvaryu 
makes fire, sets up the three fires, and performs the Departure Offering 
(udavasānīyesti). Yajamàna and brahman sit south of the offering fire. The 
offering consists of an oblation of clarified butter and corresponds to En- 
tering the Old Hall (adhyavasānam) on the first day. Then torches are lit 
from all the fires, and the ritual enclosure is set on fire. The only things that 
will remain are the altars made from bricks. 

Once more, the yajamāna consigns his fires to the kindling woods. He 
returns home, ready to perform the morning and evening fire rites for the rest 
of his life. | 


689 


‘PLATES 110,111 


PLATE 108 
On the Way to the Final Bath 


Since the consecration ceremony on the first day, the yajamāna 
and his wife have not left the ritual enclosure, bathed, or changed 
clothes. On the last day of the ritual, they leave the enclosure, 
together with the priests and ritual implements. They go to a tem- 


ple pond for the final bath (avabhrtha). They are surrounded by ` 


villagers who could not enter the ritual enclosure while the cere- 
monies were being performed. 


690 


691 


PLATE 109 
The Final Bath (Avabhrtha) 


PLATE IIO 


Burning the Enclosure 


When the last ceremonies have beem completed, the ritual enclosure 
with all its contents is abandoned to Agni. 


694 


4 


/l 


PLATE III 
After the Fire 
After the ritual enclosure has burnt down, the only remainders of 


the ritual are the large altars made of bricks: the domestic altar and 
the bird-shaped offering altar. 


696 697 


APPENDIX 


Praisārtham 
by Erkkara Raman Nambudiri 


Malayalam Text 
established by E.R.Sreekrishna Sarma 


(for English translation see pages 329-33) 


DURING THE ATIRATRA, the praisārtham generally stresses only features 
pertaining to Atirātra, since Agnistoma features were already included in 
the praisārtham that accompanied the yajamana's Agnistoma. In 1975, how- 
ever, as there was enough time, Erkkara included features pertaining to 
Agnistoma as well. 

As in the translation, capital letters indicate that the original is in San- 
skrit, not in Malayalam. 


ATHAINAM ANUSASATI enna vidhikku takkavannam adhvaryu diksavacakan- 
ha] āyirikkunna karmannale anusthiccü diksaniyéstijanyam āyi diksikhyam 
āyirippēru apūrvatte ātmāvinkal sambhāvicc irikkunna bhavanotü tal- 
paripalanattinayikkontu diksitadharmannal āyirikkunna yamaniyamannale 
anušāsikka ceytatü DIKSITO ’sI ennu tutanniyuļļa praisatte kkontu. 


avite naté dharmapraptikku nimittam āyirikkunna diksitatvatte anuvadi- 
kkunnu DiksITO’sI enna bhāgatte kkontu. diksitan āyi ippēļ bhavān. anu- 
sthitannaļāya karmannalekkontu samjātadīksan āyi bbhavikkunnu. snānā- 
didīksitāvēdanāntanna] āyirikkunna karmannaļ anusthitanna] dyatu: 


SNĀNAM CA PAVANAM CAIVA 
TATHĀCAMANAM EVA CA / 
MANTRAPROKSAŅAM ITY ETAIH 
KARTĀ SAMSKARYA ĀDITAH // 


enna vacanam uņtākayāl. sndnapavanacamanapunyahannal karmādiyinkal 
sāmānyēna kartrsamskārannaļ. šraddhāhvānākūtyāvēdanaphalasamkal- 
pādikaļ bahvangannal. ivite sāgnikam ayirikkunna atiratramallo prarabdham 
ayatu. agnišabdam vahnivācakam āyirppēnnū. laksaņayā kratuvinēyum 
sthalavisesattéyum collunnu. 


AGNAV EVAGNISABDAS TU 
RUDHO LAKSANAYASYA TU / 
KRATAU STHALAVISESE CA 


698 


APPENDIX 


PRAYOGO VIDUSAM MATAH // 
AGNER ADHARABHAVADI- 
SAMBANDHO LAKSANASRAYAH / 
АТАН STHALAVISESO ’TRA 
S$YENADYAKRTIKO МАТАН // 


enninnané. SYENACITAM CINVITA ennu vidhiccirikkunna i cayanam vahni- 
samskāram atrē. YAD ISTAKABHIR AGNIM CINOTI enna vidhikku takkavannam 
istakakale kkontü agni cétavyam àkkunnu. TASMAT PANCACITIKAS CETAVYAH 
ennu vacanam paficacitikam āyittū agni cetavyam. evambhūtam āyirikkunna 
i cayanam ādhānam pole agnisamskaram atre. samkrtam āyirikkunna 
agnikkü karmākānksayinkal ATHATO 'GNIM AGNISTOMENANUYAJATI ennu 
tutanniyuļļa agnistomadika]e vidhikka kontu naté citam āyirikkunna agniye 
atirātram kontü anuyajikkunnu. ennittū sāgnicayanam āyirikkunna atirā- 
tram ākunnu. jyētostēmādikaļ. jyotistomattinnü elallo samsthakaļ uļļū. 
AGNISTOMO ’TYAGNISTOMA UKTHYAS SODAŠĪ VĀJAPEYO 'TIRATRO 'PTORYAMA 
ITI SAPTA SOMASAMSTHAH ennu gautamiyavacanam uņtākayāl. ivite atyagni- 
stomam agnistūmattil kütum; vàjapeyam sēģašiyil kütum; aptoryamam 
atirātrattil kūtum; ennittu nālu samsthaka] ennu collukilumām. i elilum veccü 
natétte samsthayallo agnistēmam ākunnatū. agnistomadika] sāgnikannaļ 
ayittum niragnikanna] āyittum anustheyanīnaļ. YA EVAM VIDVAN AGNIM CI- 
NUTE enninnane agnicayanatte vidhiccittü ATHATO 'GNIM AGNISTOMENANU- 
YAJATI TAM UKTHYENA TAM SODASINA TAM ATIRATRENA ennellàm tutanniyuļļa 
vidhi yuņtākayāl. 


agnicidvratanna] diksa nispannayāyirikkunpēļ ttanne pravarttikkunnava- 
yalla. kratvantattinkalē pravarttikkunnu. innine bhagavān jaiminiyāl uktam 
āyi. KRATVANTE VÀ PRAYOGAVACANABHAVAT enninnane. 


nate samantrayāyittu ukhaye sambhariccü VAYAVE NIYUTVATE TÜPARAM 
ALABHATE enna vidhikku takkavannam šrngarahitam àyi vāyudevatyam 
ayiripporu pašu ālabdhavyam. YAD VAYAVYAH PASUR BHAVATI ТЕМА VĀYOR 
NAITI; YAT PRAJAPATYAH PURODASO BHAVATI TENA PRAJAPATER NAITI ennu 
vacanam uņtākayāl pašu vāyudevatyam āyittu karyam. pasupurddasam 
prajapatyam āyittu kāryam. dīksaņīyēsti trihāvissāyittu kāryam. TRiny 
ETĀNI HAVĪMSI BHAVANTI enna vacanam uņtākayāl. agnicayanattinnu munpil 
ukhyāgniyute dhāraņam kāryam. ukhayinkal agniye nidhanam ceytu sadu- 
dyāmam āyittān dvadasodyamam āyittān irikkunna $ikyattinkal ukhyagniye 
avasthānam ceytü à Sikyatte tantte kaņthattil bandhiccü samvatsaram uk- 
hyāgniyute dhāraņam kartavyam. TASMAT SAMVATSARAM BHARYAH enna 
vidhi yuņtākayāl. TASMĀT TRIYAHAM BHARYAH; TASMĀT SADAHAM BHARYAH; 
TASMAD DVADASAHAM BHARYAH enninnine tryahasadahadvādašāhadhāra- 
pnarüpanna] àyirikkunna vidhikalum untu. 


ATHAITAM AGNIM TRYUPASATKAM SADUPASATKAM DVADASOPASATKAM CINVITA 


699 


APPENDIX 


ennu tutanniya vidhikku takkavannam upasaddinannalil agni cétavyam 
akunnu. i yajfiattinkal diksopasattukalkkü divasasamkhyāvikalpam unten- 
kilum tridinadiksam āyi sadupasatkam āyittū drabdham āyi. itu rantamatte 
yajfiamakakontü madhyamdinasavanattinkal marutvatīyašastrattintte $esam 
brhatta istam akunnu. atiratrattinkal rātriye atikramiccuļļa sauryašamšanam 
uņtākayāl atirātrasamstham āyi. 


ivattil veccü āgnāvaisņavīyēsti sāksāt dīksāpādikayākunnu ennū atiprasidd- 
ham allo. YADA VA AGNAVAISNAVAH PUROĻĀŠO NIRÜPYATE ATHAIVA DIKSITA 
ITI HA SMAHA enninnine. diksayennàl indriyasamyamam. ennāl sāksāl sam- 
yamatteyalla ivite vidhippū. vagādīndriyābhimāninika] āyirikkunna agn- 
yadidevataka]kkü svābhāvikapravrttiparityāgatte cceytü šāstrīyapravrtti- 
svabhāvyāpādakam āyi vihitānekakarmajanitam āyi atīndriyam āyirppora- 
tigayam dīksayākunnatu. itra néravum indriyābhimāninika] ayirikkunna 
devataka] visayānubhavam koņtu malimasaka] āyi $astriyapravrttivimukha- 
kaļ āyirunnuvatrē. ippēļ anusthitahnaļ āyirikkunna karmannalekkontü 
nirmalakaļ āyi vihitānusthānainaļilum tadupāyabhūtavastvantarannaļilum 
udyuktamār āyi vannu ennū DĪKĢITO “1 enna bhāgattekkoņtu colliyatu. 
SOMO DIKSAYA DIKSA SOMASYA enna mantralingattekkontü somayāgāigamāņi 
diksayennu varum. ennāl atirátrasamstham āyirikkunna somaydgattinna- 
yikkontü ippēļ diksitan āyi bhavān ennū DĪKATO ‘si enna bhagattekkontu 
colliyatü. īvaņņam diksitattvatte anuvadiccū taddharmannale ccollunnu 
praisašesattekkoņtu. 


DIKSITAVADAM VADA. dīksitavādatte vadikkēņam. dīksitavādam ennū sam- 
skrtayāyirikkunnā vākkū. EKA HA TV EVA VYAHRTIR DIKSITAVADAH SATYAM 
EVA. eka ennü avyabhicāriņi. kaladesanna]kku takkavannam vyabhicarikkāte 
inkkunnatü. annine irikkunna samskrtavākkukaļe kkontu venam vyava- 
harikkān. samskrtapadannale kkontu vyavaharikkunpēlum arthatah sat- 
yam āyirikkēņam ennum collunnu; SATYAM EVA VADA ennatinekkontü. sat- 
yam tanne vadikkénam. 


DRSTAM SRUTAM SVANUMATAM 
SVANUBHÜTAM YATHARTHATA / 
KATHANAM SATYAM ITY AHUH 
PARAPIDAVIVARJITAM // 


evambhütam āyirippēnnū satyam. satyapratiyogi anrtam. atine vadikka- 
yum arutü. vadikkil prāyašcittam uņtū. DIKSITAS CED ANRTAM VADED IMAM 
ME VARUNA, TATTVAYAMI BRAHMANA, TVAM NO AGNE, SA TVAM NO AGNE ITI 
CATASRO VARUNIR JAPET enna vacanam untakayal. i vannam anrtavacanatte 
nis&dhiccü nisēdhaprasangathinkal nisēdhāntarannaļe ccollunnu šesatte- 
kkoņtū. MA SMAYISTHA MA KANDUYATHA MAPAVRTHAH. smayanam ennu 
cirikka. atine cceyyolla. NA JAKSED DIKSITAH enna vacanam untakayal. 
kaņdūyanam ennu corivuka. atine cceyyolla. NA KANDÜYETA DIKSITAH enna 


700 


APPENDIX 


vacanam uņtākayāl. apāvaraņam ennü āvaraņavarjanam. atu Sirassinkal 
ttānum. NA PURA SOMASYA KRAYAD APORNVITA enna vacanam untakayal 
somakrayattinnu munpū apagatosnisan йу! bbhavikkolia. anantaram sma- 
уапакаріпуапаћћа] anigrhiténdriyannü sambhavitanna] ennittü tatsam- 
bhavanayinkal niyamavidhiye cceyyunnu $esattekkontü. YADI SMAYASA 
APIGRHYA SMAYASAI. asahisņutayā smayanam ceyyénti vannal paranmār 
dantatte kāņāttavaņņam và potti cciriccukoļļēņam. YADI KANDÜYASAI KR$- 
NAVISANAYA KANDUYASAI. avvanname asahisņutayā kaņdūyanam ceyyénti 
vannāl krsņavisāņakoņtū kaņdūyanatte cceytu koļļēņam. YADI VACAM 
VISRJED VAISŅAVĪM RCAM ANUDRAVATAT. DIKSITA VĀCAM YACCHA YAJAMĀNA 
VACAM YACCHA ennu tutanniyulla vagyamanavidhiyinkal vagvisargam cey- 
tupoyal vaisnaviyayirikkunna VISNO TVAM NO ANTAMAH ennulla rkkine japi- 
ccu kollénam. MA TVANYATRA DIKSITAVIMITAT SÜRYO 'BHYUDAGAT MA- 
BHINIMRUKTA. diksitavimitattinkal ninnü anyatra sannāyirikkunna bhavāne 
abhilaksiccü sūryan abhyudgamikkayum abhinimrēcanatte ceykayum arutu. 
diksitavimitam ennü svāyatanatte ivite vivaksiccu. abhyudgamikkayennal 
udikkuka. abhinimrēcanatte cceyyuka astamikkuka. süryanu niydjyatvam 
céraykayal purusaparam āyittu yojippiccukollenam vükyatte. ennal uda- 
yāstamanakālannaļil svayatanattil ninnü pravāsam ceyyolla ennu talparyam. 
YAN! DEVATĀNĀMĀNI YATHAKHYATAM TANY ACAKSVA. adévatanamanna] 
uccarikkunnatil vi$esam uļļatukoņtū dēvatānāmannaļil visesam Шеппи 
collunnu ādyam. yāvacilava dēvatānāmanna] visnuh пагауараћ ennu tutanni 
yullava. avaaye yathākhyātamām vaņņam ākhyānam ceyakyē vēņtu. akhy- 
ānam ceyka vadikkuka. ATHA YANY ADEVATĀNĀMĀNI YATHAKHYATAM TĀNY 
ACAKSANA UPARISTĀD VICAKSANAM DHEHI. yāvacilava adēvatānāmānnaļ uļļatū 
bhavadàsah bhavatratah ityādi, avatte ākhyānam сеуйуаћћиппауап avattinu 
mite vicaksaņapadatte kküte uccarikkénam. bhavadāsa уісакѕара bhava- 
trata vicaksaņā ityādi. CANASITAVATIM VICAKSANAVATIM VĀCAM VADA pa- 
lavavakyannale uccarikkentivarikil naté canasita ennu colli parayéntatellam 
paraītūū otuvil vicaksana ennum collu. KRSNAJINAN МА VYAVACCHETHSAH. 
sangam āyirikkunna krspajinattinkal ninnu vérpetolla. avabhrtattoJavum 
krsnajinathinkal ninnü verpetolla ennu talparyam. DANDAC CA. dandattinkal 
ninnum vérpetolla. MAITRAVARUNAYA DANDAM PRAYACCHA enna praisam 
uņtākayāl maitrāvaruņanāyikkoņtu dandatte kkotuppēļavum dandattinkal 
ninnu vērpetolla. cašabdatte kkoņtū i praisattinkal anuktanna] āyirikkunna 
yāvacila уатапіуатаћћа] untó SOMENA DIKSITO NA DADYĀN NA JUHUYAN 
NA PACEN NA JAPET. ADITA EVA VIBHAJET ennu tutanhiyullavayum küte uk- 
tahha] àyi. uktaūnaļ āyirikkunna yamaniyamannale paripāliccukoļļēņam. 
sahkalpiccé yamaniyamannal uņtāvū. 


SANKALPAMŪLAH KĀMO VAI 
YAJNAH SANKALPASAMBHAVAH / 
TATHANYE YAMADHARMAS CA 
SARVE SANKALPAJAH SMRTAH // 


701 


APPENDIX 


ennu vacanam uņtākayāl. uktannaļ āyirikkunna yamaniyamakalapannale 
paripalikkunnérattt. avahitan āyittu vartticcukoļļēņam. ennü adhvaryu 
DIKSITO ’SI enna praisattekkontu colliyatü. 


702 


BIBLIOGRAPHY AND ABBREVIATIONS 


IN THE FIELD of Vedic studies there are two excellent bibliographies: 
Renou (1931) and Dandekar (three volumes: 1946, 1961, 1973). The reader is 
referred to these for further particulars and for editions and translations of 
the texts listed under A. The reader who wishes to consult the Rgveda is 
referred to Geldner’s translation (1951) and to Renou (1955—1967). For the 
Taittirtya Samhita of the Black Yajurveda, Keith (1914) may be used. The 
Satapatha Brahmana of the White Yajurveda is readily accessible in the 
translation by Eggeling (1882—1900, reprinted 1963 and 1966). 


A. TEXTS WITH THEIR ABBREVIATIONS 


AA Aitareya Aranyaka 

AB Aitareya Brahmana 

AG (Jaiminiya) Aranyageyagana 
ĀpGS Āpastamba Grhya Sūtra 
ĀpšS Āpastamba Srauta Sūtra 
ApSulvaS Apastamba Sulva Sūtra 
AGS Āsvalāyana Grhya Sttra’s 
ASS Āšvalāyana Srauta Sūtra 
AV Atharvaveda Samhitā 
BĀU Brhad Aranyaka Upanisad 
BGS Baudhāyana Grhya Sūtra 
BharSS Bhāradvāja Šrauta Sūtra 
BSS Baudhāyana Srauta Sūtra 
BSulvaS Baudhāyana Sulva Sūtra 
CU Chāndogya Upanisad 

GG (Jaiminīya) Grāmageyagāna 
GobhGS Gobhila Grhya Sūtra 
HirGS Hiraņyakeši Grhya Sūtra 
HirSS Hiraņyakeši Srauta Sūtra 
JA Jaiminiya Arcika 

JB Jaiminiya Brahmana 

JSS Jaiminiya Srauta Sūtra 
KapS Kapisthala Samhitā 

KSS Kātyāyana Srauta Sūtra 
KSulvaS Kātyāyana Sulva Sūtra 
KB Kausītaki Brāhmaņa 
KhādGS Khādira Grhya Sūtra 

KS Kāthaka Samhitā 


703 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 
KU Kena Upanisad 
LSS Lātyāyana Srauta Sūtra 
Manss Mānava Srauta Sūtra 
MS Maitrāyaņī Samhita 
MU Maitrayaniya Upanisad 
ParGS Pāraskara Grhya Sūtra 
PB Paficavimsa Brāhmaņa 
RV Rgveda Samhitā 
SV Sāmaveda Samhitā 
SB Satapatha Brahmana 
SGS Sānkhāyana Grhya Sūtra 
$$s Sankhayana Srauta Sütra 
TA Taittirtya Aranyaka 
TB Taittiriya Brahmana 
TS Taittiriya Samhita 
TU Taittirtya Upanisad 
Vaikh$S Vaikhānasa Srauta Sūtra 
VāitšS Vaitāna Srauta Sūtra 
VarSS Vārāha Srauta Sūtra 
VS (K/M) Vājasaneyi Samhitā (Kāņva/Mādhyandina) 
VŠS Vadhila Srauta Sūtra 


B. OTHER PUBLICATIONS 


Allchin, F.R. (1963). Neolithic Cattle-keepers of South India. Cambridge. 

Anantha Krishna Iyer, L.K. (1912). The Cochin Tribes and Castes, П. 
Madras-London. 

Anisimov, А.Е. (1963). “Cosmological Concepts of the Peoples of the North.” 
Studies in Siberian Shamanism, ed. H.N. Michael. Toronto. 157-229. 

Bailey, H.W. (1957). “Буага Matinam." Bulletin of the School of Oriental 
and African Studies, 20.41—59. 

Bake A.A. (1935). “Тһе Practice of Samaveda." Proceedings of the Seventh 
All-India Oriental Conference. Baroda. 143-155. 

Basham, A.L. (1954). The Wonder That Was India. New York. 

Bhandarkar, D.R. (1945). *Can Women Perform Srauta Sacrifices of Their 
Own Accord?” B.C.Law Volume. Calcutta. I, 159—163. 

Bharatha Iyer, K. (1955). Kathakali. The Sacred Dance-Drama of Malabar. 
London. 

Bhardwaj, S.M. (1973). Hindu Places of Pilgrimage in India. Berkeley, Los 
Angeles, London. 

Bhattacharyya, T. (1948). A Study on Vastuvidya or Canons of Indian Archi- 
tecture. Patna. 


704 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Biardeau, M. and C. Malamoud (1976). Le sacrifice dans l'Inde ancienne. 
Paris. 

Bodewitz, H.W. (1973). Jaiminiya Brahmana I, 1-65, Translation and Com- 
mentary, with a study of Agnihotra and Prāņāgnihotra. Leiden. 

Bottéro, J. (1973). "Notes sur le feu dans les textes mēsopotamiens.” Le 
feu dans le proche-orient antique. Leiden. 

Boyce, M. (1975). “On the Zoroastrian Temple Cult of Fire.” Journal of 
the American Oriental Society, 95.454-465. 

Brough, J. (1950). “The Meaning of ni/hnu in the Brāhmaņas.” Siddheshwar 
Varma Commemoration Volume. 1,126-130. 

(1953). The Early Brahmanical System of Gotra and Pravara. Cam- 
bridge. 

(1971). “Soma and Amanita muscaria.” Bulletin of the School of 
Oriental and African Studies, 34.331-362. 

Brown, W.N. (1931). “Тһе Sources and Nature of purusa in the Purusasūkta 
(Rigveda 10.91).” Journal of the American Oriental Society, 51.108—118. 

(1942). "The Creation Myth of the Rig Veda.” Journal of the Ameri- 
can Oriental Society, 62.85-98. 

Brownson, C.L., ed. (1908). Xenophon’s Hellenica. New York. 

Burkert, W. (1979). Structure and History in Greek Mythology and Ritual. 
Berkeley, Los Angeles, London. 

Burrow, T. (1973). The Sanskrit Language. London. 

Caland, W. (1896). Die altindischen Todten- und Bestattungsgebrduche. 
Amsterdam. 

(1912). "De Archaeologische vondsten in de heuvels van Lauriya.” 
Verslagen en Mededelingen der Koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen, 
Afd. Letterkunde, 4e Reeks, 11.378—385. 

(1921-1928). Das Srautasūtra des Apastamba. Göttingen, Leipzig, 
Amsterdam. I-III. 

(1924). “Zur Übersetzung des Taittiriyasamhita.” Acta Orientalia, 
2.22-31. 

and V. Henry (1906). L'Agnistoma: description complēte de la forme 
normale du sacrifice de Soma dans le culte vēdigue. 2 vols. Paris. 

Campbell, J. (1864). 4 Personal Narrative of Thirteen Years Service Amongst 
the Wild Tribes of Khondistan for the Suppression of Human Sacrifice. 
London. 

Chadwick, N.K. (1931). “The Kite: A Study in Polynesian Tradition.” 
Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 61.455—491, Plates LV- 
LVII. 

Colebrooke, H.T. (1805). “On the Vedas, or Sacred Writings of the Hindus.” 
Asiatick Researches 8.369-476, in: Miscellaneous Essays, ЇЇ. London 
1873. 8-102. 

Converse, H.S. (1974). “The Agnicayana Rite; Indigenous Origin?" History 
of Religion, 14.81—95. 


705 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Coomaraswamy, А.К. (1939). ""Svayamātrņņā: Janua Coeli" Zalmoxis, 

2.3-51. 
. (1942). “Atmayajfia: Self-Sacrifice." Harvard Journal of Asiatic 

Studies, 6.358-398. 

Crooke, W. (1896). The Popular Religion and Folklore of Northern India. 
Reprint 1972. Delhi. 

Dandekar, R.N. (1945). “Yama in the Vedas.” B.C. Law Volume. Calcutta. 
I, 194—209. 

(1946, 1961, 1973). Vedic Bibliography, Y, II, III. Poona. 

(1965). “Vedic Religion and Mythology: A Survey of the Work of 
Some Western Scholars." Journal of the University of Poona, Humanities 
Section, 21.1—53. 

, C.G. Kashikar, and others (1958-1973). Srautakoša: Encyclopaedia 

of Vedic Sacrificial Ritual. Poona. 

Dange, S. A. (1970). Pastoral Symbolism from the Rgveda. Poona. 

(1971). Vedic Concept of “Field” and the Divine Fructification. Bombay. 

De Zoete, B. (1953). The Other Mind. A Study of Dance and Life in South 
India. London. 

Dumont, L. (1953). “Définition structurale d'un dieu populaire tamoul: 
AiyaNar, le Maitre.” Journal Asiatique, 241.255-270. 

Dumont, P.-E. (1927). L'A$vamedha. Paris. 

(1939). L'Agnihotra. Baltimore. 

(1951). "The Special Kinds of Agnicayana (or Special Methods of 
Building the Fire Altar) According to the Kathas in the Taittiriya Brāh- 
mana." Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, 95.628—675. 

(1957). “A Note on Taittiriya-Samhità 5.2.8.5 and Satapatha-Brah- 
mana 7.5.1.1." S.K. Belvalkar Felicitation Volume. Banaras. 

Dundes, A. and V. P. Vatuk (1974). “Some Characteristic Meters of Hindi 
Riddle Prosody.” Asian Folklore Studies, 33.85-153. 

Edgerton, F. (1929). "The Upanisads: What do They Seek, and Why?" 
Journal of the American Oriental Society, 48.97-121. 

Eggeling, J. (1882-1900 = 1966). The Satapatha Brahmana, 1-V. Delhi, 
Patna, Varanasi. 

Eiseley, L. C. (1954). “Мап the Fire-Maker.”’ Scientific American, 191:193, 
52-57. 

Eliade, M. (1964). Shamanism: Archaic Techniques of Ecstasy. New York. 

Emeneau, M. B. (1949). “Тһе Strangling Figs in Sanskrit Literature." Uni- 
versity of California Publications in Classical Philology, 13.345-370. 

Erkkara Raman Nambūtiri (1976). Amnayamathanam. Tavanur. In Ma- 
layalam. 

Faddegon, B. (1927). **Ritualistic Dadaism." Acta Orientalia, 5.177-196. 

Fewkes, J.W. (1920). “Fire Worship of the Hopi Indians." Annual Report of 
the Board of Regents of the Smithsonian Institution, 589-610. 

Findeisen, H. (1956). “Der Adler als Kulturbringer im nordasiatischen 


706 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Raum und in der amerikanischen Arktis.” Zeitschrift fiir Ethnologie, 
81.70—82. 

(1957). Schamanentum dargestellt am Beispiel der Besessenheitspries- 
ter nordeurasiatischer Völker. Stuttgart. 

Findly, Е.В. (1978). “Аѕресіѕ of Agni: Functions of the Rgvedic Fire.” 
Ph. D. dissertation. Yale University. New Haven. 

Fischer, R. (1958). “Pharmacology and Metabolism of Mescalin.” Revue 
Canadienne de Biologie, 17.389—409. 

Flattery, D.S. (forthcoming). Peganum Harmala L.: The Indo-Iranian Drug 
of Truth. 

Forbes, R.J. (1958). Studies in Ancient Technology. Leiden. 

Frazer, J.G. (1958). The Golden Bough. One Volume Abridged Edition. New 
York. 

Freud, S. (1907). “Obsessive Acts and Religious Practices.” In: Collected 
Papers, ЇЇ. London, 1953. 25-35. 

Geldner, K.F. (1951). Der Rig-Veda. Cambridge, Mass. 

(1957). Der Rig-Veda IV: Namen- und Sachregister. Ed. J. Nobel. 
Cambridge, Mass. 

Ghurye, G.S. (1964). Indian Sadhus. Bombay. 

Gilbert, W.H. (1947). *New Fire Ceremonialism in America." Revista del 
Instituto de Antropología de la Universidad Nacional de Tucuman, 3: 
233-317. 

Gongalves, D. (1955). Historia do Malavar. Ed. J. Wicki. Münster. 

Gonda, J. (1943). Ursprung und Wesen des indischen Dramas. Leiden. 

(1954). Aspects of Early Visnuism. Utrecht. 

(1957). Some Observations on the Relations Between "Gods" and 
“Powers” in the Veda, à propos of the Phrase "Sūnuh Sahasah." The 
Haque. 

(1959). Epithets in the Rgveda. The Hague. 
(1960), Die Religionen Indiens I: Veda und álterer Hinduismus, Stutt- 
gart. 
(1965). Change and Continuity in Indian Religion. London. The 
Hague, Paris. 
(1965a). The Savayajūas. Amsterdam. 
(1966). Loka: World and Heaven in the Veda, Amsterdam. 

(1970). Visnuism and Sivaism: A Comparison. London. 

(1974). *Dumézil's Tripartite Ideology: Some Critical Observations." 
The Journal of Asian Studies, 34.139—149. - 

(1977). The Ritual Sūtras. Wiesbaden. 

Government of India (1958). Report of the Sanskrit Commission 1956-1957. 
Delhi. 

Grassmann, H. (1873). Wērterbuch zum Rigveda. Leipzig. 

Gray, J.E.B. (1959a). “Ап Analysis of Rgvedic Recitation.” Bulletin of the 
School of Oriental and African Studies, 22.86—94. 

(1959b). “Ап Analysis of Nambudiri Rgvedic Recitations and the 


707 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Nature of the Vedic Accent." Bulletin of the School of Oriental and Afri- 
can Studies, 22.499—530. 

Grene, D. and R. Lattimore (1959). The Complete Greek Tragedies I: Aes- 
chylus. Chicago. 

Harrison, H.S. (1954). "Fire-Making, Fuel, and Lighting.” A History of 
Technology. Ed. C. Singer, E.J. Holmyard and A.R. Hall. Oxford. 216- 
237. 

Heesterman, J.C. (1957). The Ancient Indian Royal Consecration. The Hague. 

(1959). “Reflections on the Significance of the Daksiņā.” Indo- 
Iranian Journal, 3.241—258. i 
(1962). “Vrātya and Sacrifice.” Indo-Iranian Journal, 6.1-37. 

(1964). “Brahmin, Ritual and Renouncer." Wiener Zeitschrift für 
die Kunde Stid- und Ostasiens, 8.1-31. 

(1967). "The Case of the Severed Head.” Wiener Zeitschrift fiir die 
Kunde Stid- und Ostasiens, 11.22-43. 

Heim, R. (1963). Les champignons toxiques et hallucinogēnes. Paris. 

Heizer, R.F. (1963). “Domestic Fuel in Primitive Society.” Journal of the 
Royal Anthropological Institute, 93.186—194. 

Hillebrandt, A. (1880). Das altindische Neu- und Vollmondsopfer. Jena. 

(1897). Ritual-Literatur: Vedische Opfer und Zauber. Strassburg. 

(1927). Vedische Mythologie, 1-11. Breslau (reprint Hildesheim). 

Hiltebeitel, A. (1976). *The Burning of the Forest Myth.” Hinduism: New 
Essays in the History of Religions. Ed. B.L. Smith. Leiden. 208—224. 

Hough, W. (1926). Fire as an Agent in Human Culture. Washington, D.C. 

(1928). Collection of Heating and Lighting Utensils in the United 
States National Museum. Washington, D.C. 

Howard, W. (1977). Samavedic Chant. New Haven. 

Hu Sai-lan (1977). Style Transformed: A Special Exhibition of Works by 
Five Late Ming Artists. Taipei. 

Hubert, H. and M. Mauss (1909). “Essai sur la nature et la fonction du 
sacrifice." Mélanges d'histoire et des religions, 1-130. 

Hutton, J.H. (1926). The Angami Nagas. London. 

Huxley, J., ed. (1966). *A Discussion on Ritualization of Behavior in Ani- 
mals and Man.” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of Lon- 
don, Series B, No. 772, Vol. 251. 

Ikari, Y. (1975). “Ukha to Mahavira.” Journal of Indian and Buddhist Stud- 
ies, 23.1057—1046. 

Ingalls, D. (1959). "The Brahman Tradition.” Traditional India: Structure 
and Change. Ed. M. Singer. Philadelphia. 3—9. 

(1971). "Remarks on Mr. Wasson’s Soma.” Journal of the American 
Oriental Society, 91.188-191. 

Innes, C.A. (1951), Malabar. Madras. 

Kaelber, W.O. (1976). “Tapas, Birth and Spiritual Rebirth in the Veda.” 
History of Religion, 15.343-386. 

Kane, P.V. (1941). History of Dharmašāstra. Vol. II. Poona. 


708 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Karmarkar, A.P. (1942). “The Purusasükta (Rgveda X.90) and the Mystic 
Glorification of the Human Victim." Journal of the Royal Asiatic So- 
ciety, Bombay Branch, 18.91—93. 

Kashikar, С.С. (1958). “Тһе Present-Day Vedic Ritual in India." Revashan- 
ker Becharbhai Trivedi, Abhinandana Grantha. Madras. 56-64. 

(1964). “Тһе Vedic Sacrificial Rituals Through the Ages." Indian 
Antiquary. Third Series. 1.77-89. 

(1968). A Survey of the Srauta-sütras. Bombay. 

(1969). “Pottery in the Vedic Literature.” Indian Journal of History 
of Science, 4.15-26. 

Keith, A.B. (1914). The Veda of the Black Yajus School entitled Taittiriya 
Samhita, 1-1. Cambridge, Mass. 

(1920). Rigveda Brahmanas. The Aitareya and Kausitaki Brahmanas 
of the Rigveda. Cambridge, Mass. 

(1925). The Religion and Philosophy of the Veda and Upanishads, 
I-II. Cambridge, Mass. 

Kirfel, W. (1935). ‘Vom Steinkult in Indien." Studien zur Geschichte und 
Kultur des nähen und fernen Ostens; Festschrift Paul Kahle. Leiden. 
163-172. 

(1951). “Der ASvamedha and der Purusamedha." Beiträge zur 
indischen Philologie und Altertumskunde: Festschrift Walther Schubring. 
Hamburg. 39-50. | | 

Knipe, D.M. (1972). “Опе Fire, Three Fires, Five Fires: Vedic Symbols in 
Transition.” History of Religion, 12.28-41. | 

(1975). In the Image of Fire: Vedic Experiences of Heat. Delhi-Vara- 
nasi, Patna. 

Kosambi, D.D. (1950). “On the Origin of Brahmin Gotras.” Journal of the 
Royal Asiatic Society, Bombay Branch, 26.21—80. 

(1956). An Introduction to the Study of Indian History. Bombay. 

(1972). The Culture and Civilization of Ancient India in Historical 
Outline. Delhi. 

Kramrisch, S. (1975). “The Mahavira Vessel and the Plant Putika." Journal 
of the American Oriental Society, 95.222—235. 

Kuhn, A. (1859). Die Herabkunft des Feuers und des Géttertranks. Gūtersloh. 

Kuiper, F.B.J. (1962). “The Three Strides of Visnu.” Indological Studies in 
Honor of W. Norman Brown. New Haven. 137-151. 

(1970). “Review of Wasson (1968). Indo-Iranian Journal, 12.279-285. 

Kunjunni Raja, K. (1961). “Kerala Pronunciation of Sanskrit.” The Adyar 
Library Bulletin, 25.461—476. 

| (1964). “The Sanghakkali of Kerala.” Bulletin of the Institute of Trad- 
itional Culture, Madras University. Part IT, 169—178. 

Lévi, S. (1898 = 1966). La doctrine du sacrifice dans les Brahmanas. Paris. 

Lévi-Strauss, C. (1971). L’homme nu. Paris. 

Levy, J. and J.F. Staal (1968). The Four Vedas. Record Album. New York. 


709 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Lippert, J. (1941). The Evolution of Culture. New York. 

Lloyd, G. and D. (1971). Birds of Prey. Toronto, New York, London. 

Logan, W. (1887). Malabar. I-II. Madras. 

Longhurst, A.H. (1936). The Story of the Stipa. Colombo. 

Lorenzen, D.N. (1972). The Kāpālikas and Kalamukhas. Two Lost Saivite 
Sects, Berkeley. Los Angeles. 

Lüders, Н. (1951). Varuna, I-II. Göttingen. 

Macdonald, A.W. (1952). “А propos de Prajapati.” Journal Asiatique, 240. 
323-338. 

(1975). “Оп Prajapati.” Essays on the Ethnology of Nepal and South 
Asia. Kathmandu. 1-13. 

MacLeod, W.C. (1925). “Fuel and Early Civilization.” American Anthro- 
pologist, new series, 27.344—346. 

Malamoud, C. (1975). “La brique percée. Sur le jeu du vide et du plain dans 
l'Inde bráhmanique." Nouvelle Revue de Psychanalyse, 11.205-222. 

(1976). “Тегтіпег le sacrifice: Remarques sur les honoraires rituels 
dans le brahmanisme." In M. Biardeau and C. Malamoud (1976), 
Le sacrifice dans l'Inde ancienne. Paris. 155-204. 

Mayrhofer, M. (1953). Kurzgefasstes etymologisches Wērterbuch des Altin- 
dischen. Heidelberg. 

Mencher, J. (19662). “Тһе Namboodiri Brahmins of Kerala." Natural His- 
tory, 75.14-21. 

(1966b). ‘““Namboodiri Brahmins: An Analysis of a Traditional Elite 
in Kerala.” Journal of Asian and African Studies, 1.7-20. 

and Н. Goldberg (1967). “Kinship and Marriage Regulations among 
the Namboodiri Brahmans of Kerala." Man, 2.87-106. 

Minard, A. (1936). La subordination dans la prose védique. Paris. F 

(1949). Trois énigmes sur les cent chemins: Recherches sur le Sata- 
patha Brahmana, I. Paris. 

Mooss, N.S. (1973). The Tranvancore Anchal. Kottayam. 

Mujumdar, D.C., ed. (1950). Encyclopedia of Indian Physical Culture. Baroda. 

_Mus, P. (1935). Barabudur: esquisse d'une histoire du bouddhisme fondée 

sur la critique archéologique des textes, Y. Hanoi. 

(1953). “Le mythe et l'histoire dans l'Inde à propos du Purushasükta 
(R.5.X.90)." Eventail de l'histoire vivante: Hommage à Lucien Febvre. 
Paris. IT, 11-18. 

Mylius, K. (1967). “Die Ideenwelt des Satapatha-Brahmana.” Wissenschaft- 
liche Zeitschrift der Karl-Marx-Universitāt Leipzig, 16.47-55. 

(1967). “Рет erste Adhyāya des Asvalayana-$rautasütra." Zeitschrift 
für Missionswissenschaft und Religionswissenschaft, 51.245—373. 

(1968). "Der Samsava." Wissenschaftliche Zeitschrift der Karl-Marx- 
Universität Leipzig, 17.117-137. 

(1968). “Der Sarvamedha.” Wissenschaftliche Zeitschrift der Karl- 
Marx-Universitāt Leipzig, 17.275—277. 


710 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


(1972). "Der zweite Adhyāya des Āšvalāyana-srautasūtra.” Acta 
Orientalia, 34.95—162. 

(1972). “Das geographische Milieu der mittelvedischen Literatur.” 
Mitteilungen des Instituts für Orientforschung. Berlin. 17.369-382. 

(1974). "Die Rolle des vedischen Rituals in sozialen Konflikten.” 
Zeitschrift des Zentralen Rates fiir Asien-, Afrika- und Lateinamerika 
Wissenschaften in der DDR, 1.123-134. 

(1976). "Durchführung eines grossen vedischen Somaopfers, Kerala 
1975.” Ethnographisch-archüologische Zeitschrift, 17.111-126. 

Nachtigall, H. (1953). “Die erhöhte Bestattung in Nord- und Hochasien.” 
Anthropos, 48.44—70. 

Nagy, G. (1974). “Six Studies of Sacral Vocabulary Relating to the Fire- 
place." Harvard Studies in Classical Philology, 78.71-106. 

Narten J. (1960). “Das Vedische Verbum math.” Indo-Iranian Journal, 4.121- 
135. 

Nebesky-Wojkowitz, R. de (1951). “Ancient Funeral Ceremonies of the Le- 
pchas." The Eastern Anthropologist, 5.27-40. 

(1952). “Prehistoric Beads from Tibet." Man, 52.131-132 (art. 183). 

Needham, J. (1959-1974). Science and Civilization in China, III-V. Cam- 
bridge. 

Nehru, J. (1946). The Discovery of India. London. 

Nilsson, М.Р. (1923). “‘Fire-Festivals in Ancient Greece.” Journal of Helle- 
nic Studies, 43. 144-148. 

Nēlle, W. (1953). “Schamanistische Vorstellungen im Shaktismus." Jahrbuch 
des Museums fiir Vēlkerkunde zu Leipzig, 11.41. 

Oakley, K. (1955). “Fire as Palaeolithic Tool and Weapon.” Proceedings 
of the Prehistoric Society, 21.36—48. 

(1956). "The Earliest Fire-Makers.” Antiquity: A Quarterly Review 
of Archaeology, 118.102-107. 

(1958). “Use of Fire by Neanderthaler Man and his Precursors.” 
Neanderthal Centenary. Ed. G.H.R. Von Koenigswald. Utrecht. 267- 
269. 

(1961). “Оп Man's Use of Fire, with Comments on Tool-Making and 
Hunting.” Social Life of Early Man. Ed. S.L. Washburn. Chicago. 176- 
193. 

O'Flaherty, W.D. (1973). Asceticism and Eroticism in the Mythology of Siva. 
London, New York, Toronto. 

(1975). Hindu Myths. Harmondsworth. 

(1976). The Origins of Evil in Hindu Mythology. Berkeley, Los An- 
geles. 

Oldenberg, H. (1919). Vorwissenschaftliche Wissenschaft. Die Weltanschau- 
ung der Brahmana-Texte. Gottingen. 

Oliphant, S. С. (1920). “The Vedic Press-Stones." Studies in Honor of Mau- 
rice Bloomfield. New Haven. 225-250. 


7її 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Padmanabha Menon, K. P. (1924, 1933). History of Kerala, vols. I, Ш, 
Ernakulam. 
Parpola, A. (1968-1969). The Šrautasūtras of Latyayana and Drāhyāyana 
and Their Commentaries. Helsinki. 
(1973). The Literature and Study of the Jaiminiya Sāmaveda in Retro- 
spect and Prospect. Helsinki. 
(1976). “Interpreting the Indus Script, П.” Studia Orientalia, 45.125- 
160. 
, S. Koskenniemi, S. Parpola, and P. Aalto (1969). Progress in the 
Decipherment of the Proto-Dravidian Indus Script. Copenhagen. 
(1970). Further Progress in the Indus Script Decipherment. Copen- 
hagen. 
Paul, R. A. (1978). Review of Altar of Fire. American Anthropologist, 80.197- 
199; 
Peake, Н. J. (1933). Early Steps in Human Progress. Philadelphia. 
Potdar, K. R. (1953). Sacrifice in the Rgveda. Bombay. 
Pritchard, J. B., ed. (1955). Ancient Near Eastern Texts Relating to the Old 
Testament. Princeton. 
Puhvel, J. (1970). “Aspects of Equine Functionality.” In Puhvel, J., ed., 
Myth and Law Among the Indo-Europeans. Berkeley and Los Angeles. 
Raghavan, V. (1957). "Present Position of Vedic Chanting and Its Future,” 
Bulletin of the Institute of Traditional Cultures. Madras. 48-69. 
(1962). The Present Day Position of Vedic Recitation and Vedic 
Sakhas. Kumbakonam. 
Raikes, R.L. and R.H. Dyson (1961). “The Prehistoric Climate of Balu- 
chistan and the Indus Valley.” American Anthropologist, 63.265—281. 
Raja, K. Ramavarma (1910). "The Brahmins of Malabar.” Journal of the 
Royal Asiatic Society, 625-639. 
Rao, M.S.A. (1957). Social Change in Malabar. Bombay. 
Rau, W. (1957). Staat und Gesellschaft im alten Indien nach den Brāhmaņa- 
Texten dargestellt. Wiesbaden. 
Renou, L. (1931). Bibliographie vēdigue. Paris. 
(1939). “La maison védique." Journal Asiatique, 231.481—504. 
(1947). Les écoles védiques et la formation du Véda. Paris. 
(1950). “The Vedic Schools and the Epigraphy.” Siddha Bharati. 
Papers in Honour of Sidheshwar Varma. Hoshiarpur. II, 214-221. 
(1950). **Récitations du Vēda.” Sanskrit et Culture. Paris. 
(1953). Religions of Ancient India. London. 
(1954). Vocabulaire du rituel védique. Paris. 
(1955). *Les hymnes spéculatifs de l'Atharvaveda." Bulletin de la 
Maison Franco-Japonaise. Tokyo, nouvelle série. Tome IV:I, 31-48. 
(19552). "Atharva-Véda et rituel." Journal Asiatique, 243.417- 
438 


—— 
—— 
———— 


Ww 


1955-1967). Etudes védiques et Pāņinčennes, 1-XVI. Paris. 


—_—S 


712 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


(1958). Etudes sur la vocabulaire du Rgveda, première série. Pondi- 
chéry. 
(1960). Le destin du Véda dans l'Inde, Études védiques et paninéennes, 
6. Paris. 
(1963). "Sur le genre du sūtra dans la littérature sanskrite.” Journal 
Asiatique, 251.165—216. 
and J. Filliozat (1947). L'Inde classique: manuel des études indiennes, 
I. Paris. 
Rogerius, A. (1915). De open-deure tot het verborgen heydendom. Ed. W. 
Caland. The Hague. 
Rolland, P. (1973). Le Mahāvrata: Contribution à l'étude d'un rituel solennel 
védique. Göttingen. 
Rónnow, K. (1929). *Zur Erklárung des Pravargya, des Agnicayana und der 
Ѕаџігатарї. Le monde oriental, 23.113-173. 
Ruben, W. (1939). Eisenschmiede und Dämonen in Indien. Leiden. 
(1940). “Schamanismus im alten Indien." Acta Orientalia, 18.164—205 
Saraswati, B. and N.K. Behura (1966). Pottery Techniques in Peasant India. 
Calcutta. 
Sauer, C.O. (1961). *Fire and Early Man," Paideuma: Mitteilungen zur 
Kulturkunde, 7.399-407. 
Sauvé, J.L. (1970). “The Divine Victim: Aspects of Human Sacrifice in Viking 
Scandinavia and Vedic India." Myth and Law Among the Indo-Europeans. 
Ed. J. Puhvel. Berkeley and Los Angeles. 173-191. 
Schafer, E.H. (1961). Tu Wan’s Stone Catalogue of Cloudy Forest: A Com- 
mentary and Synopsis. Berkeley and Los Angeles. 
Schmidt, H.P. (1968). Brhaspati und Indra. Untersuchungen zur vedischen 
Mythologie und Kulturgeschichte. Wiesbaden. 
Schneider, U. (1971). Der Somaraub des Manu. Mythus und Ritual. Wiesbaden. 
Schultes, R. E. (1969). **Hallucinogens of Plant Origin.” Science, 163.245-254. 
Schwab, J. (1886). Das altindische Thieropfer. Erlangen. 
Séchan, L. (1951). Le mythe de Prométhée. Paris. 
Seidenberg, A. (forthcoming). “Тһе Ritual Origin of the Circle and Square.” 
Shende, N. J. (1965). “Тһе Purusa-Stkta (RV 10.90) in the Vedic Literature.” 
Journal of the University of Poona, 23.45-51. 
Silburn, L. (1955). Instant et cause. Le discontinu dans la pensée philosophique. 
de l'Inde. Paris. 
Sowerby, A. de C. (1940). Nature in Chinese Art. New York. 
Soymié, M. (1954). “Те Lo-feou Chan: Étude de géographie religieuse." 
Bulletin de l'école française d'extréme-orient, 48.1—139. 
Srinivasan, D. (1973). *Samdhya: Myth and Ritual." Indo-Iranian Journal, 
15.161-178. 
Staal, J. F. (1958). "Notes on Some Brahmin Communities of South India.” 
Arts and Letters. Journal of the Royal India, Pakistan and Ceylon So- 
ciety, 32.1-7. 


713 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


(1959). “Uber die Idee der Toleranz im Hinduismus.” Kairos. 
Zeitschrift fir Religionswissenschaft und Theologie, 1.215-218. 
(1961). Nambudiri Veda Recitation. The Hague. 
(1963). “Report on Vedic Rituals and Recitations.” Year Book of the 
American Philosophical Society, 607-611. 
(1964). Vedic Ritual in South India. (Film) Utrecht. 
(1967). Word Order in Sanskrit and Universal Grammar. Dordrecht. 
(1968). “The Twelve Ritual Chants of the Nambudiri Agnistoma.” 
Festschrift F. B. J. Kuiper. The Hague. 409-429. 
(1971). "Some Vedic Survivals.” Unpublished. 
, ed. (1972). A Reader on the Sanskrit Grammarians. Cambridge, 
Mass., London. 
(1974). “Тһе Origin and Development of Linguistics in India.” Essays 
in the History of Linguistics. Ed. D. Hymes. Bloomington. 63—74 
(1975). Exploring Mysticism: A Methodological Essay. Berkeley, 
Los Angeles, London. 
| (1978). “The Ignorant Brahmin of the Agnicayana.” Annals of the 
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 60. 337-348. 
(1979a). “Oriental Ideas on the Origin of Language.” Journal of the 
American Oriental Society, 99.1-14. 
(1979b). Comment: Altar of Fire." American Anthropologist 81. 
346-347. 
(1979c). “Ritual Syntax." Sanskrit and Indian Studies. Essays in 
Honor of Daniel H. H. Ingalls. Ed. N. Nagatomi, B. K. Matilal, and 
J. Masson. Dordrecht 119-142. 
(19794). “Тһе Meaninglessness of Ritual.” Numen. International 
Review for the History of Religions, 26.2-22. 
(1982). The Science of Ritual. Poona. 
Stein, A. (1921). Serindia: Detailed Report of Explorations in Central Asia 
and Westernmost China. Oxford. 
(1928). Innermost Asia: Detailed Report of Explorations in Central 
Asia, Kan-su and Eastern Iran. Oxford. 
Stein, R. (1942). “Jardins en miniature d'extréme-orient." Bulletin de l'école 
francaise d'extréme-orient, 42.1-104. 
Sternberg, L. (1930). “Der Adlerkult bei den Völkern Siberiens." Archiv für 
Religionswissenschaft, 28. 125-153. 
Sugathan, N. (1976). Gangadharan on Law of Land Reforms in Kerala. Cochin. 
Thibaut, G. (1875-77). The Sulvasiitra of Baudhāyana, The Pandit. 292-298 
(May 1875), 17-22 (June 1875), 44—50 (July 1875), 72—74 (Aug. 1875), 
139-146 (Nov. 1875), 166-170 (Dec. 1875), 186-194 (Jan. 1876), 209— 
218 (Feb. 1876), 316—322 (Oct. 1876), 556-578 (Feb. 1877), 626-642 
(March 1877), 692—706 (April 1877), 761-770 (May 1877). 
Thieme, P. (1938). Der Fremdling im Rgveda. Leipzig. 
(1952). Studien zur indogermanischen Wortkunde und Religionsge- 


714 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


schichte, Leipzig. 
(1953). Die Heimat der indogermanischen Gemeinsprache. Mainz. 
(1950). Mitra and Aryaman. New Haven. 

Thite, С. U. (1970). “Significance of Dikga." Annals of the Bhandarkar 
Oriental Research Institute, 51. 163-173. 

(1975). Sacrifice in the Brahmana-Texts. Poona. 

Thomsen, V. (1924). “‘Alttiirkische Inschriften aus der Mongolei." Zeit- 
schrift der deutschen morgenldndischen Gesellschaft, 78.121-175. 
Tsuji, N. (1952). On the Relation Between Brahmanas and Srautasütras. 

Tokyo (in Japanese, with English summary). 
(1970). Existent Yajurveda Literature. Tokyo (in Japanese). 

Van Buitenen, J.A.B. (1962). The Maitrayaniya Upanisad. The Hague. 

(1968), The Pravargya. Poona. | 

Van de Broek, R. (1972). The Myth of the Phoenix According to Classical 
and Early Christian Traditions. Leiden. 

Van Gelder, J.M. (1919, 1921, 1961). Mānava-šrautasūtra. Leiden, Leipzig, 
New Delhi. 

Van Gennep, A. (1909). Les rites de passage. Paris. 

(1911). “De la méthode à suivre dans l'étude des rites et des mythes." 
Revue de l'université de Bruxelles (English translation in: Waardenburg 
1973, 287—300). 

Velankar, Н. D. (1962). *Gharma and Oman in the Atri Legend." Indological 
Studies in Honor of W. Norman Brown. New Haven. 228—237. 

Venkatachalam, V. (1958). “The Sālagrāma—A Study.” The Vikram, 
2.105—120. 

Vernant, J.-P. (1965). Mythe et pensée chez les grecs: études de psychologie 
historique. Paris. 

Waardenburg, J., ed. (1973). Classical Approaches to the Study of Religion. 
The Hague, Paris. 

Waser, P. G. (1967). “Тһе Pharmacology of Amanita muscaria.” Ethno- 
Pharmacologic Search for Psychoactive Drugs. U.S. Public Health 
Service Publication No. 1965. 419—439. 

Wasson, R. G. (1968). Soma: Divine Mushroom of Immortality. New York. 

(1970). “Soma: Comments Inspired by Professor Kuiper’s Review.” 
Indo-Iranian Journal, 12.286—298. 

(1971). “The Soma of the Rig-Veda: What Was It?" Journal of the 
American Oriental Society, 91. 169—187. 

(1972). Soma and the Fly-Agaric: Rejoinder to Professor Brough. 
Cambridge, Mass. 

Weber, A. (1850). “Zwei Sagen aus dem Catapatha-Brahmana über Ein- 
wanderung und Verbreitung der Arier in Indien, nebst einer geogra- 
phisch-geschichtlichen Skizze aus dem weissen Yajus.” Indische Studien, 

1.161—232. 
(1864), “Über Menschenopfer bei den Indern der vedischen Zeit.” 


715 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Zeitschrift der deutschen morgenlándischen Gesellschaft, 18.262—287. 
| (1868). Indische Streifen. Berlin. 54—89. 
(1873). “Zur Kenntnis des vedischen Opferrituals (Fortsetzung).” 
Indische Studien, 13.217—292. 
Wheeler, M. (1968). The Indus Civilization. Cambridge. 
Widengren, G. (1965). Die Religionen Irans. Stuttgart. 
..... (1969). Der Feudalismus im alten Iran. Köln, Opladen. 
Wikander, S. (1946). Feuerpriester in Kleinasien und Iran. Lund. 
Wilbert, J. (1967). “Secular and Sacred Functions of the Fire Among the 
Warac.” Antropologica: Organo del Instituto Caribe de Antropologia 
y Sociologia de la Fundacion La Salle de Ciencias Naturales, 19.3—23. 
Yalman, N. (1963). “Оп the Purity of Women in the Castes of Ceylon and 
Malabar.” Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 93:1.25—58. 
Young, E. (1929). The Tangle-Coated Horse. New York. 
Zaehner, R.C. (1955). Zurvan. A Zoroastrian Dilemma. Oxford. 
Zimmer, H. (1955). The Art of Indian Asia, I-II. New York. 


716 


Ауа. för indologi iranistik /?%4 "d ri 9 
och indoeur. sprákforskning 


Prācinavamša (Old Hall) 


O Utkara Rubbish Heap 


Patnisala Garhapatya (Domestic Altar) 


(Wife’s Hall) O] sc] 


(Old) Ahavaniya 
(Offering Altar)= 


] (New) Garhapatya 
Daksinagni (Domestic Altar) 
(Southern Altar) 


Agnidhriya 
Utkara Rubbish Heap 
O 


Havirdhāna 
(Soma Hall) 


Audumbarī 


Uparava Holes 


Cātvāla Pit 
O 


|” Q 


(Sacrificial 


