DISPUTATIONES 
RHENO-TRAJECTINAE 


DISPUTATIONES INSTITUTI AD LINGUAS 
ORIENTALES 
DOCENDAS ATQUE INVESTIGENDAS 
IN UNIVERSITATE RHENO-TRAJECTINA 


CONDITI 


EDIDIT 


J.GONDA 


V 


MOUTON & CO. 1961 . °S-GRAVENHAGE 


NAMBUDIRI 
VEDA RECITATION 


BY 
J. F.,. STAAL’ 


MOUTON & CO. 1961. ’S-GRAVENHAGE 


(lL oVy / 


5? 


‘: © | ah Mouton & Co., Publishers 
O part of this book may be translated a r i 
( eproduced in any form. b 
Photoprint, microfilm, or any other means, without written alk 
permission from the publishers. 


The Hague, The Netherlands. 


PREFACE 


‘eal PK $007 
S & 
tee. 410 0 La 

This study could not have been made without the unfailing help, the 
vast experience, erudition and learning and, above all, the hospitality and 
friendship of many Nambudiris. Of all those to whom I should like to 
extend my sincere thanks, the following may especially be mentioned: 
the members of Ollappamanna Mana (Ottappalam) and of Akavoor 
Mana (Chowwara), Sri Matangarli Parameshvaran Nambudiri (Kavalap- 
para) and Sri Pazhedattu Narayanan Nambudiripad (Lakkiti), especially 
for Rgveda; Sri Chittoor Kunhan Nambudiripad (Cherpu), Sri Madampu 
Narayanan Nambudiri (Vadakancheri) and Sri Desamangalam Sankaran 
Nambudiripad (Kadalassery), especially for Yajurveda; Sri Mutta- 
thukatil Itti Ravi Nambudiri (Panjal) and Sri Thottam Sridharan Nam- 
budiri (Panjal), especially for Samaveda. 


neared fawnwEg ws 


I have derived great benefit from the constant encouragement and from 
numerous suggestions given by Prof. Dr J. Brough (London), Prof. Dr 
J. Gonda (Utrecht), Mr. J. E. B. Gray (London), Dr J. C. Heesterman 
(Utrecht-Poona) and Mr. C. A. Rylands (London), to all of whom I am 
very grateful. I feel much indebted to Mrs. E. M. Whitley (London), 
who suggested improvements in some phonetical statements, and to 
Miss B. S. Panikker (London), whose vatuable suggestions have been 
incorporated in the third chapter. I am equally thankful to Dr J. R. 
Marr (London), who has helped me with the transliteration of Malayalam 
and Tamil terms and names, and to Dr J. E. Schwartzberg (Philadelphia) 
who reviewed the map of Kerala. 

Mr. Gray, who had earlier analysed records of Rgveda recitation from 
Maharastra and from Rajasthan (BSOAS, 22, 1959, pp. 86-94), has 
recently given a detailed analysis of the Nambudiri Rgveda recitation 
(ibid., pp. 499-530). Parts of his analysis and some of the descriptions 
given here supplement each other. 

I feel deeply obliged to Dr A. A. Bake (London), who was the first 


Printed in The Netherlands by Mouton & Co, Printers, The Hague 


6 Preface 


scholar who travelled widely in different parts of India in search of Vedic 
and other recitations and who permitted me to use some of his recordings. 
I feel also greatly indebted to Mr. N. A. Jairazbhoy (London) for his 
frequent assistance and for his permission to reproduce here his analysis 
of some portions of Nambudiri samans. Both Mr. Jairazbhoy and Dr 
Marr have helped me considerably in determining musical intervals. 

In addition I should like to express my gratitude to the Netherlands 
Organization for Pure Research (Z.W.O.), which has provided me with a 
tape-recorder and which has assisted me in the expenses. I owe this 
partly to recommendations by Prof. Dr C. C. Berg (Leiden), Dr J. A. B. 
van Buitenen (Utrecht) and Prof. Dr Th. P. Galestin (Leiden), whom I 
thank sincerely. I am also very thankful to the Royal Netherlands 
Embassy (New Delhi) and to the Consulate-General of the Netherlands 
(Bombay), who have helped me throughout. 

This study is largely based upon a number of recordings which were 
made in South India during the summer of 1957, the final period of a 
three years’ stay in India which I owe to scholarships from the Govern- 
ment of India and from the Government of the Netherlands. A catalogue 
of the records taken was completed in November, 1957, and stencilled 
copies thereof were distributed privately. This catalogue is now reprinted 
after having been revised and enlarged with regard to an additional tape 
kindly provided by Sri T. K. Rajagopala Aiyar (Madras). The original 
tapes are in the author’s possession. Two complete copies, made with 
the assistance of Z.W.O., are preserved in the Universities of Leiden and 
Utrecht. A nearly complete third copy is preserved in the School of 
Oriental and African Studies, London. 

I should like to express my gratitude to Professor Gonda, who accept- 
ed the present study for publication in the series ““Disputationes Rheno- 
Trajectinae”’, of which he is the editor, and to the Netherlands Organiza- 
tion for Pure Research, which has borne the expenses of the publication. 

Finally I like to pay tribute to the two Vedic scholars to whose pu- 
blications I have referred throughout: Willem Caland, the Samavedin of 
Utrecht, and Louis Renou, whose “‘Les écoles védiques et la formation du 
Veda’? was my constant companion in the field and who, while this book 
was in the press, gave a short but exemplary survey of Vedic recitation 
in India in his Etudes védiques et Paninéennes, VI, (Paris, 1960), 37-41. 


January, 1960. 
School of Oriental and 
African Studies, London 


J. F. STAAL 


CONTENTS 
Page 
a ae. 
Preface. - +s beens : 
Abbreviations .---- ccc i 
Introduction .---:: °° ye ae pes ne 
‘i Significance and forms of religious transmission . - - - . 
9. Distribution of the Vedic schools .-.----'''c°*t" : 
II. Veda recitation of Tamil Brahmins. .----:°* °° “ 
1. Previous publications . be eee ae to sees ne 
2. The udatta and the svarita in Rk- and Taittiriya-Samhita - 
3, Vikrtis of the Tamil Regveda and Yajurveda recitation - 
4. The pitch of the accents - pe ee. a ee ee | . 
5. Svadhyaya and prayoga in Samagana ..--:° z 
IIl. The Nambudiris .-----:°° ne a = : 6. a Beno 7 
IV. General characteristics of the Nambudiri Veda recitation . - - o 
V. Nambudiri Reveda. 2 gy 
1. Samhita 2 ee 7 
2. Padapitha .-- ser ie 
3, Kramapatha ©. - : 
4. Jatapatha - ee . 
5 Rathapatha. - 7 of 
6. Sastram . eee : 
7. The recensions of the Rgveda.-- +--+’ 7 
VI. Nambudiri Yajurveda . ee ee ee | : | : . 
1. Taittiriya-sambita . ©. 2 - 
2. Padapatha . Le Fee RS EE i 
3, Udatta and svarita - - ss - 
4 Sitras.-.- ee err " 
VII. Nambudiri Samaveda cease ee ee | : - 
1. Sdmaveda in South India. - - +s e 
>. Nambudiri Jaiminlya ----- ssc 


8 
Contents 


3. Jaiminiya Sdmans . - Bree Seb pee ud. 76 
4. Notations, pitch and rhythm. Distribution of the Jaiminiya 81 


A catalogue of records of Veda Recitation and Indian Music (Re- 


corded in South India, April-July 1957). . 87 
Select Bibliography , 
| 98 
Index of Names. 
100 
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 
Fig. 1. RV udatta, Trichur 
Fig. 2. RV anudatta, Trichur = | 
Fig. 3. RV Svarita, Trichur : * 
Fig. 4. RV jata, ratha, Trichur . a 
Fig. 5. YV ghosam. . _ 
» 48 


Fig. 6. Four records of the first Can Dec itt ee Me ole 
t two 
Map of Kerala. parvansofJGG 1.1... | 34 


ABBREVIATIONS 


Abbreviations are as in: M. Bloomfield, 4 Vedic Concordance. Harvard Oriental 
Series, 10 (Cambridge Mass. 1906). Pratisakhyas are abbreviated as: Pr. 

References to the Kauthuma Samaveda are as follows (cf. R. Simon, Puspasatra, 
Miinchen, 1908, 483; and J. M. van der Hoogt, The Vedic Chant, Wageningen, 1929, 
77): 
SV 1.1 = Pirvarcika, Ist rk (according to the consecutive numbering of Benfey; cf. 
also S&mavedasamhita, ed. D. Santavalekar, Bombay, 1956). 

SV 2.1 = Uttararcika, Ist rk (according to ed. Benfey; as 651-1875 in ed. Santava- 
lekar). 

GG 1.1 = Gramageyagana: Purvarcika, Ist rk, Ist melody (according to SV, ed. 
Satyavrata Samasramin I-V, B(ibliotheca) I(ndica), Calcutta, 1874-78: I 91-II 242; cf. 
also Grdmageyagana — Aranyageyagana, ed. R. Narayanasvami, Bombay, 1942). 

ArS 586 = Aranyaka Samhita, Ist rk (which are numbered consecutively in ed. 
Santavalekar). 

ArG 586.1 = ArS 586, ist melody (published B.J., II, 243-365). 

ArG 1.1 = Ist melody of Ist of those chants of the ArG, which take their text 
from SV 1 and which are numbered consecutively 1-179 in ed. Narayanasvami, p. 
307-410, and also published in B./., [1, 387-518):. 

UG 1.1.1 = Uhagiana, as published in B./., ILI, 4 — V, 380. 

RG 1.1.1 = Uhya (rahasya) gana, as published in B.J., V, 381-599. 

All references to the Kauthuma SV are followed by a reference to volume and page 
of the 8./. edition. References to the Ranayaniya SV are to the Kauthuma editions. 

References to the Jaiminiya (J) SV are as follows: JS I 1.1.1 = Jaiminiyasamhitd, 
ed. W. Caland (Breslau, 1907). 

References to the ganas are as in: Jaiminiya Arseya Brahmana, ed. A. C. Burnell 
(Mangalore, 1878). The yoni, if any, in the JS is mentioned and the corresponding 
Kauthuma ganas, if any, are referred to. 

References to recordings are to sections (in Arabic numerals) of tape sides (in Roman 
numerals) as in the Catalogue published below (p. 87 sq.). 


INTRODUCTION 


1. SIGNIFICANCE AND FORMS OF RELIGIOUS TRANSMISSION 


Auch was Geschriebnes forderst du Pedant?... 
Das Wort erstirbt schon in der Feder... 
Faust to Mephistopheles 


The fidelity with which the Brahmans of India have transmitted the 
Vedic heritage deserves our full admiration. It is rooted in the awareness 
of the transcendence (apauruseyatva, ‘“‘non-human origin’’) of the sacred 
word. It is the same tendency which has created, along with the samhita, 
the padapathas and kramapathas, in which the formal structure of the 
text was analysed, the pratisakhyas and similar auxiliary texts, in which 
the rules for such an analysis were laid down, and the commentaries 
thereupon, where such rules were discussed. This conscientiousness 
is identical with the ritual exactitude, satyam, “‘truthfulness”’, with 
which the Vedic Indians performed the sacrifices. It rendered efficacy 
to the fulfilment by the Brahmans of a twofold task: the prayoga, the 
sacrificial performance in which Vedic recitation plays an important 
part, and the svddhydya, the oral transmission by which the Vedas 
are preserved and remain the “taxis around which the universe revolves”. 
In sacrifice and in transmission alike inaccuracies have therefore cala- 
mitous influences upon human society and upon the universe. The 
least they necessitate is prdyaScitta, “‘expiation”. Through scrupulous 
adhyaya, that is, by recitation of the Veda, the Brahmans participate in 
the sacred order by preserving the tradition throughout one sarga, 
“creation, manifestation’”’, as it was later expressed in Vedanta. Thus 
man contributes to the divine plan which the Vedantaparibhasa describes: 
“And thus in the initial period of creation Paramesvara created the Veda 
with the same sequence as the sequence of the Veda existent in earlier 
creation, but not a Veda of a kind different from that’’.1 


1 Vedantaparibhasa 4.55, ed.-transl. S. S. Siryanarayana Sastri, (Madras, 1942), 
87-88. 


12 Introduction 


In the following the main attention will go to the svadhydya, though 
occasional reference may be made to the sacrifice too. If a Westerner 
wants to aim at a fuller understanding of what svadhydya has come to 
mean in Hinduism, he should know the concepts with which he is in- 
clined to operate himself when dealing with related phenomena. To 
study and evaluate the significance of, and the relation between, such 
phenomena, a kind of Phenomenology of religious transmission is needed. 

The Western religions (Judaism, Christianity and Islam) are primarily 

book religions, and Western culture is a culture of books. To the 
Christian, the sacred word is recorded in the Bible, “the book” par 
excellence, which is further transmitted by the tradition which consists 
for the greater part of books. The Kur’dn called Christians and Jews 
along with the Muslims Significantly ah/ al-kitab, “the people of the 
book”. Though the term kur’an itself very probably means “recitation, 
what is recited”,? Muslims frequently refer to the kur’an as al-kitab, 
“the book”. This last word refers in particular to the lawh al-mahfiz, 
“the well preserved table”, which exists in heaven. Al-kur’dn consists 
of parts of the contents of al-kitab, revealed in the Arabic language. 
Islam is therefore rightly called a religion of the book. Moreover, the 
first verses revealed to Muhammad extol the use of the pen (kalam), 
taught by the Lord.? While the pen began to play an important réle in 
the propagation of Islam, the mystics considered it as a symbol for the 
way in which knowledge of the finite can be contained in the infinite 
divine omniscience.* 

In Christianity book religiosity may seem to be relatively recent, for 
in the New Testament, to teach in the exxAnoata is called: xatynyetv® from 
nye, “to (produce) sound” (hence catechism). But the tendency to 
write down the sacred word was very ancient: the two tables of stone, 
for instance, the “tables of testimony”, containing the commandments 
and brought by Moses from the mount, were “written on both their 
Sides... And the tables were the work of God, and the writing of God, 
graven upon the tables’’,® 


* Generally kara’a means “to recite”, sometimes (e.g. in stira 17,95) “‘to read”. See: 
Handwérterbuch des Islam (Leiden,1941), 347 a. 


3 Kur’Gn 96.4. 

‘ “If there exists”, says al-Ghazzili, “in the Divine Presence a thing through which 
the special feats of knowledge are engraved upon the receptacle-substances, its image 
(mithal) is the pen”: Mishkat al-Anwar (Cairo, 1322), 33;A. J. Wensinck, La pensée de 
Ghazzali (Paris, 1940), 95. 

5 1 Cor. 14. 19, 


° Ex. 32. 15, 16. For Judaism as “religion de l’écriture”’, cf. also H. Duméry, Phéno- 
ménologie et Religion (Paris, 1958), 27-28. 


Introduction 13 


These categories of religious transmission might not apply to the ie 
as a whole. E. R. Curtius who has devoted a memorable ae - , [ 
Europdische Literatur und lateinisches Mittelalter to the bie . ° Me 
book,’ says, having dealt shortly with Greece and Some: eine a : 
Weihe wurde dem Buch durch das Christentum zutheil.” For the 5 #4 
he calls Plato’s deprecation of writing and books ee ¥ 
changed already with Hellenism, when the importance of the book an 

iting 1 ased. . - 
gen ha had stressed the fact that our modern libraries si cenit 
in Alexandria. But he has also tried to show how this : a esr 
arising from the fruitful contact between Hellas and oe a descan 
Realitat des Buches, wie sie in Agypten wirksam war’’.® T eae 
Egyptians had an extraordinary reverence for the ae i He 
created its objects in the God of Writing, Thoth, and in the . oO ess 
the Book-house, Seshat. In a papyrus, quoted by Raphi, ania 
Erman’s translation,® a father introduces his son to the ““book school 
with the admonition “‘sein Herz hinter die Biicher zu setzen und sie yas 
seine Mutter zu lieben, denn es gibt nichts, das uber serena geht’’. 
The Etruscans too had deities represented as writing. These were, 
according to Kerényi, connected with the mysteries of death. = 
In connection with the classical Hellenic view it may be remar e 
however, that Plato did not reject the written word in favour of t e 
spoken word. He deprecated for philosophy fixed forms of caste 
and exposition in favour of recollection and unexpressed aeiaibs : . 
He rejected writing and speech alike, wherever put forward care : 
and assimilated uncritically. He adopted the view of whoever t in S 
that in the written word there is necessarily much which is not serious 
(cardia, ““play’’), and that neither poetry nor prose, spoken or ae 
(ypapyvat ovdé AcyO%vat) are of any great value, if, like the sci 2 
of the rhapsodes, they are only recited in order to be believer (meu ove 
évexa edéxOnoav), and not with any view to criticism or pants se 

And in the well known passage of the Seventh Letter he wrote about i 

own philosophical doctrines and views: “There neither 1S nor AD as 

be a treatise (ovyypayuan) of mine on this subject. For it canno 


a 1954), 306-352: Das Buch als Symbol. = 
: ae Apollon. Studien iiber antike Religion und Humanitaét (Wien etc., 1937), 


171-187: Die Papyri und das Wesen der Alexandrinischen Kultur, 186. 


s .c., 173. -_ | 
20 ee ns. the only God represented with a scroll, was Christ: Curtius, 0.c., 314 


11 =Phaedrus 277e5—278a2; transl. B. Jowett. 


14 Introduction 


spoken of at all (6ytbv yao ovdapdic Eorttv), like other branches of 

knowledge... Yet this much I know, that if the things were written or 

spoken, it would be best spoken by me...”’?? 

Such a view can easily go together with the idea of an ineffable (&ppyt0<) 
Divine (as in Neoplatonism!%) and of ineffable truth. These doctrines 
have often been accepted in India. The philosophical idea of the ineffable 
divinity is especially widespread in the Vedanta, the locus classicus being 
TU, where the Absolute is spoken of as “that from which all words re- 
coil — not within reach of the mind’’.14 

In the West negative theology has also, often by means of voluminous 
writings, opposed the desire to express the truth in writing or in speech. 
In general, however, expression, mainly through writing, has gained 
importance ever since the early middle ages. The numerous instances of 
the book as symbol, enumerated and interpreted by Curtius,'5 illustrate 
this. The book came to denote the plenitude of all knowledge and wisdom. 
In Dante, in the last vision of the Paradiso, it has become the symbol 
for the Deity itself. 

In the West the written word has become a vital characteristic of 
modern man. It may assume ridiculous forms (‘‘faire des livres avec 
des livres’), but it is significant. Novalis expressed this, when he wrote: 
“‘Biicher sind eine moderne Gattung historischer Wesen, aber eine 
héchst bedeutende. Sie sind vielleicht an die Stelle der Traditionen 
getreten.”?® But sensitive minds have felt a one-sidedness too. The last 
Cambridge Platonist, referring to the Athenian prisoners of the Syracusan 
expedition who were given their liberty because they could recite choric 
odes from Euripides, said: “Print has had a damaging effect. Before the 
mind had the assistance of the page it was given much harder work to 
do.”2" 

The importance attached to writing in the West is connected with the 
invention of writing. Though it can no longer be said that all the Indo- 
Europeans adopted writing from the Semites, it seems certain that only 


18 341c4-d3. Partly translated as in: W. D. Ross, Plato’s theory of ideas (Oxford, 
1951), 158. 

18 FE.g. Plotinus, Enneades, V 3.10.42; V 3.13.1; and cf. III 8.10. 28-31; VI 7.41.38; 
VI 9.4. 11-12 (Bréhier). 

4) 6 TU 2.4.1 and 2.9.1. 

6 O.Cc. 

16 Quoted by Curtius, o.c., 329. 

17 Dialogues of A. N. Whitehead (New York, 1956), 140. — Lavelle, however, reminded 
his readers of a Chinese saying: “la mémoire la plus forte est plus faible que l’encre la 
plus pale”: L. Lavelle, La parole et l’écriture (Paris, 1947), 162. 


Introduction 15 


many centuries after the beginning of the Vedic literature writing on 
used in India?*— in the beginning mainly, if not exclusively, for commercia 
purposes. Perhaps “it is the Buddhists who first made use of writing to 
record their canonical books”.?® The Vedic Indians looked down a 
writing and considered it as impure. A pupil should not recite and study 
the Veda, says the AiA,”° ‘“when he has eaten fiesh, or seen blood, or a 
dead body, or done what is unlawful... or had intercourse, or writ- 
ten...”. It is very probable that the Indians came into contact with 
writing only when they had possessed for centuries a vast eae 
transmitted orally.24 In India, where people have a memory vast y 
superior to ours, it may not be necessary to assume that “‘l Orpanisaion 
méme du canon védique ne se concoit guére sans le concours de |’€cri- 
ture’.22. But it is obvious that under such circumstances very much 
depends upon memory. This does undoubtedly explain at least partly 
the extraordinary importance accorded to memory by the eee 
Forgetting of what one has learnt before is like slaying a Brahman. 
“Honour Memory”’ says an Upanisad.** . 

Thus in the three Western monotheistic religions and in Western 
culture in general, transmission has increasingly come to mean trans- 
mission of the written word. But to the Christian idea of transmission 
another characteristic is essential: transmission may involve translation. 
This may be partly due to the fact that the New Testament records what 
Christ said and did in a language different from the language in which 
he spoke; and partly also because of the preponderance of the Latin 
version and of Latin works alongside of it during a long period of the 
history of Christianity. Therefore, though the meaning of the divine 
words is sacred, their language is not considered as divine. Hence the 
important efforts to translate the Bible and consequently to understand 


18 ‘ot discovered at Mohen-jo-Daro has neither been convincingly deciphered, 

Realtree scripts. Cf. L. Renou-J. Filliozat, L’Inde Classique, II (Paris, 
665. 

IP Sw. Rhys Davids, Buddhist India (London, 1903), 119. 

2 5.5.3; transl. A. B. Keith (Oxford, 1909), 301. 7 

21M. Winternitz, Geschichte der indischen Litteratur, I (Leipzig, 1908), 33. 

22 LL, Renou, La civilisation de l’Inde ancienne (Paris, 1950), 244: “Tin est pas sere 

que la récitation des textes religieux ait comporte, des repoque ace a 

présence de manuscrits a titre d’adjuvant”. Cf. however, L’Inde Classique, ee : ; 

28 Yajnavalkya 3.228 ap. TU ed.-transl. Swami Sharvananda (Madras, oe 

Cf. also A. K. Coomaraswamy, Recollection, Indian and Platonic. package : ; 

3 (1944), 1-18, where the practical need for memory In oral transmission Is overshadow- 

ed by metaphysical interpretations. 

24 CU 7.13.1: smaram upassva. 


16 Introduction 


the original. Such efforts are connected with the origin of Protestantism 
and of some parts of oriental studies.*® 

This translating activity cannot be said to be an exclusive mark of the 
monotheistic religions of the West; it existed in Buddhism. In Islam, 
on the other hand, the kur’anic language is considered as sacred. ‘“These 
are the miracle-verses (dydt) of the book that makes manifest. We have 
sent it down as an Arabic kur’Gn’’, it is declared.2® As distinct from the 
Christian mysteries, this has been considered as the only miracle (mu’- 
djiza) of Islam. Hence the kur’an should not be translated. 

In the West, the transmission of written texts, which may involve 
translation,?’ has led to the problem of meaning too: whoever translates 
is concerned with the meaning of expressions. In the Indian svadhydya 
there is no sharp distinction between word and meaning and between 
form and contents. In this “archaic’’ world lie the roots of the efficacy 
and power of mantra recitation, which is related to ‘‘magical”’ identifica- 
tions as well as to the creative force of the word in poetry, in divine and 
in human speech.?® This archaic reality has always constituted an 
important aspect of the recitation of the Veda. 

It is obvious that it should not be forgotten, on the other hand, that 
alongside the mere preservation of the sacred sound, there have since 
the earliest times been attempts to fix the meaning. ““The study of words 
and of the meanings of words was undertaken in the first place primarily 
to meet the needs of Vedic ritual and the text material required by it.’’2® 
This constituted one of the main sources out of which Indian philosophy 
developed. Many of the early interpretations of the Vedic heritage were 
predominantly ritualistic. An important attempt to arrive at a unifying 
view was the interpretation of each Vedic sentence as an injunction to 

(mostly ritual) action (Mimamsa). Later followed incessant attempts to 


See also H. S. Nyberg, ,,Das Studium des Orients und die Europdische Kultur” 
ZDMG, 103 (1953), 9-21. 


38 Kur’an 12.1. 

87 Less characteristic phenomena (e.g. initiation, spiritual affiliation, etc.) may be 
excluded here. 

28 The meaning of commonly adapted terms such as “‘magical”’ lies in the fact, that 
the objects to which they are made to refer cannot be handled in the framework of 
categories and concepts which we have evolved and with which we are familiar. Hence 
these objects may only be understood when the categories, which we apply to them 
unconsciously and unsuccessfully, are mentioned and analysed. An attempt to use 
more appropriate concepts is made in: C. G. Diehl, Instrument and purpose. Studies on 
rites and rituals in South India. (Lund, 1956). In many cases, howerer, profitable use 
could be made of the traditional distinction between karma, jfidna and bhakti. 

29 See: J. Brough, “‘“Some Indian theories of meaning’’, TPS, 1953, 161-76; and cf. 
M. B. Emeneau, “India and linguistics’, JAOS, 75 (1955), 151. 


Introduction 17 


see one doctrine expressed in the mass of recited Vedic material ei 
danta).2° Alternatively, stress may have been laid upon at gual leat 
bility and the ineffableness of the Absolute. In logic, verba a 2 
(sabda) became one of the means of valid knowledge, and, in its re — : 
to the Veda, safeguarded the Vedic authority. In India, ee eve 
opment does not mean replacement of the old by the new, ut = 
existence of the old with the new. Hence all these phenomena existe 
ist side by side. 
nr nt and writing, translating and interpreting, the hse 
student of svddhyaya is invited to discard the mentality underlying t an 
professional habits. He is faced with a tradition which pays eats 
attention to the transcendence of the sacred word as Western re a 
traditions do. But first there is no written text which 1S transmi e 
there is sound, originally “heard” (Sruti), and Vedic ad srsinaeaen agian 
vedadhyayana. Secondly, in this process translation or interpretation ar 
not necessarily thought of, for the words, which are one with the meaning 
and themselves sacred, should be preserved for the world and ae Poe 
terity. In this sense the srotriya who recites without sient mr 
should not be compared with a clergyman preaching from the p a : 
but rather with a medieval monk copying and illuminating manuscripts, 
and to some extent with all those who are connected with book pro- 
duction in modern society. To the copyists we owe nearly all our aia 
ledge of Antiquity, to the reciters all our knowledge of par = ‘i 
(for the few existing manuscripts are themselves based upon oral trad! 
4 32 
aa above description and analysis of some forms of religious trans- 
mission in general are intended to serve as an introduction to the a 
tality behind the recitation of the Veda. The following sections Wl 
devoted to a description and analysis of some of the more formal aspects 


of the Vedic transmission. 


30 Cf. the present writer’s “Uber die Idee der Ucn ar ae Kairos. 
at see ¥ oe : heologie 1a ) Te 
tschrift fur Religionswissenschaft und T: , sae ae 
Riel maar commented upon by ilu ase sid sialprenaraieet 
kelloser Reinheit zu reziti , 
Revedin, der den gesamten Text in ma Rein Serer EN 
; are ee ht in der Anukramani stent, 
ist, iber ein Lied etwas zu sagen, das nic del baihrig , 
ie Erfahrung bezeugen”: Bhasya zu varttika 5 zu Panini 1.1.9 und seine 
‘nheimischen Erklarer (Berlin 1935), 183. . ; 
oe L Renou in: L’Inde classique, | (Paris, 1947), 271: “Les eet spenmapenctiie 
ee moi des hommes qui naguére enco 
*ont pas plus de valeur que le temoignage ae oo eis 
bane ar aeiiolre des portions plus ou moins considérables du Veda.” This statement 


continues to be valid. 


Introduction 


2. DISTRIBUTION OF THE VEDIC SCHOOLS 


Only Brahmans are entitled to recite the Vedas. Each Brahman family 
belongs to one sdkha and within the sadkhad to one sutra. The sutra 
prescribes the prayoga and its texts should be transmitted in the svdaa- 
hydya; but although they do not follow the rites of other schools, Brah- 
mans may study other recitations along with the sva@dhydya of their own 
school. It is obvious on methodological grounds that the student of 
Veda recitation should if possible only listen to Brahmans who recite 
their own Sakhda. 

Texts of different sakhds or Vedas may be recited in the same or in a 
similar way (e.g., RS and TS by Tamil Brahmans). The same texts, 
however, are generally recited in different ways (with the exception of 
very general characteristics) in different places. It is therefore natural 
to start with a short survey of the actual geographical distribution of the 
SGkhas. This may serve as a supplement to the information supplied by 
texts such as the Caranavyitha and by the epigraphical evidence studied 
by Renou.*% 

The Vedic tradition is undoubtedly at its strongest and at its purest 
in the South. In the North, where there are Brahmans who no longer 
know to which Veda they belong, recitation flourishes mainly in Maha- 
rastra and in Gujrat. Especially the (mainly Madhyamdina, but possibly 
also Kanva) SYV (VS, not the SB) and the Ranayaniya*! SV are recited. 
The AV seems to be only extant in a few villages in Gujrat, a fact which 
was discovered by the Samkaracarya of Dvaraka.** In other parts of the 
North, especially in Bengal, Assam, the Panjab and Kashmir, the tradi- 

tion of Veda recitation seems to be either practically extinct or much 
deteriorated, though occasionally artificially revived.2° The famous 
centre in U.P. is of course Banaras. 


L. Renou, Les écoles védiques et la formation du Véda (Paris, 1947), §§ 47, 73, 117, 
197, Cf. also V. Raghavan, “‘Present position of Vedic chanting and its future’, 
Bulletin of the Institute of traditional cultures (Madras, 1957), 48-69, from which the 
information given here is independent if not stated otherwise. 

84 In accordance with Mahidasa commenting upon the Caranavyiha (Renou, 
op. cit., 127). 

85 The “‘degraded brahmans” of Orissa, which Renou, following J. N. Bhattacharya, 
mentions (op. cit., 87, n.l) are atharvans, not Atharvavedins. In the opinion of some 
Malayali Hindus the Mappilahs (Malayali Muslims) belong to the “‘Atharvana Veda”, 
which elsewhere again is identified with the bible of the Christians. 

86_E.g. in Darbhanga, where the SV has been introduced from the South thanks to a 
South Indian sdmaga patronised by the Maharaja (Raghavan, op. cit., 51). 


Introduction 19 


Travelling Southward along the East coast, however, ear ee 
crossing the Godavari at Rajamahendravaram (Raja ne H * 
Andhra, a region where one can find — though not ater ins : re 
rich and strong tradition of Veda recitation and the surviva a 
times development of several other Vedic traditions an ; ieee 8 
generally believed to have been extinct for centuries. aoe - 
characteristic for Andhra and Madras is the Taittiriya sakha, . Ww fe 
the TS, TB, TA and TU are all recited. The other sakhas ot the ie : 
are extinct. Sukla YV is very rare, as It was previously: _— i fu 
Renou®’ the traditions are silent concerning Madhyam ae arte 
South, whereas there may have been some Kanvas near the | or . 
border of the Deccan. At the present day Madhyamdinas sie . i 
South as Mysore City, and Kanvas in a few villages in the neighbourho 
of Tiruccirappalli (Trichinopoly) and ‘Tancavur (Tanjore). + ib 

The RV, somewhat less common that the KYV, 1s eae i 
jess common but nevertheless available in most of the fowns oO eee 
tu; the sakha is Kauthuma (-Ranayaniya?).*° Jaiminiyas are pire : 
rare, but not extinct as it has been thought;*® they will be dealt wi 

below. 
ei re meme recite the SB traditionally; and of course rel IU 
which belongs to the VS. The Rgvedins recite only the RS, w ereas 
recitations of the CU by Kauthumas or of the KenaU by deux are 
based upon granthas or printed editions and not upon oral traditions. 
a are not recited. 

a may be made regarding the AV, which seems to be 

extinct in the entire South.2® On the occasions when the opening aa 

of each of the four Vedas are recited, South Indian (Tamil = we “ 

Malayali) Brahmans recite in the YV style the line: sam se evir . 

histaya apo bhavantu pitaye|sam yor abhisravantu nah, the aan . 

of the Paippalada recension.*2 The recent Ganapatyupanisad, whic 


37 Op. cit., 200. | ; 

38 nee Tamil SV is generally considered to be cp peruey: a Se ce sae 
j igin< lam in N. Arcot) declared emp : 

Tanjore (originally from Adayappa declare oe oe 

<akhd |} in: it may be either Ranayanlya Or na. 
of my Sakhd is not quite certain, } dati aero he 
i al to me and my family. e rela 

thing, the name Kauthuma is quite new i ee a a acer 
wo schools is not very clear. It might be cl earer 

cisitis (in accordance with the Caranavyuha: Renou, op.cit., 88). But according 

to Renou (op. cit., 92, n. 2) this is not in accordance with the texts. 

39 Renou, op. cit., 128. 

40 Notwithstanding Wilson, Ind. Caste, U1, 57, 76, 174 quoted ap. aeaee idl 

41 Raghavan concluded that this recension was once popular in the South (op. ci., 

53); but even one line might have come from the North. 


20 Introduction 


said to belong to the AV, is occasionally recited in Tamilnatu, in the 
same way as the TU upon which it is partly based; but it is doubtful 
whether this recitation can be called traditional and it cannot be regarded 
as a proof for the earlier occurrence of the AV. The Jesuit Goncalves, 
who lived 1561-1640, mentions only three Vedas as current among the 
Malabar Brahmans,*? while Rogerius, who visited South India in the 
XVIIth century, states that the AV had long been lost.** 

In order to enter the region which is the object proper of the present 
study, Kerala, where the Malayalam speaking Nambudiri Brahmans live, 
one has to travel Westward from Madras and pass through the Western 
Ghats. There again the geographical distribution of the sakhas is 
somewhat different, as we shall see, and the modes of recitation quite 
different. The study of the Nambudiri recitation can be undertaken in a 
more satisfactory way if it is introduced by, and compared with the 
recitation of the Tamil Brahmans, which 1s known to some extent and 
which is more easily accessible, by its nature as well as by its more wide- 
spread occurrence. The following discussion of a few features of the 
Tamil recitation will be introduced by a short survey of previous publica- 
tions, which were partly based upon this kind of recitation. The Tamil 
Brahmans consist of various communities,“ the first among which is the 
Aiyar community from which the information below is taken. Next come 
the Vaisnava Aiyank4rs, who are generally reported to recite in the same 
way as the Aiyars.*® This is only natural, as the division between the 
two must have come into being long after the Vedic period (with the 
Alvars and Ramanuja); moreover, Aiyar and Aiyankar boys are ge- 
nerally taught together in the Vedapathasalas. There is however a belief 
that there are differences in the chanting of SV, which is indeed possible 
as SV is generally not transmitted in the schools, but in the homes. The 
problem should be studied in specifically Vaisnava centres.*® 


42 D. Goncalves S. J., Historia do Malavar, ed. J. Wicki S. J. (Miinster, 1955), 35. 
I am very grateful to Professor C. R. Boxer (London) who drew my attention to this 
“History of Malabar’’. 

43 “|. doch dit vierde deel (i.e. ““Adderawanawedam’’) en is niet meer te vinden, 
also het al lange verloren is gheweest .. .”: A. Rogerius, De open-deure tot het ver- 
borgen heydendom (Leiden, 1651), ed. W. Caland (’s-Gravenhage, 1915), 21. Caland 
notes that actually no mss. of the AV have been found in South India. 

44 Cf. the present writer’s ‘‘Notes on some Brahmin communities of South India”, 
Art and Letters, Journal of the Royal India Pakistan and Ceylon Society, 32 (1958), 1-7. 
46 The Tengalais may be expected to pay less attention to Veda recitation in favour 
of the recitation of classical Tamil, which has developed greatly in Tamijnatu, especially 
among non-Brahmans. 

«6 The author went for this purpose to the temple of Sri Venkatesvara at Tirupati 
(Tirumalai), but it was found that there are only Taittiriyakas in this region. 


il 


VEDA RECITATION OF TAMIL BRAHMINS 


1. PREVIOUS PUBLICATIONS 


It seems probable that the first Western scholar who mee ean 
i itation, which he heard at roona, 
dologists about actual Veda recl n, | : 3 7 
. fae He contributed a small article entitled Uber die vedischen 
Accente” in 1863,! where he writes: “Ich zweifle ob es vor mir je einem 


Europier gelungen ist, einen Bhatt (so heissen die gewerbsmassigen Her- 


i ie Brahma- 
sager der Veda) zu veranlassen, vor ihm den Veda zu lesen. Die B 


nen halten das fiir eine ganz entsetzliche Profanation, und a ae 
meisten wiirden durch nichts in der Welt zu bewegen sein, es ie s me 
Thereupon he gives a description of the recitation of a verse 
instances of kampa. . 
gota cere who travelled widely in different parts one pee 
in search of Vedic and other recitations 1s Dr Arnold A. Bal ‘ = : es 
a short record of his experiences in an article dealing ee Ye case 
exclusively, with SV, and entitled ae ae bane wie a 
to the previous work done , M. 
a ee niga tie gives a discussion of Felber's icone a 
to his own records. This discussion is taken up again by : te 7 see 
two articles entitled: “Some problems regarding ae On menace 
investigation”, and “Sound Record of | Samaganas: ampere 
retrospect”.* In the first paper Apte discusses Bake S : navies Ms 
however, incorporating any new material which might contri 


solution of several of the problems considered. In the second paper he 


kara 
describes his own records, which were taken from Laksmana Sam 


17 (1863), 799-802. mee 
eee 7 the 7th All-India Oriental Conference (Baroda, 1935), 143-55 


3 This author has also elsewhere than where Bake paler: ee aie 
tion: Notes on Aryan and Dravidian philology, I (Madras, 1934); In oe ee eae 
4 Bulletin of the Deccan College Research Institute, 4 (1942-43), 2 ae 
A third article in the same issue (269-79) bears partly upon the same sud} : 


‘spoken’ word in Sanskrit literature’’. 


22 Veda recitation of Tamil Brahmins 


Bhatta Dravida, the (Tamil) Simavedin who has chanted for the Deccan 
College Postgraduate and Research Institute and who had _ himself 


written a very informative article entitled: ‘“‘The mode of singing Sama 
Gana’’.5 


2. THE UDATTA AND THE SVARITA IN RK- 
AND TAITTIRIYA-SAMHITA 


Panini states that the udatta is ucca, “high”, the anudatta: nica, “low’’, 
and the svarita: samahdarah, “a compound (tone)”. Moreover, the be- 
ginning portion of the svaritg is said to be udatta.* The svarita is further 
characterised as Gksipta, ‘‘falling” by the APr and as Pravana, “‘a conti- 
nuous fall” (from the udatta to the anudatta) by the TPr.7 
Haug observed, however, that his informant(s) recited the Svarita ata 
higher pitch than the udatta. Actually all Aiyar Rgvedins and Taittiriya- 
kas clearly recite the syllable marked in the mss. Or printed texts with a 
vertical stroke above (i.e., the svarita) with a high pitch, the unmarked 
syllable (i.e. the udatta or the pracaya) at a middle Pitch, and the syllable 
marked with a horizontal Stroke below (the anudatta) at a low pitch. 
A long svarita, however, is recited at a middle pitch followed by a high 
pitch. Of two or more successive anudattas, one is recited at a lower 
pitch ( sarvanudatta). 
Haug therefore concluded: ‘Die wahren Hauptaccente sind nur der 
Anudatta und Svarita. .. Der Udatta ist nur eine Art Hilfsaccent... Die 
Herausgeber des Peterburger Sanskrit Worterbuches, sowie Prof. Auf- 


Other Western scholars generally rejected these conclusions. Whitney, 
for instance, referring to Haug, wrote: “In maintaining this, however, 
he is obliged to assume that the whole has nothing to do with what we 
call accent at all, but is a mere artificial system of variations of tone, 
with no assignable purpose. To do this is to Plunge one’s self into 


5 


The Poona Orientalist, 4 (1939), 1-21. 

° Panini 1.2.29-32.. 

*  APr 1.14-7 and TPr 1.47 ap. W. S. Allen, 
1953), 87-8. 

° ZDMG, 17 (1863), 800. 


Phonetics in ancient India (London etc., 


Veda recitation of Tamil Brahmins 23 


; er 
difficulties vastly greater than those with which we have been trying 
ontend.’’® | . . 7 
" In India there is not always clarity about these seein either. so a 
ya as sitting 
I h a vaiyadkarana pandit who w 
remember a discussion wit eal see alors 
r i and who maintained that, in 
front of me in a bus in Udupi an ; ama tare 
anini recited higher than the ud@tta. 
with Panini, the svarita was never | ert 5 
vaidika in the neighbourhood, however, did recite it at a higher pitch than 
the udatta. | | 
Subsequently it has been recognised that, at least i an there a 
the originally high tta to an u 
have been a development from Se aea ee 
**This must be an innovation, 
recited at a middle pitch. | : 
one’’, says Macdonell.!® It actually is announced in the ana 
ciaies that the first “half mdatrd or half of the svarita’’ (ardhamatrardham 
eva va) is more raised than the uda@tta (udattarodattat). | See 
It is obvious that an attempt might be made to explain this evel 8 
ment by assuming that the original Vedic accent was not a sa 
accent but a stress accent. This might be reflected in the enerac eta ion 
in the RPr of the uddtta, anuddtta and svarita respectively . ee 
ze ”? in Vedic and in 
Ky a 12 Moreover, the “Schwundstufe”’ in 
visrambha and aksepa. : ayn 
to be explicable only on the assump 
the IE languages in general seems ra a 
r tin IE. But the terms of the 
of the existence of a dynamic accen RP 
on the other hand have been intended as an attempt at a picasa - 
cen 
iation.1* These problems have been re 
the mechanism of pitch varia , ie 
treated again by Gray, who defends the view that the original IE pater 
was an accent which can be analysed in terms of alpa- and detain 
There can be little doubt that the Brahmans of the various ae 
Indian Brahman communities now recite with a musical acs A 
udatta and the svarita in the actual Aiyar recitation of the RV an 


® W. D. Whitney, Oriental and linguistic studies, II ae oo ae ae 
in: Trans of the American Philological Association, 1870). Cf. also ‘3 seca S 
ss Siddheswar Varma upon the views of Sivaramakrishna Sastri an ; ae : 
Vedic accent and the interpreters of Panini’, JRAS (Bombay), 26 ( ed, ‘ 
Cf. also Whitney ed. T7Pr (New Haven, 1871), ee 4 

10 A. A. Macdonell, Vedic grammar (Strassburg, a x i . 

11 ~RPr, 189, 190 (ed. transl. M. Miiller, Leipzig, 1856, = : 


: oe op. cit., 90. Wackernagel says about the Indian doctrines of the accent: 


“Die Theoretiker sprechen immer nur von PAL Ra nie von dessen Starke 
indi ik, 1, G6ttingen, 1896, 284 a) ; . 
vars a Ca analysis of Rgvedic recitation”, BSOAS, 22 SHED ened 
ie “AN analysis of Nambudiri Rgvedic recitation and the nature of the Ve 
an - 


accent’, ibid., 499-530. 


24 Veda recitation of Tamil Brahmins 


Tait. YV have the clearly defined values described above. In order to 
study the development from the high to the middle ud@tta, it therefore 
becomes important to see whether perhaps other Brahman communities 
recite these accents differently. This is one of the topics which will be of 
particular interest to the student of Nambudiri Veda recitation. 


3. VIKRTIS OF THE TAMIL RGVEDA AND YAJURVEDA RECITATION 


If the padapatha of the RS or of the TS be denoted by abcd... , the 


following three vikrtis which are current amongst the Aiyar Brahmins 
can be written as follows: 


krama: |ab|bc|cd|]|... 

jaja: |ab|balab||bel|cb|bc]|... 

ghana: |ab|balabc|cbalabc||bc|cb|bced|dcb|bcd|| ... 
(where in krama single, in jata and ghana double dandas denote the ab- 
sence of samdhi). Whoever has mastered the last, and hence also the 
previous vikrtis, is called “‘ghanapathikal’’. Two special rules of a general 
nature (and many of a special nature) are observed: 

I. The last word of a verse, half-verse or sentence is repeated with iti 
(pragraha). If the last word is a compound, the process is called pari- 
graha, the samdhi is left out after iti in the second half of the parigraha 
and the compound is hence analysed into the two constituent parts.1° 
The accent is applied in RV as if these two parts were not separated.® 

II. After the last occurrence of any compound in the development of a 
vikrti, the compound is repeated with parigraha. After iti the samdhi is 
left out and the compound is analysed into its two constituent parts 
(avagraha). 

Examples: If ‘“‘c’’ stands for a compound consisting of the parts “‘c’”’ 


and ‘“‘c’” in the padapatha |a|b|c|d|e|..., the parigraha is as 

follows: 

krama: |ab|be|cd|citic’-c" |de|... 

jaja: |ab|balab||bc|[cb|be||cd|dcled || c iti c’-c’ | 
deled||del]|... 


ghana: |ab|balabc|cbalabc||/bc|cb|bcd|dcb|bec 
d|[cd|dc|cdeledc|cde||citic’-c’ ||deled|... 


18 The present author has not heard the vikrtis of the rare occurrence of three mem- 
bered compounds (Macdonell, § 185). 
16 Cf. RPr, 210. 


Veda recitation of Tamil Brahmins” 25 
Thus the kramapatha of RV 1.1.1 na 
| ag-nim ile | le pu-rd-hi-tam | pu-r6-hi-tam-yaj-na-sya | pu-ré-hi-tam 


j-ti pu-rah hi-tam | ... | 

There can be no confusion as to whether an occurrence of a parigraha is 
the result of an application of rule I (in the case of a compound) or of 
rule II: for in the former case, up to the repetition, no word beyond the 
compound has occurred in the development of the vikrti, which is started 
afresh afterwards (i.e., without linking the last words of the previous 
with the first word of the next sentence), whereas in the latter case the 
development of the vikrti continues. Thus, if one hears: 


lab|bec|citic-c |delef|... 
‘t exhibits an application of rule I and the padapatha is to be reconstructed 
as:|a|b|c||dljel|fl|.... If one hears: 
|Jab|bcl|cd|citic—< dé| ef | <4: 
it exhibits an application of rule I and the padapatha is to be recon- 
structed as: |a|b|c|dle|f|...- 


| 

If the rules overlap (as in RV 1.164.1: sap-td-pu-tram) the parigraha 
occurs only once as according to rule I. _ 

These rules can be stated after a close examination of good recitations 
of the vikrtis. They are in accordance with rules of the krama-section 
(Patala 11) of the RPr (which is not generally taught to students of RV 
recitation in South India, but which is well known to some of the pan- 
dits). In siitra 596 the parigraha rule is formulated for avagrhya com- 
pounds; in 598 for the last word of a half rk. Satra 605 states that com- 
pounds should be separated after the repetition. | a 

As for the chronology of the vikrtis, it is clear from the discussion 1n 
the siitras 677 sq. that not long before the RPr the kramapatha may have 
come into being (Brahmanas do not mention it), whereas nothing beyond 
the krama (jatd, etc.) existed at the time of the RPr, as it asserts that the 
krama ‘does not accomplish anything else” (677: anyasadhako na). 

As an example of the accuracy with which also other rules of the RPr 
are observed and are extended to cases beyond the kramapatha (about 
which the literature which is available seems to be silent), a recitation of 
the ghanapatha of RS 10.127.3 (from the Ratri sikta) may be discussed. 
The samhita- and padapathas are: 


| | ; | _ [ ; | 
S. nir u svdsaram askrtosdsam devyayatt | dpéd u hasate tamah || 


26 Veda recitation of Tamil Brahmins 


ee | | 
P. nih | im ( Ht) | svd-sa-ram | a-kr-ta | u-sd-sam | de-vi | a’yatt || d-pa | 
it | dim (itt) | ha-sq-te | td-mah ||. 


For the construction of the kramapdatha two rules should be applied. 
First, the general rule that each of the eight vowels (a, 4, i, i, u, i, r, F), 
if occurring in a final position (avasdne), should be nasalised;!” hence 
the padapatha has um. But in the krama, “‘out of fear of this nasalisation”’ 
(anundsikyabhayGt), such vowels should not appear in a final position 
and hence should be passed.'® The example given by the commentator 
Uvata is: 
P. | man-drdm | a | vd-re-nyam | 


K. | man-drdm 4 vd-re-nyam |. 


In such cases this single sound is to be repeated with it (pragraha) after 
its Occurrence. 

The second relevant rule prescribes that the words “‘svasdram askrta”’ 
should be likewise passed.1® That is, they should occur only once as in the 
samhitapdatha, and hence also the s should be inserted into akrta?® (this 
samadhi is called sauddhdksara). Hence the krama becomes: nir u svdesd- 


| 
ram as-kr-to-sd-sam. Afterwards the pragraha of both words should 
follow. 
Along ismilar lines the ghanapdatha may be constructed. Evidently in the 
following recitation an additional rule is applied, which requires the words, 
which have been passed, to be recited in the reverse order. The result is: 


Ghanapatha. 


l | | | | 

| ni-ru-svd-sd-ram as-kr-to-sd-sam de-vi de-vy3u-sd-sa-ma-kr-ta svd-sa- 
| | - I 

ra-mu-nir-ni-ru-svd-sa-ram as-kr-to-sd-sam de-vi | iim i-tyim | svd-sd-ram 


} 
os a | a-kr-té-tya-kr-ta | u-sd-sam de-vi de-vy3u-sd-sa-mu-sd- 
| | if | 
te WE NEN: ya-tit de-vyit u-sd-sa-mu-sd-sam de-vya-ya-ti | de-vya- 
: | | : | 
ya-tyd-ya-tt de-vi de-vyd-ya-ti | d-ya-ti-tyd-ya-ti || d-pé-di-dd-pd-pé-du- 
- - 4 (4 4 | 

ha-sa-te hd-sa-ta u i-da-pd-pé-du-hda sa-te | i-du-hd-sa-te ha-sa-ta u i-di- 

| - . , f ; | | | 
du-ha-sa-te td-mas td-mo hd-sa-ta u i-di-du-ha-sa-te td-mah | iim i-tyam | 

| n | un ? 

ha-s@-te td-mas td-mo hd-sa-te ha-sa-te td-mah | td-ma i-ti td-mah ||. 


17 RPr, 64. 18 Id., 615. 28 Id., 592, 621. 20 Id., 307. 


Veda recitation of Tamil Brahmins 27 


4. THE PITCH OF THE ACCENTS 


In both the RS and the TaitYV there does not seem to be an absolute 
pitch. The intervals between the svarita and the udatta and between the 
udatta and the anudatta are a minor and a major second respectively. 
The sarvanudatta, which is in Tamilnatu especially common amongst 
the Taittiriyakas of the Kancipuram mandalam, the region in between 
Kaficipuram, Cénkalunirppattu (Chingleput) and Tiruvannamalai, iS 
more than a second lower than the anudatta. 

According to Felber, the modes of chanting YV, RV and SV are 
respectively bhdsikasvara (“an even murmur”), mantrasvara, ranging 
over 3 to 4 notes, and samasvara, ranging over (almost) the entire octave 
and becoming a chant. This is called probable by Bake?! and is reserved 
for later comments by Apte.22 Apart from the fact that this theory 
contradicts the information, admittedly sometimes vague, given by some 
theoretical treatises, that the number of notes increases if one goes from 
RV to YV and hence to SV (e.g., one, two, three respectively?*), it is 
obvious from the above that it does not apply to the Tamil Taitt. recita- 
tion which is always very similar to the RV recitation. Bake was in- 
formed, however, that it does apply to the SYV recitation, which he did 
not find anywhere in the South. As we saw above, however, there are 
still Kanvas left. The only vaidika from this sakha, from which the 
present writer could record recitations of the VS and of the SB, recited 
not in bhdsikasvara but in a way very similar to the Tait. recitation: the 
VS with four notes (corresponding to respectively: the vertical stroke 
above; the absence of any mark; the horizontal stroke below; and one 
out of several consecutive horizontal strokes); the SB with the three low 
notes out of these four. It is obvious that this recitation especially of the 
SB must be of later origin, as the horizontal stroke below the syllable in 
this text does not denote the anudatta at all. These data may hence not be 
called conclusive as yet and more materials are required. 

In Tamilnatu bAdsikasvara or rather, as it is called, dandaka recitation 
is used for non-traditional recitations of unaccented texts such as the 
CU and the KenaU. 

It is said that the svaras of the SV cover the entire octave. Actually 
the Tamil Kauthumas use nowadays hardly six notes. The intervals are 
about a second, but the lowest of these (atisvdrya) is sometimes less 


21 Op. cit., 147. 
22 Op. cit., 304. 
23 Cf, Naradiya Siksa 1 1.2.3; Samgita Ratnakara IV 38 ap. Apte, op. cit., 292. 


28 Veda recitation of Tamil Brahmins 


than a second lower than the lowest but one (mandra)*. (Here and al- 
ways in the following such intervals are to be understood as non-tempered 
intervals). There are good reasons to believe, as we shall see, that this 
mode of chanting is not very ancient and it is sometimes called by the 
Tamilians themselves “‘the modern way’’. 

In SV the chanted notes do not always correspond to the svaras which 
are denoted by figures in the Kauthuma figure notation, which was 
adopted e.g. in the B.J. edition and which has been introduced from the 
North into the South, where the old system was a syllable notation. Even 
the number of chanted notes need not be the same as the number given 
by the texts as we know them. Further examples will be provided below. 

As a small instance of SV recitation the krusfa may be referred to, as 
it occurs in the stobha line of ArG 141.1.25 The Tamil Kauthumas chant 
the krusfa in a manner which can be approximately represented by the 
following notation, where the key merely denotes relative and non- 
tempered intonation: 


[ 

u—2— u—2— u—2— 
In the opinion of a Madras Kauthuma scholar, the krusta may have been 
chanted in former times at a second above the prathama. 


5. SVADHYAYA AND PRAYOGA IN SAMAGANA 


Following Simon, Bake has utilised two terms from the (Kauthuma) 
Puspasitra to denote the svadhydya and the prayoga forms of the Sama- 
gana respectively: the ruépdntara and the svariipa forms. According to 
the Puspasitra the changes which are imposed upon the rapantara form 
in order to arrive at the svaripa form are the following: (1) insertion of 
syllables “‘om” and “hum”; (2) replacement of syllables by o-kdra 
(aniruktagana); (3) replacement of syllables by ‘“‘bha”, “bhi”, etc. 


24 In the gatrd vind both are located on the last finger (kanisthika). 
35 Ed. R. Narayanasvami. Cf. also J. M. van der Hoogt, The Vedic chant studied in 
its textual and melodic form (Wageningen, 1929), 36-7. 


ee 


ee + een cme we ee yee 9g Cem Oe een te eee oe ee ee ee ee ee, 


Veda recitation of Tamil Brahmins 29 


(bhakaraprayoga) ; (4) utterance of the syllable “‘ho” by the chorus; (5) 
replacement of nidhdnas by other nidhdnas. 

Bake, approvingly quoted by Apte, says: “It stands to reason that in 
the study of the Samavedic chant, this so-called svarupa form is of the 
greatest importance. This form presents almost unsurmountable diffi- 
culties, however, on account of the rarity of the offer-ceremonies with 
which it is inseparably connected. I have, however, been assured by two 
Samavedins, connected with the Srirangam temple at Trichinopoly, that 
Vedic sacrifices of the kind that necessitate the use of SV are being per- 
formed even today. This form of SV then is not quite extinct. This form 
or what is left of it ought to be properly recorded in detail and as soon 
as possible; for there is no doubt that our present time is not in favour 
of the survival of these practices. The breaking down of orthodoxy has 
many beneficial effects but it cannot be helped that with the disappearance 
of much that is bad or has become bad, things that are important vanish 
also and are lost for ever, unless recorded before it is too late.’’2¢ 

Apte adds: *“The writer can assure interested scholars that the Deccan 
College Research Institute will seize the first available opportunity to 
record the svaruipa form of the Samavedic chant on the rare occasion of . 
the appropriate sacrificial performance; but till then, the work of re- 
cording the rupdntara form of typical samaganas as sung in the three 
well-known schools of the SV — the Ranayaniyas, the Kauthumas and 
the Jaiminiyas — must go on.’’?” 

It is true that the performance of a Vedic sacrifice is nowhere in 
Tamilnatu a common event. Many well-versed SV purohitas or pijaris 
in most of the important towns of Madras State, however, could provide 
the information, that almost yearly, during Vasanta, somaydgas are 
performed in a few villages in Tanjore District. This must have happened 
regularly until a few years back, and irregularly at present. The sacri- 
ficial SV recitation is not known as svarupa, but referred to as Srauta(m) 
by the Aiyars and as (ydga)stuti by the Nambudiris. 

It is not yet certain what these somaydgas exactly consist of. But they 
must be based upon the Agnistoma archetype, for on these rare occasions, 
where Rgvedins recite sastram with nyidnkha insertions, simagas chant, 
amongst other pieces, the bhakdra-rathamtara®*, aniruktagdna of the 
bahispavaménastotra?®> and of other stotras and the Subrahmanya- 


20 Op. cit., 149-50, ap. Apte, op. cit., 284. 

27 Op. cit., 284. 

28 ~W. Caland-V. Henry, L’Agnistoma (Paris, 1906), 308-9. 
29 Id., 178 and 466-7. 


30 Veda recitation of Tamil Brahmins 


hvanam.*° These recitations are in full accordance with what is prescribed ' 
by the siitras as described by Caland and Henry. The svaras are the same 
as those of the corresponding répdntara ganas: for instance the svaras of 
the bhakararathamtara are those of the rathamtara. The Subrahma- 
nyahvanam, in which only two tones should occur (for according to 
Panini all svaritas should become udattas) is chanted with three notes to 
be denoted in descending order as 1-2-3. The words de-vd and bra- 
hma-na are chanted as 1-23 and 1-23-3 respectively, whereas Panini 


seems to require 1-3 and 1—-3-2.%! 


80 Id., 64-6 and 119. Cf. also B. Faddegon, Studies on the Samaveda (Amsterdam, 
1951), 23; and P. Thieme in: Indian Culture, 4 (1937), 203-8. 
81 Panini, 1.2.37, 38. 


Ill 


THE NAMBUDIRIS 


The Nambudiris are the Malayalam speaking Brahmans of Kerala.} 
Though it is unlikely that they were original inhabitants,” they have not 
with certainty been traced back to any origin outside Kerala? and form 
a unique community among the many kinds of Brahmans in India. They 
have on the one hand preserved some of the ancient Vedic and post- 
Vedic traditions and rites, extinct elsewhere,* but differ on the other 
hand from the other Brahmans of India in many respects which have been 
enumerated as the “‘64 andcdrams’’.® Foremost among these are the 
marriage customs, which have often been described. The Nambudiris 
form a patrilineal (makkattayam) community in which until 1933 only 
the eldest son was entitled to marry a Nambudiri girl. The others 
married Nayar girls and the latter’s sons came under the matrilineal 
(marumakkatta@yam) system of the Nayars and were hence themselves 
Nayars. The Nambudiris did not consider such a union a valid marriage; 
it was called a sambandham.® In this way the property was preserved and 
kept undivided, as the younger brothers did not inherit. Thus the 
Nambudiris remained the principal landlords; even if through special 


1 For this section cf. also the article quoted above p. 20 n. 44, which supplements the 
above. For further details, especially concerning Nambudiri sub-castes, cf. apart 
from the literature quoted below: K. Ramavarma Raja, ‘“‘The Brahmins of Malabar’’, 
JRAS, 1910, 625-39. 

2 Cf. M.S. A. Rao, Social change in Malabar (Bombay, 1957), 8-10. 

8 E.g. (South) Kanara or Andhra, where some village names correspond to Nambu- 
diri house names. 

¢ Apart from the traditions regarding vedddhydyana and Vedic customs and traditions 
in general, to be referred to below, there are other important examples, e.g. the sarvas- 
vadanam form of marriage and the dvayamsdyana way of adopting a son — customs 
which seem to have existed elsewhere in India before the [Vth or the Vth century A.D. 
(see K. P. Padmanabhan Menon, History of Kerala, I, Ernakulam, 1924, 71). 

5 See Fawcett in: Madras Government Museum Bulletin, Ul, 1 354; and W. Logan, 
Malabar, I, 156, referred to in C. A. Innes, Malabar (Madras, 1951), 156. 

® According to Kathleen Gough there is no harm in regarding these unions as 
“concubinage from the point of view of the Brahmans and (since they fulfilled the 
conditions of Nayar marriage) marriage from the point of view of the Nayars’’. 
(E. K. Gough, *“*The Nayars and the definition of marriage’’, JRAI, 89, 1959, 29). 


32 The Nambudiris 


circumstances a Nayar became the owner of land, he sometimes sur- 
rendered the overlordship (the janmam or hereditary right) to the village 
Nambudiri and remained himself the principal tenant (kanakkdran) 
under him.”? The sons of Nambudiri fathers and Nayar mothers could 
only inherit the mother’s property as they remained members of the 
mother’s family, and were neither allowed to eat or bathe along with 
their father, nor to participate in his Vedic or other brahmanical religious 
observances. This state of affairs and the fact that the Nambudiris and 
the Nayars constituted the greater part of the landed aristocracy of 
Kerala, explain why the Nambudiris are very much closer to the Nayars 
and to other high Malayalam castes (royal or princely families; ambala- 
vasis) than to e.g. the Aiyars living in Kerala. The latter have also kept 
the East Coast habit of living together in small streets of adjacent houses , 
(agrahadram), with a temple at the end of the street, in the centre of the 
villages, whereas the Nambudiris live in their manas or illams, just as the 
Nayars live in their taravdts scattered throughout the country. Though 
the mana is patrilineal and the taravaj matrilineal, they are partly similar 
in structure (e.g. kinship terms are more or less common to both).® 

One of the principal aims of the Nambudiri Yogaksema Mahasabha, a 
society founded in 1908, was agitation for marriage of all junior Nambu- 
diri males within the community.!° This aim was finally embodied in the 
Madras Nambudiri Act of 1933. Under this act all members of the mana 
had equal shares in the land or property of the mana, which on the death 
of the Nambudiri father was partitioned and inherited by the widow, 
sons, daughters, son(s) of deceased son(s), etc. In the same year the 
Madras Marumakkattayam Act of 1933 was passed, by which sam- 
bandham unions were considered regular marriages, conferring on the 
children the same rights of inheritance of property as held by children 
whose parents were both Nambudiris. Finally the Hindu Succession 
Act of 1956 has made a uniform bi-lateral pattern of inheritance for all 
Hindus throughout India. 


7 See K. Raman Unni, “Polyandry in Malabar’’, Sociological Bulletin (Bombay), 7 
(1958), 67-8. 

8 It may have been different formerly. The villages of Pafijal and Sukapuram, where 
a number of i/lams are found in the centre of the village and near each other — not 
adjacent, but separated by their compounds — are sometimes quoted as exemplary 
remnants. 

® See Rao, op. cit., 117-30; 207-10. 

10 Id., 199. 

11 Jd, 107, 137. 


The Nambudiris 33 


The Nambudiri position in Kerala society is well characterised by 
their privilege and duty to preserve the Vedic tradition and to keep it 
alive; the society accepted this. This may have been connected with the 
special power attributed to the mantras to assist man in the life hereafter. 
The well-known collector of Malabar, Logan, has ventured a description 
of how the pre-Brahman society might have received the Brahman 
immigrants with an awe, mainly rooted in the belief in this superior power 
of the Vedic mantras. Originally, the Malayalis buried the bones of the 
dead in sepulchral urns. ‘“‘But with the advent of the Vedic Brahmins”, 
writes Logan,!2 “came a change in this respect. They posed before the 
rude chieftains with whom they came in contact as °God-compellers’. 
Their sonorous mantrams and spells could compel the gods to take the 
wandering ghosts of even the worst of man directly to heaven. There 
was no necessity for costly death houses, and for furnishing such with 
all the deceased’s weapons and implements in use by him during life. 
A few sonorous phrases, a ringing of bells and burning of incense, and 
the thing was done; and it only remained to scatter the ashes of the de- 
ceased upon the surface of some holy river to ensure him a welcome into 
the heaven of Indra.” 

Whether this picture is adequate or not, it certainly gives an idea of 
the spiritual power society attributed to the Nambudiris. In preserving 
the Vedas they have always adhered to the rule that no non-Brahman 
should recite or hear the Vedas; and this was and is respected by the 
other castes. The Nambudiris themselves observed many prescripts for 
ritual purity; this is perhaps most clearly manifest in their frequent 
baths,!* where they are equalled by the Nayars only. During the actual 
Veda recitation they try to transmit the Vedic heritage with extreme 


12° Op. cit., I, 261 ap. Padmanabhan Menon, op. cit., I 51-2. The power of the 
Nambudiris in society was mainly based upon ritual and upon landownership, to a 
far less degree upon their “‘training in Sanskrit, with the power this gave through 
knowledge of religious and political theories on which society was based” (A. C. 
Mayer, Land and society in Malabar, Bombay, 1952, 34). In Kerala many non- 
Brahmans knew and know Sanskrit, which is no prerogative of the Brahmans (like the 
Vedas). 

18 JB I, 282 gives a suggestive description of the significance of the Brahman duty 
to be pure (suddha, suci), which was probably known to the Nambudiri samagas: 
‘“‘Wer das Trinkgefass der G6tter kennt, wird unter den Seinigen wiirdig an einem 
Mahle teilzunehmen. Der Brahmane nun ist das Trinkgefass der GOtter; wer solches 
weiss, der wird unter den Seinigen wiirdig an einem Mahle teilzunehmen. Wie man aus 
einem reinen lauteren Trinkgefasse zu trinken wiinscht, so wiinschen die GGtter ver- 
mittelst eines reinen lauteren Brahmanen zu trinken. Deshalb soll der Brahmane 
danach trachten rein und lauter zu sein” (trans]. Caland, Das JB in Auswahl, Amster- 
dam, 1919, 109). 


34 The Nambudiris 


conscientiousness. Mistakes are eschewed. Just as the Gods, when 
trying to conquer the asuras by Vedic recitation, were defeated in turn 
when mispronouncing a syllable, Nambudiri Samavedins have the con- 
viction that the slightest mistake made during the chanting of a saman 
based upon the rk “‘Jndra jusasva pra vaha ...’"4 is sufficient to produce 
the reciter’s madness. 

The Nambudiris hold an annual Veda recitation at Kadavalliar.1® 
_ Until recently this took place also in the palace at Trivandrum, where 
there was also a Board of Vedic Studies. Vedic sacrifices are performed 
almost yearly (until 1956 at any rate), especially a somaydga which lasts 
for six days (= Agnistoma?). A rarer sacrifice is called Agni; it lasts for 
eleven days. According to Innes, those who have performed these sacri- 
fices are called respectively Somaydjipad or Somatiripad and Akkittiri- 
pad.1® Villages where such sacrifices are performed are: Pafijal (near 
Cérutirutti, in the neighbourhood of Soranir); Sukapuram (one of the 
oldest and most important Nambudiri gramams, near Pénn4ni; referred 
to as Chovur in the Syrians’ deed of A.D. 774);}7 Péyilam (near Kutta- 
natu, near Pattambi) and Irifjalakuda (an important centre of YV with 
one of the famous temples of Kerala). It is to be hoped that detailed 
accounts of these sacrifices will soon be given by Nambudiri scholars 
themselves. 

The Nambudiris are probably unique in having a sub-caste of Brah- 
mans who are not entitled to recite the Vedas: 6ttillatta. They are of 
several kinds, each of which has lost its original purity for a particular 
reason. “Amongst these’’, says Innes,!® “are the Astavaidhyans or eight 
families of hereditary physicians, considered as degraded because as 
surgeons they may have to shed blood ...; the Sastrangakars, who are 
said to be Brahmins who originally engaged in military service and 
whose traditional occupation is a performance called Yatrakali con- 
sisting of songs and sword play.’!® There are several other subdivisions 


@ SV 2.302. See below p. 80. 

16 Near Calisseri and Kunnamkulam. This information I owe to Dr. Shri Krishna 
Sharma (Madras-Tirupati). 

16 Op. cit., 109. The author also refers to a third sacrifice called Agnicayanayaga. 

47 Sukapuram is not (one of the two grdmas called) Covara (Raghavan, op. cit., 58). 
18 Op. cit., 109. Cf. also Padmanabhan Menon, gop. cit., I, 62. 

10 Yatrakaji is nowadays better known as Samkhakali or padnenkalji. Its performances 
are very rare, but one took unexpectedly place not far South of TrSsivaperir (Trichur) 
on 30-6-1957. The Brahmans who are entitled to act in this are also called samkha 
Nambudiris. The “‘sword play” is adopted from kajari payattu, nowadays prepon- 
derant in Central and North Malabar, especially in Talagseri (Tellicherry). Innes 
refers to a description of YatrakaJi in the Travancore Census Report, 1901, 297. 


The nambudiris 35 


of this subcaste, but all together form a minority amongst the Nam- 
budiris. 

The majority is entitled to recite the Vedas: ottan. Amongst them are 
the karmis and also another subcaste lower than these. These two, 
together with those who are excluded from the Veda, are called dsyans. 
Above them come the ddhyans, whose honorific title is not merely 
Nambudiri, but Nambudiripad. Among them are Bhatfatiripads, 
traditional scholars, of whom the most celebrated was Melputtir Nara- 
yanan Bhattatiripad, author of the Narayaniya and of various other 
works.2° Recently a well known Vedic scholar belonging to this caste 
was K. P. Krsnan Bhattatiripad. Among these too are the two Vadyans 
of Trssivaperir (Trichur) and Tirunavayi, the highest authorities in 
matters of excommunication and others relating to the maintenance of 
caste duties and to dharmasdastra. Under their supervision come the two 
big RV schools, which will occupy us again. 

These are merely a few facts concerning the Nambudiri subcastes, 
which form quite a complicated structure. In total, there are about 
60.000 Nambudiris in Kerala (the total population of the state being 
about 14 millions), belonging to 1561 manas. 

The first to deal with the numerical distribution of the Vedic schools 
was Burnell.24, According to his estimate of 1870 “in Malabar, of 100 
Brahmans (i.e. Nambudiris), 80 will be followers of the RV, 19 of the 
Black YV and 1 of the SV”’. 

Logan collected information concerning the distribution of the Vedas 
from 1017 manas in Malabar (Cochin and Travancore did not come under 
the Collector’s supervision) in or about 1885. His data are as follows :** 


excluded from the Vedas 
RV YV SV or uncertain total 
466 406 6 139 1017 


The Yogaksema Mahiasabha, mentioned earlier, prepared several lists of 
statistics. Unfortunately these seem to be quite inaccessible. It is 
possible that the following estimate is based upon these. According to 
this information the total Nambudiri population of Kerala consists 


20 Cf. K. Kunjunni Raja, “‘Narayana Bhatta of Melputtiir’’, Annals of Oriental 
Research of the University of Madras, 12 (1954-5), 1-38. 

21 A.C. Burnell, Catalogue of a collection of Sanskrit manuscripts, 1: Vedic manu- 
scripts (London, 1870), p. 4, note. 

#2 = ©=6Op. cit., 119. Logan gives the information for each taluk separately. 


36 The Nambudiris 


roughly of 35% Rgvedins, 50% Yajurvedins, 1/8 Samavedins, and the 
rest excluded from the Veda. Both this information and Burnell’s 
estimate need not contradict Logan’s table, as Cochin has important 
and big YV centres. The information concerning SV is in full accordance 
with the fact, that there are at present only 20 SV manas in the whole 
of Kerala. 

The above short survey can hardly portray adequately the living 
Nambudiri community - still less convey something of the individual 
qualities of some of them. For a very suggestive description of the 
Nambudiri mentality the reader may be referred to some pages from the 
introduction of an excellent book on Kathakali by an Aiyar Brahman 
from Kerala, K. Bharat Iyer.?° 


28 K. Bharatha Iyer, Kathakali (London, 1955), 5-6. 


IV 


GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE NAMBUDIRI 
VEDA RECITATION 


A general impression made by the Nambudiri Veda recitation as com- 
pared with the Aiyar Veda recitation is, that the former is the more 
rhythmical whereas the latter is the more musical of the two. In the 
Aiyar RV and YV recitation there are three or four tones with fixed 
intervals of about a second. Each tone keeps an even pitch, which lasts 
as long as the syllable lasts, with the one exception of the long svarita. 
Among the Nambudiris few notes are clearly audible at first; the more 
accustomed ear can discern in many syllables more than the one main 
pitch, to discover which may require experience. If the pitch is high, 
the highest point is reached for a moment only; and likewise, in general, 
for the low pitch. 

The Nambudiris, on the other hand, pay much attention to the time 
unit or mdatrd and have a highly developed sense of temporal intervals; 
this tendency is developed exceedingly in the chanting of SV. Hence in 
the Nambudiri opinion, the Aiyars frequently neglect the rhythm of e.g., 
those portions of ganas, in which there are a number of consecutive 
syllables with the same svara (only the first of which is marked, in 
accordance with a rule of the Samatantra') and without the sign for 
lengthening (ra = repha = dirgha), e.g., the latter part of the second 
parvan of the rathamtara, for instance the “...namasyajagatah” of 
ArG 49.1. 

The most conspicuous rhythmical quality of the Nambudiri recitation 
lies in a certain swinging or trembling pronunciation of many final 
vowels, nasals, visarga and occasionally “1”. This characteristic too 
appears as intensified in the SV chant. It may be described as a kind of 
kampa. It occurs in Vedic and not in ordinary Sanskrit recitation, but 
it is riduciled as a typical instance of Brahman recitation also of non- 
Vedic texts in Kitiattam.? 


1 svaro’nantyah. 
2 Cf. Bharata Iyer, op. cit., 14-9; S. K. Nayar in: Annals of Oriental Research (Ma- 
dras), 1957, 17-23; Travancore Census Report (1901), 261-2. 


™“ 


38 General characteristics 


The phenomena of rhythm amongst the Nambudiris in contradi- 
stinction to the musical qualities of the Tamil Veda recitation are related 
to and do perhaps reflect general differences between the cultural mani- 
festations of the South East and the South West parts of India. It cannot 
be denied that music has been developed more highly in the Carnatic 
Music predominant in the East Coast (and, of course, in Mysore) than 
in the music of the West Coast. It has been observed? that nowhere have 
Malayalam manuscripts dealing with music been found. To the ear 
of Tamil musicians the Kathakali music of Kerala seems at first rude and 
devoid of grace. One of its main qualities lies undoubtedly in its rich 
rhythm. 

Possibly connected with this too, the typical dance form of Tamiln4tu, 
Bharata Natyam, is above all — though not at all exclusively — graceful, 
refined and subtle, and reflects the /dsya dance of Parvati; whereas the 
typical dance form of Kerala, Kathakali, so much loved by the Nam- 
budiris, its main patrons and connoisseurs, is mainly — though not at all 
exclusively either — virile, brave and noble, and reflects the tdndava dance 
of Siva. 


Apart from such general differences there are several characteristics of 
the Nambudiri pronunciation of Vedic and of Sanskrit in general which 
are clearly influenced by particularities of Malayalam. 

(1) A. In Malayalam final sounds should be neither plosives, nor 
voiceless. In the Nambudiri Veda Recitation final ‘“‘t’ is often pro- 
nounced as “‘l’. Examples: upanisal for upanisat; pracodayal for praco- 
dayat; asil for asit. 

B. In Sanskrit words in Malayalam, dentals occurring as the first 
consonant of a compound letter should be pronounced as “‘!”’.4 In the 
Nambudiri Veda recitation a “‘t”? followed by a voiceless consonant is 
often pronounced as “l’’. Examples: tal-sa for tat-sa; yal-patye for 
yat-patye; etal-ka... for etat-ka...; ydal-siirya for ydat-surya. 

(2) The Nambudiris pronounce not only jihvaémiliya, but final visar- 
janiya in general, as a velar spirant, to be compared with the German 
Ach-Laut or the Arabic kh. Tamil Brahmans pronounce the visarga as a 


8 By Sri R. Vasudevan Poduval. 
4 Cf. L. J. Frohnmeyer, A progressive grammar of the Malayalam language (Manga- 
lore, 1913), 23. This phenomenon is not to be confounded with the replacement of 
Sanskrit ¢d by Tamil-Malayalam / by the Nambudiri Samavedins (see below p. 69 sq.). 
Cf. also H. Liiders, “Zur Geschichte des 1 im Altindischen”’, Festschrift Jacob Wacker- 
nagel (Gottingen, 1923), 294-308. 


General characteristics 39 


kind of echo separated from the last vowel by a weak h:° aha for ah, 
ihi for ih, etc.® 

(3) The “‘v” is sometimes pronounced as a sound which seems to be 
somewhat nearer to the “b”. Example: the second ““v’? in savitur va- 


renyam is said to be pronounced in this way.’ . | 

(4) The Nambudiris pronounce very frequently voiceless plosives, 
especially dentals, as more or less voiced. Examples: Sandi for Santi, 
yandu for yantu; bhadram garna for bhadram karna; bhadram basyema 


for bhadram pasyema; paiija for panca. 
That the pronunciations mentioned under (1) and (4) were character- 


istic for the Brahmans of Malabar round 1600 A.D. can be clearly seen 
from the transcription of the Gayatri by the Jesuit Goncalves, where 
savitur is written as “ea vidri’’ and pracodayat as “‘prajo teal’’.® 


8 Cf. L. Renou, “Récitations du Véda”, Sanskrit et culture (Paris, 1950), 34: “sorte 
‘ joutante a la voyelle”’. 

ea. ‘das ae Nachklingen des vorangehenden Vokals” (Wacker- 

nagel, op. cit., 259) and the “weak echo of the preceding vowel” (Macdonell, op. cit., 

54) do not represent the only kind of present day pronunciation. 

7 For “b” for “v” in Sanskrit words in Bengali and Assamese and also in the Veda 

recitation of Bengal and Assam, see Renou, Joc. cit. 

8 (Cf. Frohnmeyer, op. cit., 241 and also R. Caldwell, A comparative grammar of the 

Dravidian . . . languages (London, 1856), 102-3. 

® See D. Goncalves, op. cit. (above p. 20, n. 42), 57. 


Vv 


NAMBUDIRI RGVEDA 


Among the Nambudiri Rgvedins there are two schools, each possessing 
a matham?: one is located at Tirunavayi (near Kottakkal), the other is at 
Trssivapertr (Trichur) and is called vadakkii (i.e., Northern) matham. 
The differences between the recitation modes of the two schools are 
small and relate to the number of mdatrds of a few syllables in some of the 
vikrtis (example below). In these schools the RV brahmacarins enter 
at an early age (about eight),? and are taught during some (up to six) 
years the recitation of the RS. For the pupils, this period should com- 
mence after upanayanam and is over with samdavartanam. They stay in the 
school and are fed free. Veda recitation being taught as a rule at home, 
the school probable owes its origin to the initiative of some rich Nam- 
budiris, who wished to enable Nambudiri boys of less well-to-do families 
to be taught in the proper way too.? 

The brahmac4rins should not cut their hair during one year.* During 
the entire school period they are supposed to speak only Sanskrit during 
meals and sandhyadvandana. They wear only the kaupinam (after sama- 
vartanam the dhoti, Malayalam: munfii, may be put on), and, apart from 
the sacred thread (upavita, Malayalam: piénunul, piuniul), the krsnajinam, 
the thread or small band nowadays made of hare skin® and worn in the 
same way as the upavita, and the mekhald, the rope of mufija grass tied 
round the waist.® 

During the actual vedddhydyana the accents are taught in a special 
way. The teacher moves the head of the pupil with his right hand as 


1 A third one, “of less note’? according to Innes (Malabar, I, 486), is at Pulayi in 
Kurumbranad taluk. 

2 Cf. SGS 2.1.1; AGS 1.19.1-2. 

3 In Madras State well-to-do Brahman families may enable priests to give upandyanam 
to poor Brahman boys, sometimes taken together in a group. 

4 This may be in accordance with AGS 1.19.10, but conflicts with SGS 2.1.26 and 
with AGS 1.22.22, where it is said that the hair should be cut. On cutting the hair cf. 
J. C. Heesterman, The ancient Indian royal consecration (The Hague, 1957), 212-9, and 
the literature mentioned there. 

5 Cf. SGS 2.1.2 and AGS 1.19.10. 

6 Cf. SGS 2.1.14,15; 2.2.1; 2.13.3,4; 2.13.8; AGS 1.19.12. 


Fig. 3. R 


Ae! Tete ne hi atge #96 PREP a ; 
a2 rypeetaee eee 
88 tre ¢ a: .. ee ed 

eetrad ons Sd ve abe) Pegg eee 


V svarita, Trichur. 


Nambudiri Reveda 41 


follows: the head is kept straight for the udatta, is bent down for the 
anudatta and is bent to the right side (of the pupil) for the svarita? (see 
Figs. 1-3). These movements are intended for teaching purposes only. 
Another set of movements are the midras, “‘hand gestures’’, which ac- 
company the vowels and consonants of the RV recitation.® The teaching 
always begins with the recitation of OM by the teacher, followed by the 
pupil.® 

Characteristic for the RV recitation is a special kind of kampa, occur- 
ring only after an ud4atta syllable, to be denoted below as kampa* and by 
the asterisk wherever it occurs. It consists of three successive notes in 
the central, lower, and again central pitch. 

In the following a few characteristics of the different kinds of RV 
recitation will be described. 


1. SAMHITA 


In principle, as among the Aiyars, the uddtta and the pracaya are recited 
at an even middle pitch and the svarita and the anud@tta respectively at a 
somewhat higher and a somewhat lower pitch. Concerning the svarita, 
however, an interesting rule is generally observed, though apparently 
never stated: if a long syllabe has a svarita, the high pitch moves on to 
the next syllable, unless the latter syllable is itself long or has an anud@tta. 
In the other cases (i.e. if the following syllable is long or has an anuda@tta), 
a svarita on a long syllable is split into two gones, one sounding like the 


middle, the following like the high tone (as among the Alyars). Examples: 
| | 
pdtyad dadhami is recited as if it were written: pdtyd dadhami; 
| | 
But: dasdsyam as: ddsa-dsyam; 


| 
brahmano viduh as it is written.!° 
The splitting of the long svarita into two is possibly connected with the 


‘These movements are wrongly described in Raghavan, op. cit., 58. 


A set of photographs of these miidras for: a, a, i, u, e, 0, ai, au, am, am, ah, ah; (7), 
n,n, k, t, 1, $a, ha, c(h)a, na, na, pra, were made by Dr. Bake. One of these is published 
in: B. de Zoete, The other mind. A study of dance and life in South India (London, 1953), 
Plate 4(a) (representing the sound i). The movements of the hands and of the head 
may be studied in a wider phenomenological context (cf. e.g. T. Ohm, Die Gebetsge- 
barden der Volker und das Christenthum, Leiden, 1948, where these are not mentioned). 
® Cf. SGS 4.8.12,13 and RPr, 832. 

10 Respectively from RV 10.85.24; 10.85.45; 10.85.3. 


42 Nambudiri Reveda 


rule, that a long vowel must often be pronounced as equivalent to two 
short vowels." 

This practice exhibits the same tendency as must have been at work 
originally, when the primordial raised (uddatta) accent (as in: yajfiéna) 
shifted towards the dependent svarita, pronounced at the highest pitch at 


| 
present (yajfiena).1* =Thus the accent has shifted twice, as in: 


patya dadhami - jai dadhami — patya dadhami. 
(There are cases too where the udatta itself has shifted, e.g., Vedic 
sidati has become Classical Sanskrit siddti, under similar circumstances.1*) 

Panini’s sutra 1.2.32, that the first half mdatrd of the svarita is udatta, 
meant originally (in connexion with the previous sutra) that the remainder 
descended from the udatta pitch downwards. Later, when the svarita had 
a higher pitch than the udd@tta, it was probably made to apply to long 
svaritas only, and meant therefore: one mdtrd middle pitch — one mdtra 
high pitch. This applies as well to the Aiyar long svarita as to the Nam- 
budiri long svarita followed by a long or anudatta syllable. Possibly there 
was a time too when the short syllable svarita was recited as a rise from 
the middle to the high pitch. (See also below, VI 3.) 

The udatta in the RS is often recited with kampa*. This kampa is 
inserted after syllables occurring (1) at the end of a pada; (2) as the final 
syllables of many words ending in vowels, anusvara or visarga. It occurs 
twice if these two conditions coincide, e.g., if the pada ends in -dm**. 

A terminological remark: the Rgvedins, used to the subdivision of the 
RS into vargas, refer sometimes to the RS itself as varg(g)a. 


2. PADAPATHA 


In the ordinary padapatha, the kampa* follows each padam with a final 
udatta syllable ending in a vowel, anusvara or visarga. In this padapdatha, 
as in the samhitdpatha, the uddtta has a middle and the svarita has a high 
pitch. 

There is however a special kind of padam which seems to be transmitted 
in a few manas only, which are generally looked upon as very orthodox. 
In this recitation, where final syllables are expanded greatly, the uddatta 


11 Especially gen.pl. -dm, but also abl. sg. -dt, etc. 
12 See above, p. 23. 


18 Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatik, I, 288 (§ 247); Macdonell, Vedic grammar, 
80, n. 3. 


Nambudiri Rgveda 43 


has a higher pitch than the svarita. The three notes which are mainly 
used will be denoted in descending order as 1,2,3 (cf. the notation used 
for the rks in the SV). Sometimes more notes seem to be heard, but they 
may be omitted for the present, first analysis.4 The total compass is 
very wide: the interval 1-2 is approximately a second, 2-3 approximately 
a fifth. In the following example, where alongside with the numerals 
also the usual accents are marked, each numeral denotes a separate unit 
which is stressed with a beat. Groups of syllables are separated by a 
hiatus, which in some instances represents the pause between one word 
and the next. 

RS 1.1. 


| | _ ] 
a-gnim i-le pu-ré-hi-tam ya-jfid-sya de-vam y-tvi-jam | hé-td-ram_ ra-tng 
3 122322 3122 22 3 1 2 3122 31 12 121222 2 3 


| | | Z 1 . ? 
ee ee | a-gnih pti-rve-bhih f-si ’bhih f-dyah nii-ta-naih u-ta | 
12 2 22 312 12 12 2212 22 122 12 12 2(7) 312 


sah de-vdn 4d i-hd va-ksa-ti | 
12 31221223123 2 22 | 
In this recitation the accents seem to have the following values: 


udatta svarita anudatta*® pracaya 
long short long short long short long short 
12 1 1 2 2 a2 3 ? 2 


Moreover: (1) Of a sequence of anudattas, one sounds low as 3, the 
others sound as 2. (2) An extra lengthening of about one matra iS 
inserted and stressed, after a short hiatus, at final syllables which are 
long or end in visarga or nasal. | | 

It seems here is the survival of a system of accentuation which looks 
very much like the system which Panini described, later to be replaced 
by the system with the high svarita. Before discussing the different values 
of the udatta and the svarita, we shall survey some of the other modes of 


RV as well as of YV recitation. 


3. KRAMAPATHA 


The Nambudiri Rgvedins do not have ghana, but they possess another 
vikrti instead (see below). The above mentioned rules for the Alyar 
vikertis hold for the Nambudiris also. In the Nambudiri avagraha, even 


4 Cf. above, p. 37. 
16 Not sarvanudaita. 


44 Nambudiri Reveda 


where there is no difference in the analysed compound because of the 
absence of samadhi, the splitting up is audible after an uddatta syllable 
because of the insertion of the kKampa* between the two parts of the 


avagraha. Ex.RS 1.164.1, end: sata ia i-ti sap-ta * eae 

The kampa* lasts approximately three mdtrds, 1.e., more than the one 
matrad required by the RPr for the interval of the avagraha.16 

The above applies to the ordinary kramapatha of the Nambudiris, 
where the uddtta has a middle and the svarita a high pitch. As in the 
case of the padapdtha, however, there is a special kind of krama, trans- 
mitted in a few manas only. Here the same general krama rules hold, but 
the udatta has the high pitch. 

The accents seem to have the same values as in the special padam. 
The vaidika who recited the above quoted special padam recited the 
kramapatha of RS 1.1.1 in the same pitch as follows: 


| | | . | | 
a-gnim i- le | i-le pu-rd-hi-tam | pu-r6-hi-ta-jya-jna-sya | pu-ro-hi-ta-mi-ti 
3 1 1222222 3 122222 3122223 1 2 31223 12 


1 | | | 
pu-rah hi-tam | ya-jfid-sya de-vam | de-va-mry-tvi-jam | r-tvi-ja-mi-ti 


3 12 2 222 3 1 2 3 122 3 1 3 1 22 313 12 

{ i l | | 
r-tvi-jam | hé-td-ram ra-tna ’dhd-ta-mam | ra-tna *dhd-ta-ma-mi-ti 
31227) 121222 23 12 2227) 23 1222312 


l i i { 
ra-tna dhd-ta-mam || d-gnih pii-rve-bhih | pu-rve-bhir f-si *bhih | 
23 122 222 3 1 1212 22 12 12 3 12 22 


| | | | | 
F-si ’bhi-ri-dyah | f-si bhi-ri-ti f-si *bhih | i-dyo ni-ta-naih | nii-ta-nai- 
123 1 22 12 3 1312 22 1 3 122 222 12 2 22 


| 
ru-ta | u-té-tyu-td | sda de-vdn | de-vdn é-hd | é-ha | i-ha va-ksa-ti | 
312 312 3 12 13 122 3 121212 #1212 31 22 22 


| 
va-ksq-tt-ti va-ksa-ti || 
2 3122 2 2 22 


In connexion with the de-vdn é-hd | é-hd | of the last hemistich some 
special explanation is needed. The samhita- and padapatha have: 


S. devam éhd 
P. de-van 4 i-hd. 


16 RPr, 29. 


Nambudiri Rgveda 45 


Hence one may expect for the kramapatha: 
K. de-vdn d é-ha 


; , a 
The reasoning mentioned in an earlier example!” applies here too, and 


hence we arrive at: 
K. de-vdn é-ha. 


After this we apply another rule of the RPr,!8 which prescribes that such 
an akara an-anunasika should be repeated with the next word. Hence we 
have... | é-hd |. | | 

A a eek ae remark: The Nambudiris call the RS and its pada- 
and krama-patha together sometimes trisandham. This may include 
jata and ratha (see below) too, for these can be looked upon as modifica- 


tions of kKrama. 


4. JATAPATHA 


The Aiyars extend the above rules I and II in ghanam as follows: Delors 
the final pragraha, the last two words are recited according to the jaja- 
patha. For instance, if a rk ends with ... a bcd |, as follows: 


ab|ba|labc cbalabc||be |cb|bed |dcb |bed||cd | 
dc|cd||ditid ||. 
Amongst the Nambudiris jaja is always recited by two persons, facing 
each other and sitting on their heels with the arms on the knees and the 
hands on both sides of the face (see Fig. 4). This is clearly a posture of 
concentrated attention to each other, possibly also one which excludes 
dangerous influences and prevents secret sound from being heard and 
abused, in the case of a wikrti which may have been considered as espe- 
cially sacred.’® The recitation is started by one and taken over by the 
other, who recites the first word of his portion simultaneously, but 
generally with different endings because of the samdhi and with different 
accents. Thus, if the two persons are A and B, as follows: 


ala Cc c|cd 
A jabjoalel  ledldelegl sig 


17 See above, p. 26. 


18 =RPr, 600. 
19 Cf ee op. cit., 359. The meaning of this posture in general according to Ohm 


does not apply here. 


46 Nambudiri Rgveda 


In this Jajapatha the accents are recited in a way similar to but more 
definite than the accentuation in the special kinds of pada- and krama- 
patha described above. Only three pitches occur, which may again be 
denoted in descending order by 1,2,3. The compass is wide too: the 


interval 1-2 about a second and 2-3 about a fifth. RS 1.164.1: 


| 
A. a-Syd va-md-sya va-ma-sya-syd-syd sianiaie 
3 132 1 232 1 32212 132 1 2 


| | 

B. va-ma-sya pa-li-td-sya 
3212231 2 

A, j | 
pa-li-ta-syd hé-tur hé-tuh 


2 3.1 32 212 3221221 
| | 


| | 
B. pa-li-td-sya va-md-sya vd-md-sya pa-li-td-sya 
231 232 1 232 1 223 12 


A. pele pa-li-td-sya hé- yp 
231 2231 32122) 
B. hé-tus td-sya td-sya hé-tur hd-tus 
2123 1 31 321232123 


A. td-sya bhrd-ta bhrd-ta td-sya td-sya Wikia 
1 3 212 32 212321 31 3 2122492 


; | 
B. td-sya bhré-ta ma-dhya-mo 

1 2 2122122 2212 
A. : 

ma-dhya-m6 _as-tyas-ti ma-dhya-m6 

, , 2 3212 2 222 3212 
B. ma-dhya-mé bhrd-ta bhrd-ta ma-dh ya-mdh 

2 3 212 21232 2122122 3 212 


| | 
A. ma-dhya-mé as-ti ds-na beige 
2 3212 22 1 311 21 
| | 
B. gs-tyds-no ’sno*® ’styus-tyds-nah 
3 1 212 212 3 1 2) 


80 abhinihita svarita (cf. RPr, 199). 


Nambudiri Rgveda 47 


In this recitation the accents have the following values: 


udatta svarita anudatta pracaya 

long short long’ short visarga long short long short 
(final) (final?) 

212 1 212 2 21 32 3 212 2 


We are now in a position to appreciate an instance of the difference 
between the TrsSivaperir (Trichur) and the Tirunavayi styles. A differ- 
ence occurs in the interval of the avagraha in this jafapadtha. For instance, 
the compound garta ’prstha of RS 1.164.1 (second hemistich): 


| | | 

ghr-td ’prs-tha i-ti ghr-ta ’prs-thah 
31 2 312 322 2 212 TrSSivaperir 
31 2 312 3 2 2 212 Tirunavayi. 


It is uncertain why the note struck twice in TrsSivaperir (Trichur) and 
once in Tirunavayi has the value 2 and not I, in accordance with the above 
rule for the short udatta. That the udatta of the unseparated compound 
is preserved in the separated compound is prescribed by RPr 210. 
Perhaps a special rule has to be assumed, according to which the uddatta 
before avagraha sounds as pracaya or svarita. 


5. RATHAPATHA 


The Nambudiri Rgvedins are in particular proud of their ratha, a vikrti 
which does not seem to be known elsewhere in India.24_ The values of 
the accents are the same as in jafapatha, the pitch is the same and the 
vaidikas sit in the same way. Rathapdtha consists in principle of a re- 
iterated return to the first word of a verse, taking one more word each 
time, ie: |abalabcbalabcdcbalabcdedcba]... . 
The two occurrences of the initial word as initial and final word of a 
portion are made to overlap and are chanted by the two different persons: 
both recite forward, one in the samhitdpatha and the other in the pada- 
patha (i.e. with and without samdhi); and one recites backward (with 
samdhi). When the latter has arrived again at the first word, the former 


31° This ratha is different from the ratha mentioned among the traditional asfavikrti, 
in other parts of India (published for instance in Santavalekar’s RV edition, Poona 
1940, 801). 


48 Nambudiri Reveda 


joins him and both go forward and include one more word, e.g. in the 
following way: 


A.ababcbabcdcbabcde Be cence 
B. babc abcd abcdedcba... 


If the last word of the rk has made its appearance, there is a final return 
followed by a final proceeding up to the parigraha of the last word. The 
reciter who is not going to return may slightly prolong the recitation of 
the last word of his portion, while the other is already returning. This is 
in accordance with the fact, that generally the person who has been 
reciting the padapatha does not make the returning move, which enables 
him to exploit the lengthened vibration occurring at the end of many 
padams of the Nambudiri padapdtha. An example taken from the fifth 
move (reaching the sixth word) of the ratha of RS 1.164.1: 


| | 
A, ... va-md-syd-sya va-md-sya pa-li-td-sya hd-tus td-sya bhra-ta 
32 132 132 1 2231 2413 1 «=3 «21232 


| | | 
B. g-syd va-md-sya pa-li-td-sya hd-tuh td-sya b hr d- 


3 13 12231 2i12112~« «212 
| 
A td-sya || 
I 2 
| 
B. ta | 
212 


If such a complicated play of succession and overlapping is performed 
successfully by a pair of vaidikas, it is highly appreciated by the vanishing 
number of connoisseurs (who may detect the slightest mistake too). 
There are temple feasts where two Brahmans are reciting ratha, while the 
others are eating. At certain points in the development of the ratha the 
eaters should have finished with certain courses and be ready to be 
served with the next course (may be “‘pdl-pdyasam’’ — a milk-made sweet 
delicacy). The last mouthful should be taken simultaneously with the 
last parigraha. This presupposes an audience equally well educated as the 
reciters. 

It may be added here, that the RV school at TrsSivaperir does not at 
present seem to teach anything beyond the RS to the brahmacarins. 
But those who may stay on as teachers may be initiated also into the 
more difficult arts of recitation. 


Fig. 4. RV jata, ratha, Trichur. 


Fig. 5. YV ghosam. 
By courtesy of Sri Chittoor Kunhan Nambudiripad. 


Nambudiri Reveda 49 


Lastly it may be mentioned that both in jaja and in ratha there is a rule 
according to which there should be a quick in- and out-breathing between 
the two consonants of a compound letter, as e.g., in vis-va. This is an 
example of the “‘insistance sur consonnes conjointes’’ mentioned by 
Renou,22 which may also be compared with the phenomenon of sva- 
rabhakti.”* 


6. SASTRAM 


Every Nambudiri Rgvedin who is a karmi is entitled to recite in prayoga 
as the hotr the sacrificial forms of the RV which are called Sastra(m). 
The Sastra recitation is characterised by the triple repetition of the initial 
and final rks and by insertions of the syllable 03m.*4 It has become very 
difficult to find vaidikas who are able and willing to recite this especially 
sacred form; the number of those who are able to do this is quickly 
vanishing, whereas those who are willing to expose their knowledge are 
necessarily few. 

After numerous unsuccessful attempts one piece of this kind of re- 
citation could be recorded. Unfortunately the reciter himself was not a 
Rgvedin but a Yajurvedin. There are, however, apart from the impression 
of the person, four reasons in favour of the reliability of his performance: 
(1) The fact that the reciter did have the courage to recite himself this 
important mode of recitation. (2) The detailed correctness of his per- 
formance in all those respects in which his recitation can be checked by 
texts known to us. (3) The fact that he belongs to one of the six families 
of the six ‘“‘Vaidikans”, highly respected Nambudiris whose duty it is to 
expound and maintain the dharmasastra in the Nambudiri community. 
(4) The way in which he learnt it: being partly educated in a RV milieu, 
by participating in and assisting at ceremonies where the Rgvedins recited 
Sastram. 

The specimen recorded consists of the samidheni stanzas, which ac- 
company the installation of the chips of firewood (samidh) at the be- 
ginning of the pradhana.*® They consist principally of eleven stanzas, 
ie. RS 3.27.1; 6.16.10-12; 3.27.13-15; 1.12.1; 3.27.4; 5.28.5-6.26 With 


22° Récitations du Véda, 35. 

Insertion of a vowel between r or | and a following consonant. 
24 ~L. Renou, Vocabulaire du rituel védique (Paris, 1954), 147. 

25 Renou, op. cit., 164. 

2 SSS 1.4.7-13. 


50 Nambudiri Reveda 


the help of the rule: ¢trih prathamam anvdéha, trir uttamam anvédha, 
“recites the first thrice, recites the last thrice’’,2? this number is extended 
to 15 rks. If a greater number be required (e.g., 17, 21, 22, 24, 26 or 
more),8 it is the view of the parvapaksin in the Sabarabhasya that there 
should be accordingly as many repetitions of the first and the last verses 
as would yield the required number. But the siddhdnta view is, that the 
remaining number should be made up by importation of new verses.?® 

The specimen recorded represents the archetype consisting of 15 verses 
and as such occurring in the darSaptirnamdsa, the ceremonies taking 
place at the new and full moon days. At this occasion the rks (1.e., the 
pranava of the last rk) are followed by the words: “agne maham asi 
brahmana bhdrata’’ taken from the TS.*° The metre of the rks is gdyatri, 
with a caesura between the second and the third pdda, as usual (the first 
and second are treated as one hemistich). Apart from this caesura the 
rks are recited uninterruptedly (samtatam), as required by the ASS.* 
At each interruption, apart from the caesura between the second and 
third pada in the first and third rk of the initial and final triple repetitions, 
there is a lengthened insertion: either of om, after the last syllable of the 
tk; or of the last vowel or nasal of the second pdda after this pdda. In 
this insertion there is a quick succession of notes at a high (“‘udatta’’) 
and low (“‘anudatta’’) pitch with an interval of about one third, to be 
denoted by 1 and 3 respectively. The low tone lasts about twice as long 
as the high tone. Each insertion is preceded and followed by a syllable 
of the same pitch as the main text, which is recited more or less in mono- 
tone (ekaSsruti),?* to be denoted by 2. The pitch denoted by 1 is some- 
times about a major second and sometimes about a minor second higher 
than the pitch of 2. 

Thus the pranava at the end of the first rk, the final syllables of which 
are: -nayuh, becomes: 


— nayooooo00000000mmmmmmm 
2 2133133133133 1331332 


which will be denoted as: -nay04M2. In other words, “‘An”’ stands for a 
n-tuple repetition, preceded and followed by an “a” of the value 2, of 
the following sound pattern of the sound “‘a’’: 


27 Ap. Mi. Su. Sabara-bhasya 9.1.33. 

28 Renou, op. cit., 164; Sabara-bhasya 10.5.27. 
29 Sabara-bhasya 10.5.27-31. 

80 TS 2.5.9.1. Cf. SSS 1.4.44. 

81 Ap. Renou, ibid. 

38 See Renou, ibid. 


Nambudiri Rgveda 51 


aaa 
133 


If two such repetitions occur in immediate succession the final sound 2 
of the former and the initial sound 2 of the latter vanish (as in the above 
instance). Represented in this symbolism the recitation of the sdmidheni 
verses can be written down in the following way: 


Pravovaja’ abhidyavohavismamtoghrtacya devanjigatisumnay04M2 
pravovaja@ abhidyavohavismamtoghrtacyA3 devanjigatisumnay04M2 
pravovaja’ abhidyavohavismamtoghrtacya devanjigatisumnay04m 

agna *ayahivitayegrnanohavyadatayE3 nihotasatasibarhis04M2 
tamtvasamidbhirangiroghrtenavardhayamas!\ brhacchocdyavisthyO4M1 
sa nah prthusravayyamacchadevavivasas!\ brhadagnesuviry04m 
ilenyonamasyastirastamamsidarsatA 1 samagniridhyatevrs04M I 

vrso ’agnih samidhyatesvonadevavahanA| tamhavismamta ’ilat0¢M1 
vrsanamtvavayamyrsanvrsanah samidhimah!] agnedidyatambrh04m 
agnimdatamvrnimahehotaramvis vavedasaM 3 asyayajnasyasukrat04M1 10 
samidhyamano ’adhvare3gnih pavaka ’idyA1 SociskeSastamimah04M1 11 


to CON A MA WN = 


samiddho’agna ’GhutadevanyaksisvadhvarAl tvamhihavyavalas04m 12 
Gjuhotaduvasyatagnimprayatyadhvare vrnidh vamhavyavahan04m 13 
ajuhotaduvasyatagnimprayatyadhvarE3 vrnidhvamhavya vahan04m 14 
Gjuhotaduvasyatagnimpryatyadhvare vrnidhvamhavyavahan04m 15 


agne maham asi brahmana bharatA1. 


It may be remarked here that the last pada of the fourth rk (RV 6.16.10) 
has ‘“‘ni hotd satasi”’ instead of ni hota satsi. The latter should have be- 
come in the Nambudiri recitation: ni hota salsi,®* as it is actually recited in 
the Nambudiri RV, apart from Sastram, and in the Nambudiri SV.™ 
The quick succession of omkdras or rather o-karas followed by ma- 
karas may seem to resemble the nyankha.*® It might be objected that the 
nyiinkha®® is to be inserted at the second (eventually also at the seventh) 
syllable of a pada, whereas in the sdmidheni verses the insertions take 
place at the last syllable of a (the second or third) pada. But, on the other 
hand, the nyankhas described and exemplified in the SSS are of two kinds 


88 See above, p. 38. 

34 See below, p. 76. 

35 Some Aiyars were reported to recite the nyinkha also (see e.g. Sri Muljantiram 
Ramanatha Diksitar: Catalogue, XXII 1-5). 

as §§S 10.5.10 sq. Cf. also Renou, op. cit., 87. 


52 Nambudiri Reveda 


only: the anustubh- and the vairdja-nyinkha, and there might be another 
type, the gayatri-nyinkha, not known from the literature (?) but utilised 
in the above stanzas. 

Against this view it might be objected, that the gdyatrinyunkha should 
consist of o-kdras only, as in the examples given by Renou and by 
Caland in his translation of the SSS; whereas in the samidheni verses the 
other vowels and nasals are modified in the insertions too. But this need 
not be the case (although Renou speaks exclusively of o-kdras), as a 
definition of the nyu#inkha, elucidating Panini’s rule 1.2.34 (where the 
nyunkha is said not to be ekasruti) and quoted in the Petersburger Lexikon, 
runs: nyunkhadh sodaSa omkaras tatra kecid udattah kecid anudattah. 
Apart from the number, this can be said to apply to the omkdra in the 
samidheni verses (explicitly referred to as pranava, i.e., not as o-kdra 
followed by ma-kdra, in the SSS 1.4.14). 

In another respect, however, there is no agreement. In the nyunkha 
there should be a succession of uddatta o-kdras and of anudatta ardhokdras 
(lasting half as long as the okdras). This is just the opposite of the above 
recitation. 

In conclusion, it might be better not to regard the insertions in the 
recitation of the sGmidheni verses as a kind of (gdayatri) nyiunkha, but 
rather as special forms of the insertion of om, common in Sastra, along 
with other modifications in the final sounds of the second pdda. Thus it 
provides a detailed example of the way in which the pranava is actually 
inserted in Sastram. — Mr. Gray drew my attention to the fact that this 
is partly in accordance with Patajfijali’s description of the pranava as 
consisting of 3-mdtrd omkara or okara insertions in the place of the last 
syllables of a pdda.*" 


7. THE RECENSIONS OF THE RGVEDA 


In his Ecoles védigues Renou has shown how the two “recensions” of 
the RV, Sakala and Baskala, cannot really be called sakhds. In the 
samhitd, there are no differences apart from the position accorded to the 
Khila.*8 The tradition does not split into Aitareya and Kausitaki at the 
level of the brahmanas (brdhmanacarana). In a way, the KB supplements 
the AiB, whereas the correspondence between brahmanas and sitras is 


8? Patafijali ad Panini 8.2.89. Cf. also J. A. B. van Buitenen, ‘“‘Aksara”, JAOS, 79 
(1959), 176-87. 

88 Khila RV hymns are recited by the Madhva Brahmans round Udupi (South 
Canara). 


Nambudiri Reveda 53 


not very strict: e.g. the names occurring in the brahmanas do rarely 
coincide with the names in the AS and SS respectively. Two sakhds can 
be said to exist from the level of the sitras: there is sétracarana and 
sitrabheda. From that time onward there are two distinct groups, 
following the ASS-AGS and the SSS-SGS. 

The Sankhayana branch, which, according to Renou, has always been 
rare and even looked down upon, may survive in the Gujrat only (J. N. 
Bhattacharya).*® 

Much more information is required about the Nambudiri RV before 
more can be known about the significance and the development of the 
two RV schools in South India. The Nambudiris differ in two important 
respects from the other (South) Indian Rgvedins: 

(1) They do not only belong to the Aévalayana school, but also to the 
Sankhayana school. This is in accordance with the fact that all or almost 
all the Sankhayana mss. are from Kerala. The latter do not use, how- 
ever, the name Sankhayana, but the name Kausitaki.*° 

(2) The Nambudiri Rgvedins do not merely recite the RS, but also 
the brahmanas, aranyakas and upanisads of the RV. 

This is interesting for two reasons. First, the RV brahmanas etc. are 
not generally supposed to be accentuated. But as the Nambudiris recite 
them ‘“‘with svara’’ their recitation might be compared with the accentua- 
tion according to the rules. Secondly, the question might be re-considered 
whether there is a bradhmanacarana, for the Nambudiris who follow 
Aévalayana recite only the AiB and those who follow the Sankhayana 
only the KB. It might be investigated, whether these recitations function 
in any ritual and whether such developments may be looked upon as 
recent or as ancient. 

Attempts to record a specimen of the KB have failed thus far. One 
sentence recited by a Kausitakin and attributed by him to the KB starts: 
“Prajapatir vai samvatsarah — tasyaisa atmadyanmahdépratam...” (2). 
It has not been traced anywhere as yet. 

A first comparison of the few specimens of the somewhat less inacces- 
sible AiB (or AiA or AiU) recitations with each other and with the rules 
of the accentuation seems to show that in such recitation the svarita has a 
higher pitch than the udatta, as in the ordinary Nambudiri recitation. 
The rule of the shifting svarita seems sometimes to be applied. In order 


38 See Renou, Ecoles védiques, 57, n.1. 
40° Cf. Renou, op. cit., 25: ‘‘Les deux écoles auraient pu s’appeler aussi bien Aitareyin 
et Kausitakin, noms que connait d’ailleurs la littérature.” 


34 Nambudiri Rgveda 


to study the accentuation more closely, more and better material is 
needed. 

In the ritual realm differences between the two schools may be some- 
what more easily traceable. At samdhydvandana the Kausitakins recite 
the following rks in the same order, without any breaks, in the ordinary 
Nambudiri RS style.4! They announce the name of the rsi, the chandas 
and the devata,** recited ekaSruti at udatta pitch but with stress accents 
generally on the final syllables, as follows: 


Rahigano Gotama rsi. Jagati chanda. Vi§vedeva devata. 1.89.1—5. 
Virdvasthana (2) chanda. 1.89.6. 

Jagati chanda. 1.89.7. 

Tristup chanda. 1.89.8-10. 

Marica Kasyapa rsi. Tristup chanda. Jataveda Agna devatd. 1.99.1. 
Tarksyoristanemi rsi. Tristup chanda. Tarksya devatd. 10.178.1-3. 


These verses of the Kausitaki samdhydvandana are not given and the 
above cannot hence be checked by either the Asvalayana or the Sank- 
hayana sitras. But the commentator on the SGS, Narayana, refers to 
RS 1.89 in connexion with the samdhydvandana.4? This confirms the 
above information. 


‘1 The Aégvalayanas recite other hymns, e.g. RV 3.59.6 and 1.25.19, as Sri Akkirath 
Mundanath Narayanan Nambudiri very kindly informs me. 

4 Cf. SGS 2.7.18. 

2 Ad SGS 1.4.2 ap. SGS transl. H. Oldenberg, SBE, 29 (1886), 99, note. 


ee ne _— 
— Le LL IO ELLE EA ECAC Ol rt A tO AE AS A pe ct 0 ew ctr ye nme EO 


VI 


NAMBUDIRI YAJURVEDA 


All the Nambudiri Yajurvedins are Taittiriyakas. Though the YV does 
not seem to be taught in institutions similar to the RV mathams, mention 
may be made of the existence of two schools, transmitted in the manas: 
the schools of Péruman and of Irimjalakuda. Sri Madampi Narayanan 
Nambudiri, to whom I owe many data incorporated in the present section, 
gave the following instance of a difference between the two styles. If the 


| 
samadhi is applied in the recitation to forms such as “‘vai dGdityah’’, the 
resulting hiatus may or may not be kept, as follows: 
| : 
vd Gdityah according to the Péruman grama style; 


| 
vadit yah according to the Irinjalakuda grama style. 


66=._ 99 


The preliminary samdhi rules (if ‘‘a’’ follows, ‘‘ai’” becomes “ay”? and 
hence “‘a’’) are prescribed by the TPr,' which is silent regarding the sub- 
sistence of the hiatus. 

Somewhat separate from the Nambudiri gramams of Cochin and 
South Malabar there is an important Nambudiri community at Talip- 
parampt in North Malabar, consisting mainly or exclusively of Ya- 
jurvedins. It is doubtful whether there are in their recitation any differ- 
ences from the Southern schools. 

Characteristic for the Nambudiri YV is the absence of any of the 
vikrtis beyond the padapatha and the presence of particular modifications, 
directly based upon the samhita- and the padapdthas. According to 
Keith, krama and jatd were not taken into account in the original form 
of the TPr.? Hence it is possible that the Nambudiri tradition goes back 
to this original form. 

The Yajurvedins utilise a different subdivision of the texts of the 
Taittirlya sakhd. The main division is into samhita and ‘‘sakha’’, the 
latter term denoting the complex TB-TA (-TU). The TS consists of 44 


2 TPr 9.14 and 10.19. 
2 A. B. Keith in: HOS, 18 (1914), xxi, xxxix; cf. also W. D. Whitney in: JAOS, 6 
(1917), 429-30. 


66 


56 Nambudiri Yajurveda 


prasnas, corresponding to the subdivision in an equal number of pra- 
pathakas divided over 7 kandas. The correspondence is as follows: 
I.1-8: 1-8; II.1-6: 9-14; ITI.1-5: 15-19; IV.1-7: 20-26; V.1-7: 27-33; 
VI.1-6: 34-39; VII.1-5: 40-44. 

The sakha portion consists of 39 prasnas, which I heard recited prati- 
kena. It is therefore not always certain where in the following survey 
each prasna ends. This survey gives: I. the 39 prasnas with the names, by 
which the Nambudiris refer to them; II. the corresponding portions 
(established with the help of the pratikas) of the subdivisions of the text 
as it has come down to us; III. the subdivisions of the Kandanukrama 
coh Atreyi sakha;® IV. the subdivision according to the Baudhayana 


Nambudiri Sakha TS-TB-TA-TU A treyi Baudhayana 
in the editions 

1.-13 TB 1.1-2.5 
14. Sautramani 2.6.1-—20 31 36 
15. Savam 2.7.1-18 32 13 
16. Siktam 2.8.1-9 33 31 
17. Naksatresti 3.1.1-6 34 26 
18. Purodasam 3.2.1-10 35 
19. id 3.3.1-11 id. 
20. Purusamedham 3.4.1-19 36 Nrmedha§’ 35 
21. Pitrmedham TA 6.1-12 37 5 
22. Istihotram TB 3.5.1-13 38 4 
23. Pasuhotram 3.6.1-15 39 38 
24. Acchidram 3.7.1-14 40 37 
25. ASvamedham 3.8.1-23 24 34 
26. id. 3.9.1-23 id id 
27. Kathakam 3.10.1-11 45 18 
28. id. 3.11.1-10 46 19 
29. id. 3.12.1-4 50, 51 27, 28 
30. Sesam 3.12.5 47 20 
31. Arunam TA 1.1-32 49 22 
32. Svadhyayam 2.1-20 52 40 
33. Hotaram 3.1-21 28 3 
34. Mantram 4.1... 25 12 
35. Visikha 4.12 id. id 
36. Sukriyam 5.1-12 26 id. 
37. Srindrayanam | 10.1 43 39 
38. Upanisad 7=TU!1 42 id 
39. Valli 8-9 = TU 2-3 44 id. 


* See e.g. Keith, op. cit., xxvii, xxviii, quoting Weber. 


« Baudh GS 2.1, see: W. Caland, ‘“‘Uber das rituelle Sitra d a : 
> 2.1, > W. es Baudhayana’”’, Ab- 
reed fiir die Kunde des Morgenlandes, 12 (1910), 32-3, copied by Keith, op. cit 
iii-xliv. : a 
5 Cf. A. Weber in: Indische Studien, 3 (1855), 385. 


Nambudiri Yajurveda $7 


The relation between sakha 34 and 25 is uncertain (TA 4.1-42 is the 
mantra section of the Pravargya, the position of which is floating). The 
mantras of the Pitrmedha are placed in between TB 3.4 and 5, in the same 
order as Atreyi (Keith assigned to the Pitrmedha a loose place in the 
tradition).? The Narayana Up is placed before the TU. It should be 
noted, that nowhere does the Nambudiri sakha follow the order as given 
by Baudhayana whilst differing from the order of Atreyi and/or of the 
present day editions. 

The Nambudiri use of the term sakhd also points to the fact that the 
Taittiriya Sakha is the sakha “par excellence’’.® : 

That the term sdkha was used to denote the complex TB-TA(-TU) 
before 1615 A.D. even in Madura in Tamilnatu follows from the testi- 
mony of Roberto de Nobili, and solves at the same time a problem which 
puzzled Caland, who commented upon De Nobili’s Apology. De Nobili 
quotes two texts, identified by Caland as TB 2.8.14.2 and as TU 2.2 
respectively, which are said to belong to the portion of the YV called 
“Yaque” or “Xaquir’”. Caland comments: “The Sanskrit equivalent of 
Xaque or Xaquir I cannot guess, Sakha being apparently out of the ques- 
tion.’® This interpretation, which Caland mentioned without accepting 
it, can now be seen to be correct. 


1. TAITTIRIYA-SAMHITA 


In the ordinary TS-TB-TA recitation there are three tones at pitches 
which may vary to some extent amongst different people. The udatta 
always keeps the middle pitch (‘‘2”), The anudatta is generally lower, 
sometimes very similar to the udatta and very rarely (possibly in the case 
of an unexperienced vaidika) higher. The svarita is always high: at an 
even high pitch for a short syllable (“1”); at an even middle pitch with 
towards the end a quick ascending and descending movement of the tone, 
for a long syllable (*212”). The pracaya has the middle tone too. The 
entire picture is therefore very similar to that given by the Aiyar YV 
recitation. 

The rule of the shifting svarita is not generally observed. There are a 
few doubtful cases, however, which might be attributed to RV influence. 


6 Caland, op. cit., 8-9. 

7 Op. cit., Ixxxi. 

8 Cf. Renou, Ecoles védiques 137, 145, 220. 

® W. Caland, ‘Roberto de Nobili and the Sanskrit language and literature”, Acta 


Orientalia, 3 (1925), 40. 


58 Nambudiri Yajurveda 


The above kind of recitation is called saddhdrand (mdatra). At special 
occasions Taittiriya texts are recited much more slowly and with greater 
poise.!° There are two such special modes: Sala m@trad and cantddikkal, 
lasting respectively about 2—3 and 6-10 times as long as s@dhdrand. This 
lengthening is arrived at by expanding the syllables through a length- 
ening of their vowels (and, eventually, nasals), keeping the same pitch 
and marking each time unit with a kind of stress accent. 

These three tempi, sa@dhdrand, sala and cantadikkal may be related to 
the three modes of speech druta, madhyama and vilambita mentioned by 
the RPr.“ In the Pratisakhya they are related to abhydsa, “repetition 
(whilst reciting oneself)”, to prayoga, ‘(recitation for) sacrificial use’ and 
upadesa, ““teaching (of recitation)’’, respectively.12 Actually the Nambudi- 
ris use Sala ma@trad during “‘sacrificial fires’’. 

There is yet another kind of recitation of the TS, called valiya (big, 
long) samhita, which was described as something in between Sala matra 
and cantadikkal. In all such modes of TS recitation the accents seem to 
remain the same. The short svarita is more or less unexpanded, in the 

long svarita the quick ascent and descent near the end of the syllable are 
very clearly audible. 

As far as differences of pronounciation between the RV and the YV 
are concerned, apart from those known from the texts (e.g., replacement 
under certain circumstances of y by iy and of v by uy, e.g., RV svah, TS 
suvah, etc.) and apart from e.g. the candrabindu, it may be mentioned 
that the Nambudiri Yajurvedins pronounce the upadhmdniya clearly as 
bilabial spirant. For instance, from the Gayatri: diyoyo naf pracodayal. 


2. PADAPATHA 


According to Weber!® some of the main differences between the pada- 
pathas of the RS and of the TS are the following. In the Rkpadapatha, 
compounds are analysed by simple separation (i.e., no samdhi), whereas 


| 
the accentuation remains as if there were no separation (e.g., upamdt-iva). 
In the Tait padapatha compounds are analysed with the help of parigraha, 


10 As the Aiyar Brahmans sometimes recite the TA. 

11 754,757. Cf. Allen, op. cit., 93-5. 

12 It is misleading to translate prayoga here as “recitation” (Allen): all three modes 
refer to recitation. 

18 A, Weber, “Uber den Padapatha der TS”, Indische Studien, 13 (1873), 1-128, 
esp. 4,5,8. 


ee a SE A 
ee i NL ED 


Nambudiri Yajurveda 59 
whereas the accentuation is applied separately in the two separated parts 


| ’ | | 7 ~- 
after iti (e.g., prajdvatir itt praja-vatih). 
Amongst the Aiyar Brahmans these same rules are observed, e.g. 


| ; | 
RV 1.164.1: ghrtdprstha, padapatha: ghrta-prstha, but TS 6.3.1.6: 


| g v 
uttarena, padapatha: uttarenetyut-tarena. 
Amongst the Nambudiris the same holds too: for RV, the same 


| - o 
example. For YV: TS 6.6.9.1: brahmavadinah, padapatha: brahmavadina 


‘ ‘chan vaaian or TS 5.7.26.1: wiclieindl, padapatha: avajighrasi- 
scnajiohiesl | 

The padapatha constitutes the basis for two particular modes of 
Nambudiri YV recitation, called kdgpu (which, in Malayalam, can mean 
(Gundert): “‘beating a drum” or: “clapping hands’) and ghosam. They 
take place in the temples. In both of these, the padapatha 1s divided into 
portions consisting of four padani each. The most venerable vaidika of a 
congregation which may consist of as many as hundred people, who 1s 
called for this purpose ghosi, first recites these four. Thereupon the 
others, the cangidikkar, repeat the same four padani three times quickly. 
In the mean time the ghosi has begun to recite the next portion of four 
padani, starting near about the third repetition of the previous portion. 
From now onwards the cangidikkar start with their triple repetition 
before the ghosi has completed his portion; there should be no discon- 
tinuation in this. An example from the padapatha of TS 5.7.26.1: 


Ghosi: agnih pasth asil tena 
Cangidikkar: agnih 
G. aydjanta sah 


| = ; | ere eee | 
C. pasuh asil téna agnih pasuh asil téna agnih pasuh asil téna 
G. etam lokam 
C ayajanta sah etam lokam ayajanta sah etam lokam 
| a 4 
ajaydal yadsminn agnih sah 
| 
ajayal yasminn 


te lokdadh 


ayajanta sah etam lokam 


tam... 


Aan a 


| ld | ” la 
agnih sah ajayal yasminn agnih sah ajayal ydsminn agnih sah 


60 Nambudiri Yajurveda 


The cangidikkdr are divided into two groups who are seated facing each 
other on two parallel wooden planks (see Fig. 5). At one end of this pair 
of planks the ghosi sits in between them with a dipam, “‘lamp’’, in front 
of him. At each padam he raises his right hand and the cangidikkar do 
likewise. The four padani may be counted as follows: (1) touching the 
palm of the right hand with the right little finger; (2) with the right ring- 
finger; (3) with the right middle finger; and (4) touching the palm of the 
left hand with both the left little finger and the left ring-finger. 

Both kotpiui and ghosam follow the above pattern, the difference being 
that kdffi is recited at an even middle speed, whereas ghosam is started 
slowly and somewhat mysteriously, after which the speed is gradually 
increased (often along with some raise of the pitch). Where kotpi 
impresses the listener as a quiet chorus, ghosam becomes after some time a 
vehement concerto of voices expressing apparently increasing excitement 
with the help of increasing speed and loudness. Soon the voice of the 
ghosi is no longer audible in the tumult. In a way in ghosam the most 
strenuous task goes to the two vaidikas who head their group and who sit 
at the right and at the left hand of the ghosi. They have to check the 
latter’s recitation without failing to participate in the cangidikkars’ 
recital. As soon as the ghosi makes a mistake, these two give a sign and 
the ghosam has to make place for Koffti recitation, continuing at the same 
spot where the ghosi broke off. Suddenly the excitement is controlled 
and the quiet reappears. 

The cangidikkar have all to concentrate upon the recitation of the 
ghosi, for sometimes suddenly everybody is silent for a very short interval 
and the ghosi shouts a few words at a high voice, immediately after which 
the group continues. This takes place at the occurrence of a parigrahita- 
padam (also referred to as such by the Nambudiris). The ghosi recites 


| 
alone the second part of the analysed compound following upon itt. 


For instance, in TS ‘6.6.9.1, he recites loudly and singly the portion 


| | 
““naddhasya\”’ of the parigrahita-padam upanaddhasyéty upa-naddhasya. 
The final parigrahita-padam is in its entirety recited in this way along with 
the previous padam, by the ghosi alone while all the others are silent. 


_—_ 
Fori nstance, ya’ jfidsya’ samtatya iti sémtatyai, from TS 6.6.9.1: yajridsya 
| 


samtatyai. Immediately after this again the threefold repetition of the 
final padani by the cangidikkdr continues. 

Probably, kota and ghosam have their origin in teaching practices, 
where the teacher (later: the ghosi) taught the pupils (later: the cangi- 


eat te ee ee ee eee! if 


Nambudiri Yajurveda 61 


dikkar) to repeat his words. Also elsewhere in India the padapatha is 
divided into portions of 4 padani for teaching purposes. — 

Just as the Nambudiri Rgvedins refer to and are proud of their nt 
sandha, the Yajurvedins have their ottiffi, “chanting of the Vedas’ 
(from otti, “Veda”, and upfi, ‘‘feasting’’). This consists of three parts, 
which are taken to be either: sddhdranda-, sala matra and cantadikkal, or 
as: samhita, padam and koftti (including ghosam). The Yajurvedins also 
refer to paiicasandha or paficanta, which comprises, in addition to the 
three members of ofttitfi, also valiya samhitaé and valiya padam. 


3. UDATTA AND SVARITA 


In all the forms of the Nambudiri Taittiriya samhita- and padapathas 
the values of the three accents can be given as: 


svarita 
long short 


2 212 1 


udatta - anudatta | 


3, 2(2) 
Combining these values with the values of the RV recitation described 


above and with the data provided by Panini and by the Pratisakhyas, 
we arrive at the following survey (where “‘N” stands for “‘Nambudirv’’): 


Udatta Anudatta - Svarita 

long short long short long short 
Panini 1 1 2 2 : : 2 
N. special pada 1 2 ] 3 2 3 3 : 
N. ratha 212 1 32 3 2 7 
RPr 2 2 3 3 1 2 12 
TPr 2 2 3 3 12 | 
N. RV 2 2 3 3 21” 1 
N. YV 2 2 3,2(?) 3,2(?) 212 ] 
Aiyar RV, YV 2 2 3 3 2 1 I 


1s is | ractice amongst some pandits in Banaras. 

= ae ee about the “following rest” of the svarita that it is anudatta, but adds 

(which is omitted by Allen, op. cit., 88) that this anuddtta sounds like uddtta (sa 
ji tih). 

age for the enclitic svarita. Allen ranks the TPr with Panini and the APr and 

VPr, though the TPr states just as the RPr, but only for a svarita following an udatta 

(i.e. an enclitic svarita; see also the commentator’s example): the first part is yet 

higher (uccaistara), the rest sounds like udatta (udadttasamah Sesah). 

7 2” only if the svarita shifts to the following syllable (cf. above, p. 41). 


62 Nambudiri Yajurveda 


This table enables us to develop a hypothetical picture for a possible 
historical development from the high to the middle udatta. As it is 
assumed that the development was linear, which may not have been the 
case, this picture is only provisional. It may be premature also in as far 
as it is only based upon some of the South Indian evidence, whilst con- 
sidering exclusively phenomena of pitch. 

Panini, who may be assumed to be earlier than the RPr,!® may be 
taken as a point of departure. PAnini’s high uddatta is preserved in the 
Nambudiri special padapdtha and rathapatha, which may be assumed to 
be very old forms, accordingly only preserved in some orthodox manas 
The long udatta, however, had only during a part of the syllable a high 
pitch, the rest keeping the same pitch as the preceding and the following 
syllables. Thereupon the distinction between the long ud@tta and the long 
svarita (which was even earlier chanted at two pitches, being an enclitic 
accent) vanished. The Pratisakhyas may have tried to clarify the situation 
by fixing the udatta at a middle pitch, whilst preserving Panini’s rule for 
the svarita. In contradistinction to this middle ud@tta, the sara. which 
had always been recited only partly at the same pitch as the ud@tta, was 
fixed at the high pitch. In actual recitation, however, the long (especially 
the enclitic) svarita continued to be linked with the previous udatta 
which had assumed the middle pitch; hence it became an ascending ‘ni 
stead of the original descending, movement of the voice. This last 
development was adopted in its entirety by the Tait. YV, but was only 
hesitatingly accepted by the RV. In Tamilnatu, where the Taittiriyakas 
were far more abundant then the Rgvedins, all traces of the original RV 
recitation disappeared. 

Gray, who had earlier analysed RV recitation from Rajasthan and 
from Maharastra, gave a detailed analysis of the pitches of the Nambudiri 
RV recitation, based upon the same material as the present study and 
partly supplementing it. He arrived at the conclusion that the Vedic 
accent was not a musical accent.}® 


4. SOTRAS 


The vast majority (it is said over 90%) of the Nambudiri Taittiriyakas 
belong to the Baudhayana sitra. We observed, however,?° that the se- 
quence of prasnas in the TS and in sakhda is not the same as that given 


18 Cf. L’Inde classique, 1, 306; Il, 86. 
19 ~Cf. above, p. 23 and note 14). 
80 Above, p. 57. 


Nambudiri Yajurveda 63 


by Baudhayana. It is difficult to say why this is so; it is not likely to be 
due to the influence of the later stras, absent among the Nambudiris. 

The rest of the Nambudiri Taittiriyakas are Badhilakas. We may 

hence expect to learn more about this rare sutra, all our knowledge of 
which is confined to the four Mitteilungen of Caland,#! from these few 
Nambudiri manas. This is in accordance with the fact, that according to 
Mahadeva’s commentary upon the Hiranyakesisrautasitra, the Vadhila 
siitra originated in Kerala,** whereas the biggest manuscript utilised by 
Caland was written in Malayalam script and belonged to somebody in 
[rifijalakuda,?* the important Nambudiri YV gramam mentioned before. 

That the Baudhayana and the Vadhila sutras occur together among the 
YV Nambudiris is in accordance with Caland’s view, that these two are 
closely related as different from the group Bharadvaja — Apastamba -— 
Hiranyakesin — Vaikhanasa.** They have the “Brahmanaartige Digres- 
sionen” and other characteristics in common, and do represent an earlier 
stage of development. This may also show that the Nambudiri tradition 
goes back to an earlier time than e.g. the Aiyar tradition (where of the 
other four sutras at least three, 1.e., Bharadvaja, Apastamba and Vai- 
khdnasa, occur). 

This consideration may be added to the reasons stated before which 
favour the assumption, that the Nambudiri recitation preserves an earlier 
stage of development than the Aiyar recitation (e.g. non-occurrence of 
the RV vikrtis among the Yajurvedins; preservation of the high udatta 
in less common forms of RV recitation). Similar conclusions may be 
drawn from the mode of SV chanting. 


21 Acta Orientalia, 1 (1923), 3-11; II (1924), 142-67; IV (1926), 1-41; 161-213; VI 
(1928), 97-241. 

22, Caland in AO, I (1923), 3. 

23 Id., 4 (1926) 1. 

24 Id, I (1923), 9; Il (1924), 145-7. Cf. also Renou, Ecoles védiques, 179. 


Vil 


NAMBUDIRI SAMAVEDA 


1. SAMAVEDA IN SOUTH INDIA 


The SV consists essentially of the ganas,’ which can be briefly described 
as adaptations of rks, and to a very much smaller extent of other Vedic 
material, to numerous melodies (s@mans). The rks thus adapted are 
listed in the drcikd. Differences between the K-R and the J, the two so- 
called sakhas of the SV, primarily concerning the arrangement, exist: in 
the arcikd (especially in the uttararcika). More considerable, however, 
are the differences between the K-R ganas and the (unpublished) J ganas. 
Apart from the difference in Sakha, the various ways in which the 
adaptation of rks to sdmans can be effectuated result in many possible 
“modes of chanting” ( gityupayah). To this the traditional expression 
‘1000 Sakhdas of the SV” probably refers.2 This multiplicity of possibilities 
is easily inferred from enumerations of the devices utilised in adapting 
tks to samans. Such an enumeration is for instance given in the Saba-. 
rabhasya.* The six devices mentioned here may be interpreted by means 
of examples, taken from the first gana of the K-R GG (based upon 
RV 6.16.10), 4 and may thus serve to illustrate the characteristic ways in 
which the SV may be construed from the RV: 
(1) vikdra, “modification”, e.g. agne becomes: ognayi. 
(2) vislesana, “dissolution”, €.g. vitaye becomes: voyi toyd2yi. 
(3) vikarsana, “suspension”, e.g. ye becomes: ya23yi. 
(4) abhyasa, “repetition”, e.g. taye becomes: toyd2yi/toya2yi. 
(5) virdma, “pause”, e.g. grndno havyadataye becomes: grndno ha/ 
vyadataye. 
(6) stobha, “insertion”, €.g.: auhovalha u. 
It is clear how in this way one rk or even part of a rk can give rise to 
numerous ganas (e.g. RV 7.27.1 is the yoni for 21 ganas of the K-R ArG). 
+ Renou, Ecoles védiques, 92. 


: Arseyabrahmana, ed. A. C. Burnell (Mangalore, 1876): Introduction xlvii: Renou 
op. cit., 126. : 
3 9.2.29. 


“ Cf. SV ed. Santavalekar, prastava, 2. 


Nambudiri Sdmaveda 65 


Apart from these factors there is one more cause giving rise to diversity: 
the svara or musical pitches with which the ganas are chanted. According 
to the tradition the sakhds also differ in this respect: e.g., the K-R SV 
should be chanted with seven, the J SV with six notes.* Here the study of 
the actual recitation becomes important. It is “une pratique ‘musicale’ 
assez différenciée’’, says Renou,® ‘‘que nos manuscrits morts ne nous 
permettent malheureusement pas de voir dans toute son ampleur’’. 

We shall now give a short survey of the different kinds of SV which are 
actually found in South India, in order to introduce the study of the 
Nambudiri SV. It will have to be studied in detail to what extent the 
following communities of sdmagas reflect differences of sakha, of gityu- 
paya, of musical practice or of combinations of these. 


(1) ‘‘New school” (K-R), prevalent in Tamilnatu and in Andhra (Aiyar 
and Aiyankar Brahmans). The chanting is only approximately in 
accordance with the numerical notation, introduced to South India from 
the North (Poona?) and adopted in the modern editions. The numerals 
represent notes in descending order. A full description of the theory of 
this notation as understood by a sAmaga belonging to this group is 
given in the article referred to earlier by Laksmana Bhatta Dravida.’ 
Amongst the notable regular exceptions occurring in practice, mention 
may be made of the common descending final cadences (cf. nigada®), such 
111 1111 
as 2345, which are chanted as: 23454. 

A short description may be given of a recital of GG 1.1 by a representa- 
tive samaga of this school. In the following, the numerals 1,...,5 denote 
notes used in descending order of pitch. The total compass between 1 and 
5 is about an augmented fourth. The intervals 1:2 and 4:5 are minor 
seconds; the interval 2:3 seems to be a small major second and the 
interval 3:4 is a major second. Each numeral refers moreover to a clearly 
audible unit, but all do not last equally long. The upright strokes or 
dandas are used, here and in the following, for denoting portions sung 
with one breath, in accordance with the rule that one parvan should 
be sung with one breath:® 


§ Renou, op.cit., 98 note. 

6 Renou, op. cit., 99. 

7 See above, p. 22 note 5. 

8 Puspasitra ed. R. Simon (Miinchen, 1908), 520. 

° ArsBr xliv; van der Hoogt, op. cit. (above, p. 28, note 25), 43. The length of a 
bhakti can be known from the ritual use only; in printed editions it is generally marked 


by the double danda, as the length of a parvan is marked by single dandas. It may be 


66 Nambudiri Samaveda 


om/ognailadyahivoitoya i/to ya i/grnadnoha| vyadato ya 
3 3453 323331 2121233 121233 1 1 233 3 = 1212123 
i/toyad i/nadihotdsda | tsai ba fauho va{|hi si || 
3 121233 1 1231 123 123 3 433455 5 3(45)45 43345 45 


Comparison with the printed editions shows considerable variation in the 
notes. The fourth bhakti, the upadrava, is seen to be split into two 
parvans. 


(2) The “Mullantiram school’, surviving in Mullantiram and in a few 
other villages in the North of Madras State (Aiyar Brahmans). According 
to Dr Raghavan, “‘in this style letters like Ka, Ca, Ta, which were used in 
manuscripts as notation symbols, intruded into the texts and the singing 
as integral parts of the recital”.1° The practice of this school and the 
origination of the new school were described by Mr. T. K. Rajagopala 
Atyar in a seminar addressed by Dr Raghavan in Madras on the 10 July, 
1957.4 It seems that the qualified members of the Mullantiram school 
knew that the notation syllables did not belong to the text, but those who 
had introduced the syllables in their recital became confused and took 
to the Poona numeral system. One of the oldest living samagas of this 
school, who had neither included notation syllables nor taken to the 
Poona system, chanted GG 1.1 as follows. Here the numerals 2,3,4 
denote again notes in descending order. The intervals 2:3 and 3:4 are 
major seconds. The frequent pattern 233 may sometimes represent an 
effort at reaching 123 (where 1 denotes a pitch which is a second higher 
than 2): three different pitches are certainly often discernible. The effort 
at the element 1 seems to be especially strong in the ho in the upadrava 
and in the two occurrences of ydi in the udgitha: 


o gnail aya hi voi to yai / to yai/ gr nd no ha vya da to yai | to yai | 
334 33233 222 233 2233 2 223 3 3 2 2233 2233 
n@ iho ta sa | tsai ba | au ho va | hi si || 

2 223 2 233 233 334 4 23 3 233 


This is certainly simpler and apparently older than the ‘““New School”’. 
It is also nearer to the printed editions, which may show that the old 


worth noting that in the above, as also in other recitals, the samaga would not probably 
call the note 3 (in the above notation) a melodic centre. 

10 Op. cit. (above, p. 18, note 33), 55. 

11 Ibid., 66-8. Cf. also the same author, ‘““The music of the SV chants”, Journal of the 
Music Academy (Madras) , 20 (1949), 144-51. 


Nambudiri Sdmaveda 67 


school was nearer to the Poona system than the new school is. It is 
therefore very possible that all those features in which the new school 
differs from the Mullantiram style are innovations which have taken 
place during the last century. It is evident from this that one should be 
very careful in attributing great antiquity to certain features. 

Dr. Raghavan suggested the possibility that in the Mul]lantiram style 
there might be a survival of the J sakha.” This does not seem likely from 
the above, as the parvan division agrees with K-R, as also the text (see 
below). Other recitations confirm this view. 

Professor Ramanathan Diksitar, a Tamil simaga who teaches Vedic 
at the Samskrta Mahavidyalaya of Banaras Hindu University, has been 
working on a compilation of the Mullantiram variants. He very kindly 
mentioned two examples of these: the Mullantiram samagas chant the 

32 4 32 4 6 5 
6 S Gat 5 
nam. They chant the prastava of GG 192.2: mahi trinamavarastw’6 e as: 

S ae 5 
mahi trinamavarastim 6 e. 


(3) Talavakara, current in some villages in Tanjore District.1* Talava- 
kara is another name of the J sakha.14 Dr J. A. B. van Buitenen, who 
made several records of Talavakara samans in 1956 in Itaiyattankuti 
(near Tiruvarir), kindly gave permission to publish his record of the 
recitation of GG 1.1 here. If the numerals 1,...,4 denote again notes 
indescending order and the symbol “‘~” indicates a kind of grace note, this 
gana may be represented as follows: 


o gnadim|/G yahi vaim/| ta ya i ta ya im | gr na no ha vya dam | ta 
23232 32 223232 3222322 2 3 223 23 323 32 
ya ita ya im | nd iho tam | sa tsa i ba au ho vam [hi sim || 

2 9322. 2) 3-12: 2 227223 2 3 3432 2 

The svaras constitute a pattern quite different from the above recitations 
and incompatible with the numerals of the editions. Both the text and the 
subdivision in parvans show that this saman belongs to the Jaiminiya 
sakhd, as can be seen from the comparative survey given by Burnell :!° 


12° Ibid., 56. 

13 Ibid. a - 
14 JArsBr, ed. Burnell (Mangalore, 1878), vi-vill; Renou, 92, note 1; Raghavan, ibid. 
16 JArsBr, ed. Burnell, xiii. 


68 Nambudiri Sdmaveda 


K. 0 gndi/ G yd hi vo i to ya i / to ya i] grndno ha | vya da to ya i| to 
J. 0 gna@i/a@ ya hi vai/ ta yai ta yai| grnano ha vya da | ta ya i ta 
K. yai/ nd iho ta sa | tsé iva au ho va | hi si || 

J. yailnadiho ta | sa tsa i ba au ho va | hi si || 

In this table the K-R upadrava i-va should also be read as i-bd. Both in 
K-R and in J the danda after tsé-i, given by Burnell, should be deleted: 
the upadrava consists of one parvan only. For the J sakhda this wil] 
become apparent later. 

A distinctive peculiarity of the above recitation is the nasalisation of 
the final sound of each parvan. An apparent mistake occurred in the 
recitation of the third parvan, which was actually given as follows: 

td yd tay Gi ta ya i 
322 32 22322 2 


As this seemed to be extremely unlikely, the form has been restored as 
above. 
It may lastly be recalled here that one of the J gina mss. discovered by 


Burnell was from Tiruccirappalli (Trichinopoly), which is also in Tanjore 
District. 


(4) (Aiyar) Jaiminiya from Kofuntirappulli, a village near Palakkati 
(Palghat). These Brahmans, at the most a few hundreds, are Coliyas, an 
endogamous Brahman community of different parts of Kerala and 
Tamilnatu, wearing the kudumi on one side of the head in front (as the 
Nambudiris do). They speak Tamil, as do the other Aiyar Brahmans 
resident in Kerala, though they write Malayalam script. The Kotun- 
tirappulli Aiyar J aiminiya seem to be linked with an Aiyankar (Ténkalai) 
Jaiminiya Coliya community of Téntirupperi, a village in Tinnevelly 
District near Alvartirunakari (almost two hundred miles from K6tun- 
tirappulli, on the other side of the Western Ghats). 

That the sakhd of the Kotuntirappulli Aiyars is J is clear from the 
following recitation of GG 1.1 by one of the oldest living simagas of the 
community. Here the symbol “*” denotes a kind of grace note, quickly 
ascending from and redescending to the pitch of the previous note, the 
interval varying between a major second and a minor third. The interval 
1:2 is a minor third, 2:3 a minor second and 3:4 a major second: 
om/o gndil aya hi v@i/ta@ yaitd yai/ er nd noha vyada | taya 
2 2 2 2 43272 22 222222 22 2:22. 2.2 3 97.9 


Nambudiri Sdmaveda 69 


itaydi/ndihotad |sdtsa i ba | au ho va | ht stl 
22222 22.232" 22 22.. 3.2.3. 23 


It seems certain that the danda after i-bd is only the outcome of lack of 
breath. Also in the Nambudiri recitation this one-breath upadrava 


met ae other features from which it is evident that the Kdtun- 
tirappulli S@khad is J. The ‘“‘Tamil-Malayalam”’ / (Grantha ip — Malay- 
alam o ) occurs under certain conditions’® in stead of d, e.g.: the stobha 
i-la at the end of a JGG based upon JS I.2.3.1.9 (cf. GG 321.1-2). . 
‘In the first gana of the ArG again the J text as given by the following 
survey by Burnell?’ is followed: 
. hum | huve vaécam | vacam vadcam huve | vak srnotu Srnotu 
huve vacam | vacam vadcam huve vak | Srnotu Srnotu 
. vak | vak samaitu samaitu vak | vag ramatam | ramatam / 
vag u vak | samaitu samaitu vag u vak | ramatam ramata 
. rama tu va au ho va | thai hadi ha || 
. ramatam auho va/ihaihaiha /| 


SAE SA SOs 


The recital differs from this text only in omitting the u between vdg and 
vak, resulting in: vag-vadk. Of the mss. (see below) B 497 has u but B 62 
omits it. In the upadrava, Burnell’s text is based upon B 497; 7 62 has: 
ramatam ramatadm ramatd and the recital: ramatam ramata ramata. The 
first syllable of this gana does not occur in the editions, nor in the Madras 
K-R recitation. It is well known, however, that the five bhaktis of a 
sdman can be made into seven by prefixing to the prastdva the so-called 
himkdra which consists of the syllable hum.1® 

Another recital from K6tuntirappulli is of special interest and may 
require more detailed explanation. It was announced by the reciter as a 
Gayatrasaman. The intervals between the notes 1-4 are the same as ¥ 
the previous recital, but the interval 3:4 is apparently larger in the secon 
and third occurrences: 


namah pitrbhyah pirvasadbhyom | namah sakamnisadbh(y) aye | yufije 
22 22201) 222 2 * 43 33 32 2 2° 3 2 


vacam Sa-a G | ta him ba o-o va || 
2k 23 22.2. 2. 2322 
16 Id., ix; JS ed. Caland, 33; Renou, 99. 


17 Id., xiii. : 
18 ~Paficavidhasitra 1.1.2; ed. R. Simon (Breslau, 1931), 3 note 5; Puspasiitra, 522. 


70 Nambudiri Sdmaveda 


yuitje vacam Satapadom | gaye sahasravartanim | 

2-2 213.2.2:2 2 43333222 
gayatram tra istu-u u | bha him ba o-o va || 

32 2 2.2322. $2 2 2322 

gdyatram traistubham jagam | viSva rupdni sambharta | 
222 22 212) 32 43 333 22 2 
deva okdm sa-a G | ida him ba o-o va || 

3222 322 122 2 322 


This seems undoubtedly based upon the J Uttararcika, which has 
pitrbhyah instead of K-R: sakhibhyah and sdkamnisadbhyah instead of 


K-R: sakamnisebhyah:'® 


JS LT 11-2. 
namah pitrbhyah pirvasadbhyo namah sdkamnisadbhyah | 


yurfije vacam Satapadim gaye sahasravartani | | 1. 


Ff =— -— mm e@ 


deva okamsi cakrire | | Z. 


SV 2.1178-1180. 
namah sakhibhyah pirvasadbhyo namah sdkamnisebhyah | 


yufije vacam Satapadim | | 1. 


yuiije vacam Satapadim gaye sahasravartani | 


gayatram traistubham jagat | | 2. 


gdayatram traistubham jagadvisva riipani sambhrta | 
deva okamsi cakrire | | 3; 


From this it is seen, however, that the professed J recitation has exactly 
the same word order as the K-R Uttararcika. Does this chant represent 
some intermediate stage between, or a mixture of, K-R and J sdkhas? 
The solution of this difficulty may be given by considering more 
closely the structure of the gdnas.*° We know that the Uttararcika 
consists mainly of groups which each consist of three rks (trca). During 
the ritual each of the three rks of a trca is chanted with the same melody. 
The entire chant is called stotra, each of its three parts is called stotriya 
(or: stotriya). It was therefore necessary to indicate the melody only of 


18 Other differences may be manifest in the arcika but not in the ganas. It is also 


difficult to decide whether in the above recitation gaye or gdye is intended to be 
chanted. 
20 See especially JS ed. Caland, 3-9. 


Nambudiri Sdmaveda 71 


each first rk of a trca. These first rks along with their melody constitute 
the GG and ArG. The rks themselves were listed in the Pairvarcika and 
ArS.2! Lastly the chants were also written out completely as they occur 
in the ritual, repeating each melody thrice (once for each stotriya of a 
stotra). These last collections constitute the UG and RG. . 

Inevitably irregularities and exceptions to this system have come into 
being. One of the problems which sometimes arise 1S how one should 
proceed when the Uttararcika has a group of two rks instead of three. 
This difficulty is solved by means of “overlapping”. An example Is 
offered by the barhata pragatha SV 2.30-31: 


abhi tva Sara nonumo ’dugdha iva dhenavah | 


isanamasya jagatah svardrsamisanamindra tasthusah | | 1. 
na tvavam anyo divyo na parthivo na jato na janisyate | : 
asvayanto maghavannindra vajino gavyantastva havamahe // : 


This can be made into a well known Rathamtara saman (RG 1.1.1) as 
follows. The two rks are divided into five portions a-c: 


a. abhi... svardrsam (3 pddas) 
b. isanamindra tasthusah (1 pada ) 
c. natvavam ... parthivo (1 pada ) 
d. na jato na janisyate (1 pada ) 
e. asvayanto ... havamahe (2 pddas). 


Thus SV 2.30-31 can be written as: 
a/b 2.30 (4 pGdas) 
c/d 
e 2.31 (4 pddas). 
Then the Rathamtara siman RG 1.1.1 is construed as follows: 
I. a-b (4 pddas) 
Il. b-c-d (3 pddas) 
II. d-e (3 pddas).”* 
Now we shall subdivide JS III 1.1-2, which consists of an anustubh and a 
gayatri stanza, in a similar way: 
namah ... sakamnisadbhyah (2 pa@das) 


a. 

b. yuiije ... Satapadim (1 pada ) 
c. gaye sahasravartani (1 pdda ) 
d. gdyatram ... jagat (1 pada ) 
e. visva ... cakrire (2 pddas). 


21 It is not certain that the Uttararcika is older than the Pirvarcika (this was Caland’s 
initial view); but this is not relevant in the present context (cf. Renou, 94). 
22 See B.1., V, 381. 


72 Nambudiri Sdmaveda 


Thus JS III 1.1-2 can be written as: 

a 

b/c l. (4 pddas) 

d/e 2. (3 pddas). 
From this a stotra can be construed which consists of the following three 
Stotriyas: 

I a-b (3 pddas) 

II. b-c-d (3 pddas) 

Ill. d-e (3 padas). 
This is identical with the trca SV 2.1178-1180, whish consists of three 
gayatri stanzas. In other words, the above J Uha-gdna is the same as a 
K-R Uttararcika trca. This trca, the base of a stotra in the prayoga, may 
have found its way in this form into the Uttararcika. The above recita- 
tion is therefore undoubtedly a specimen of the J sakhd. It might have 
been JUG 1.1.1, as it is based upon JS III 1.1-2, but for the reason that 
Gayatra-samans are generally omitted from the JUG as they are from 
the UG.*5 From the above it may also be concluded that the two JS 
verses are the original verses from which the K-R trca is derived. 

As the above sdman is a Gayatra sdman its first rk does not occur in 
the K-R, nor in the J GG or ArG. The stobhas and parvans of the above 
chant cannot therefore be checked with the available mss. 

The expectation, that all the Gayatra-simans are chanted in the same 
melody, which need be stated once only (as in BI V 601), is not fulfilled 


in KOfuntirappulli. The melody of the above recital must have been 
similar to: 


22:22 22997 (43. 3393593) 
32923931297 399 7) 


The s@dha@rana gdyatra saman, however, the text of which is based upon 
the gdyatri, was recited as follows: 


tatsaviturvarenyom | bhargodevasya dhima | hi dhiyo yo na pra-a a 
2222222 %* 43333 22% 432 2 21322 
ca him ba o-o va 0-0 va o-o va him ba | 0-0 vaa || 
222322322322 2 2 32223 


/ 


The subdivision of the parvans may be noted. 


JS ed. Caland, 3-4; Pajicavidhasitra, ed. Simon, 6 note 1. 


Nambudiri Sdmaveda 73 


(5) Nambudiri Jaiminiya: see next section. 


(6) Udupi (and Karnataka?) sdmagas. Three SV families contacted 
near Udupi (Tulu speaking Madhvas, known as Sivalli Brahmans) 
gave as the name of their sakhd, apparently independently, Jaiminiya. 
The recitation, however, was clearly of the K-R type, GG 1.1 being 
recited without any of the J marks mentioned above and moreover 
chanted with even more svaras than the Tamil New School uses (this 
may be due to musical influence, as for instance in a sdman discovered 
in Gujrat and discussed by Dr Bake*). In GG 2.1 and 3.1 the K-R 
stobha ida occurred instead of the J stobha ild. 

This situation may be mentioned in order to stress the fact that the 
mere occurrence of the name J does not prove the subsistence of the J 
Sakhad. As there seems to be no reason for a SAamavedin to prefer to 
belong to J rather than to K—R (the difference has no relation to caste 
status, as for instance in the two schools of the SYV), it seems probable 
that at least some of the Udupi samagas were originally J but lost the 
tradition (perhaps when several kinds of Brahmans were converted into 
Dvaita by Madhva and his successors, from the 13th century onwards). 
Later SV recitation may have been learnt from Palakkati (Palghat) or 
from other well known K-R SV centres (the Nambudiri J SV being confi- 
ned to the manas). Actually, some South Canara sdrasvata RV com- 
munities derive their Vedic recitation from centres outside the community 
(e.g. Palakkati (Palghat) or Banaras). 

The case of Udup! is instructive in as far as it pictures a situation of an 
orthodox Brahman community which is common in greater parts of 
India. Wherever Vedic traditions are weakened at home or in the villages, 
vaidikas learn the recitation of their s@khd from famous centers (e.g. 
Banaras). The study of the Veda recitation of Aiyar and Nambudiri 
Brahmans is important because the traditions are still preserved either 
in the houses or in local Vedapathasalas. The Nambudiri YV and SV 
is in its entirety handed down in the manas. 


2. NAMBUDIRI JAIMINIYA 


Of the J SaGkhad we possess in printed form only the JS (ed. Caland, 
Breslau, 1907, and ed. Raghu Vira, Lahore, 1938). We can form an idea 


#4 A. A. Bake, “‘The music of India’, New Oxford history of music, 1 (London, 1957), 
202. 


74 Nambudiri Sdmaveda 


of the contents of the J GG and ArG with the help of the J Arseya 
Brahmana (ed. Burnell, Mangalore, 1878), where the names of the gdnas 
are enumerated. Caland has given a list of corrections and variants to 
the GG portion of Burnell’s JArsBr (ed. JS 21-23) and has given a list 
of the ganas of the JArG with the parallel K-R ganas (id., 23-29). The 
only known manuscripts of the J GG and ArG are Burnell’s B 497 and 
B 61-62 in the India Office Library. B 497 is a grantha paper ms. from 
Tiruccirappalli (Trichinopoly) which contains the GG (fol.la-86b) and 
the ArG (87a-119b). B 61 is a grantha palmleaf ms. consisting of two 
parts: B I (leaves numbered I-31) contains the dgneyam parva of the GG 
and B II (numbered 1-174) contains the aindram parva and the pdva- 
manam parva of the GG. B 62 is a grantha palmleaf ms., consisting of 
114 leaves and containing the ArG. 

No manuscripts of the J UG and RG are known to be available. 

In the following the text will be published of the J ganas recorded from 
Nambudiri simagas (tape side sections IV(5) (a) - (e) chanted by Tottam 
Sridharan Nambudiri; XVIII (1) - (8); XIX (1) - (7) and XX (I) - (5) 
chanted by Muttatukkattu Itti Ravi Nambudiri). The critical apparatus 
contains variants from the mss., or, in so far as available, from the 
K6tuntirappulli recitation; for the UG and RG no mss. variants are 
available. The apparatus is intended as complete so far as the text is 
concerned, with two important exceptions: (1) length of parvans, i.e. 
occurrence of the danda; (2) length of vowels. Both of these are difficult 
to determine with certainty from recited samans. Whenever certain, the 
indications of the reciter are followed; whenever doubtful, the text of 
B 497 is followed wherever it does not contradict the recitation. The 
rks are published as they are chanted by the Nambudiri samagas. The 
saman names are taken from the JArsBr, with Caland’s corrections, 
based upon B 497. Dentals pronounced as ‘“‘l”? are marked with an 
asterisk (t*, d*). The “‘musical”’ syllable notation of the mss. is not pu- 
blished. 

In addition to the sémans recorded by the present writer use is made 
of four samans recorded by Dr A. A. Bake on 14—6-1938 in Sdranir 
(Shoranur) with the help of a Tefiphon apparatus. Dr Bake, who was in 
all likelyhood the first European who could hear and record Nambudiri 
Samans (even Burnell did not succeed in this?*), very kindly gave per- 


% A. C. Burnell, Catalogue of a collection of Sanskrit manuscrips, 1: Vedic manu- 
scripts (London, 1896), 45: “I have heard the chants of the first two schools (K-R), 
but not of the last (J).” 


Nambudiri Sdmaveda 75 


mission to copy his records and to use them for the present edition. 
Three of these s@mans were also recorded by the present writer (below: 
samans 8, x anda); the text of both recordings is the same in each case. 
The fourth sdman was not recorded by the present writer and serves 
therefore as the basis of the text (below: sdman e). 

In collating the mss. great help was derived from a handwritten copy 
of Caland, completed in Utrecht in 1906, based upon B 497 and collated 
with B 61 and B 62 (for the ArG, Caland did not note the stobhas or the 
notation given in B 62.) This copy of Caland was accessible to me 
through a photograph kindly placed at my disposal by Dr A. A. Bake. 
The original copy is in the Utrecht University Library. 

It is perhaps regrettable that such an incomplete and relatively arbitrary 
selection of s@mans should be published at this stage. This publication 
may be justified, however, in view of the consideration that since the 
death of Burnell in 1882 and of Caland in 1932 there seems to be little 
chance that the J gdnas will soon be published in their entirety in Europe. 
In fact, even the Kauthuma text as we possess it is far from satisfactory. 
It is to be hoped that Indian scholars, inspired by the work of Kunhan 
Raja, Raghu Vira, Narayanaswami, Lokesh Chandra, Santavalekar and 
others, will continue to contribute to the study of SV in general. The 
present contribution may give some idea of the material and may enable 
Vedic scholars to judge to what extent a complete edition is desirable. 
It may be of use to the future editor of the J ganas. 

Similar considerations have led to the compilation of the following 
table, where in column I the gdnas are given in the order in which they 
will be published below, in accordance with the JArsBr (for GG and 
ArG). Column II gives the JS yoni (ed. Caland). Column III gives the 
section of the tape side (see catalogue) where the Nambudiri recitation, 
which is the basis of the text, occurs. Column IV gives the section of 
the tape side of the corresponding KOtuntirappulli recitation, if any. 
Column V gives the fol. of B 497. Column VI gives the fol. of B 61 I, 
B 61 II, or B 62. Column VII gives the page of Caland’s copy. Column 
VIII gives the corresponding K-R gana, if any, and the volume and page 
of the BI edition where it is printed; and column IX gives the corres- 
ponding K-R yoni, if any. 


JS ed. Caland. 
JS ed. Raghu Vira. 


Nambudiri Sdmaveda 


3. JAIMINIYA SAMANS 


KOtuntirappulfi recitation (tape XIII). t* and d* are always pronounced as t 
and d respectively. As the names of the sdmans were recited, variants from the 
JArsB are mentioned. The K sdmaga takes breath much more often than the 
Nambudiri sdmagas, which may not imply that everywhere a danda should 


have been added. 


Burnell 497 (India Office 4301). 
Burnell 61 (GG) or 62 (ArG) (India Office 4300 and 4302 respectively). 


JS IV. 3.8. tat* savitur varenyam bhargo devasya dhimahi | dhiyo 
yo nah pracodayat* || 

gayatram. tat*saviturvarenyom | bhargodevasya dhimaha i dhiyo yo 
nah pra | G cad hm bha | o va || 

om. TB, cf. supra p. 72 K 


JS I11.1. agna a yahi vitaye grndno havyadataye | ni hota sat*si 


barhisi | | 


gautamasya parkah. ognadi/adyahivail ta yaitad ydi/ grna no 
ha vya dé | ta yaita yai/ ndiho ta | sat* sai ba au ho va | hi si |/ 
3 ta yaitaéiB. 4sa tsa K 


JS 1 1.3.13. Sam no devir abhistaye Sam no bhavantu pitaye | sam 
yor abhi Sravantu nah | | 

vasurocisas Sauryavarcasya sdmani dve. Sanno devih | abhis{aya i 
Sanno bhuva | tit vi ta ya i Sayyor abhi Sravantu na au ho va | it pa || 
hu va ho i Sanno devir abhistaya i | hu va ho i Sanno bhuvantu pita ya i | 
hu v@ ho i Sayyor abhi Sravantu nah | hu va ho ya au ho va | i pa || 
1 varccasya T varcasasya B.4 bhuvam T abhih T.5 huvadntu TB 6 Samyor B 


JS 11.5.1. en& vo agnim namasa irjo napdtam a huve | priyam 
cetistham aratim svadhvaram viSvasya ditam amrtam | | 
gautamasya mandarye dve. 1. end vo agnim nd o masé | urjo napata- 
mahuve prayadm | ca itistha maratim | svadhvaram viSvadsyadu | tam 
G mrtam ilabha | o ila || | 
1 namasorjo R. 3 va T agnimmenamasad T agnimenamasa B airjjo B. 4 sé ad. 


hvaradm TB 


agneScdgneyam. 


iva sammahema | manisaya hoye bhadrahi na pramatira | sy@samsadi 


imam stoma marhdteja | tavedase hoye ratham 


hoye agna i sakhya i mara isama | vayantavé ho ila || 


1-2 thammi B 


oo FRX D 


os 


~ 


ome te > xX 


Cc 4A QatsD 


I U 


GRAMAGEYAGANA 


Gayatrasaman 
— IV 3.8 


Agneyam parva 
1.1 I 1.1.1 
33.1-2 1 1.3.13 
45.3 11.5.1 
66.1 I 1.7.4 


Aindram parva 


234.2 12.2.1,2. 


Pavamanam parva 


467.13 13.1.1. 
529 I 3.6.5 
ARANYAGEYAGANA 
Vrataparva 
4.3 I 3.8.8 
6.8 I 2.3.1.6 
9.1 = 
9.5 IT 4.5 
10.1 II 4.7 
10.2 II 4.8 


10.9 I 2.3.1.9 


Arkaparva 
12.15 P2212. 


UHAGANA 

? IL 4.3-5 
? IIT 3.1-2 
: III 6.9 

is IV 28.10 
RAHASYAGANA 
z Ill 4,1-2 
4 JI 15.7-8 
: II 4.7 


II 


XX(2) 


XVITI(1) ( 
XX(5) 
IV(5)b 
Bake 


XVIII(3)a 


IV(S)ec, cf. 
IV(5)e 


XX(4) 

X1X(7) 
X1X(3) 
XIX(4) 
XIX(5) 
XIX(2) 
XX(1) 


XVIII(3)b 


XVIII(7/8) 
XVIIH(2) 
XX(3) 
XX(5) 


XVIII(5/6) 
XVIIL(4) 
XIX(6) 


mbudiri Sdmaveda 


‘MINIYA SAMANS 


tape XIII). t* and d* are always pronounced as t 
ames of the sdmans were recited, variants from the 
K samaga takes breath much more often than the 

may not imply that everywhere a danda should 


01). 
3) (India Office 4300 and 4302 respectively). 


ir varenyam bhargo devasya dhimahi | dhiyo 


irenyom | bhargodevasya dhimahd i dhiyo yo 
o va /|/ 


i vitaye grndno havyadataye | ni hota sat*si 


gndil ayahivadil ta ydita yai|/ grnd no 
i| naiho ta] sat* saiba au ho va | hi si || 


evir abhistaye Sam no bhavantu pitaye | sam 
/ 

wsya samani dve. Sanno devih | abhistaya i 
4 i Sapyyor abhi Sravantu na au ho va | i pa || 
histaya i | hu va ho i anno bhuvdntu pita ya i | 
fravantu nah | hu va ho ya au ho va | i pa || 
B. 4 bhuvaém T abhih T.5 huvantu TB 6 Samyor B 


mim namasa iirjo napadtam a@ huve | priyam 
varam vi§vasya diitam amrtam | | 

ve. I. end vo agnim na o mas | urjo napata- 
stha maratim | svadhvaram viSvasyadu | tam 


| 


nimmenamasd T agnimenamasd B irjjo B. 4 sii ad- 


1 stoma marhdteja | tavedase hoye ratham 
‘aya hoye bhadrahi na pramatira | sya@samsadi 
‘ara isama | vayantavéa ho ila | | 


an) 


co 


ome = >» RX 


Cc aA Qaws 


€& x 6 


T Il 


GRAMAGEYAGANA 


Gayatrasaman 
— IV 3.8 


Agneyam parva 
1.1 11.1.1 


33.1-2 =11.3.13 
45.3 I 1.5.1 
66.1 1 1.7.4 


Aindram parva 
234.2 I 2.2.1.2. 


Pavamanam parva 


467.13 13.1.1. 
529 1 3.6.5 
ARANYAGEYAGANA 
Vrataparva 
4,3 I 3.8.8 
6.8 I 2.3.1.6 
9.1 — 
9.5 II 4.5 
10.1 II 4.7 
10.2 II 4.8 


10.9 I 2.3.1.9 


Arkaparva 
12.15 I 2.2.1.2. 


UHAGANA 

? If 4.3-5 
2 IIT 3.1-2 
? III 6.9 

? IV 28.10 
RAHASYAGANA 
? WI 4.1-2 
? JII 15.7-8 
? Il 4.7 


HI 


XX(2) 


XVIII) (=1V(5)f) 
XX(5) 

IV(5)b 

Bake 


XVITII(3)a 


IV(5)c, cf. XVITI(2) 
IV(5)e 


XX(4) 

XIX(7) 
XIX(3) 
XIX(4) 
XIX(5) 
XIX(2) 
XX(1) 


XVIII(3)b 


XVIII(7/8) (=IV(5)a) 
XVOI(2) 

XX(3) 

XX(5) 


XVII(5/6) (= 1V(5)d) 
XVIII(4) 
XIX(6) 


TV 


XIT1(8)B 


XTC) 


XITI(7) 
XI(14) 
XIT(13) 


cf. XITI(9) 


XITI(S) 


XIU(6) 


— 
— 


XIII(3) 


5b-6a 


25a 


59b 
74a 


90b-9la 
93b 

97a 

97b 

99a 
99a—b 
99b-100a 


103a 


VI 


15b-l6a 
26a—b 
38a—39a 
40a—b 
44b-45a 
45a 
46b-47a 


58b-59a 


VII 


42 


99 
123 


152-3 
157 
162-3 
164 
166 
166 
167 


Vill 


V 601 


1.1 (194) 
33.1-2 (1 143) 
45.1 (I 168) 
66.1 (1 204) 


234.2 (I 482) 


467.13 (II 5-6) 
529.1 (II 122) 


100.1 (II 469-70) 
126.1 (I 487-8) 
ad 127.1 (II 488-9) 
140.1 (I 325-6) 


141.1 (II 497) 


14.1 (II 402-3) 


1.4.2 (III 89-90) 
3.1.3 (III 24 sq.) 
5.7.3.1 (I 584) 
? 


1.1.1 (V 381-2) 
1.1.6 (V 384-5) 


IX 


2.812 


1.1 

1.33 
1.45 
1.66 


1.234 


1.467 
1.529 


Nambudiri Sdmaveda 77 


JS 12.2.1.2. _tvam id dhi havamahe s@tau vajasya karavah | tvam 

vrtresy indra sat*patim narah tvam kasthasy arvatah | | 

bhdradvaje dve. 1. tvam iddhi havamahe sdtau vajo va | sya ka ra 

vah | tvam vrtra isu indra sat* pa tin nadrah | tuvam ka stha | st var 
5 va tah | o ila || 

2 narastvam CR 4 imdrad T stha TB 


JS 13.1.1. ucca te jatam andhasa divi sad*bhimy 4 dade | ugram 
Sarma mahi Sravah | | 

Gmahiyavam. uccd ta i jatamandhasd | diva i sad* bhimiya dada i | 
ugram Sarma | ma hd i Srava u va | stau se | | 


JS I 3.6.5. akrdn samudrah prathame vidharman janayan praja 

bhuvanasya gopah | vrsa pavitre adhi sano avye brhat*somo vavrdhe 

svGno adrih | | 

asvam. hohoakran s@mudrah prathame vidharman | ho ho i janayan 
5 praja bhuvanasya gopah | ho ho i vrsa pavitre Gdhisdno avya i] hohoi 

brhat* somo vavrdhe svano adraé yau ho va ha u va | e svano adrih || 


JS I 3.8.8. abhi navante adruhah priyam indrasya kadmyam | 
vat*sam na pirva ayuni jatam rihanti matarah || 
bharadvajindm ca vratam. hdabu | trih | vajam vajam vajame | trih | 
vajamoyivajam | trih | vivivivi | trih | vivihoyivivi | trih | viyaSna- 
5 vayivi | trih | dbhinavantaya | druho druho | dvih | drithah | priyam 
indrasya kamayammiyammiyammiyammiyam | vat*sanna purva @ | 
yuni yuni | dvih | yuni | jatam rihanti matdrastarastarastarastarah | 
habvadi vivihyantam bhiiyah | viyasna va ivi | dvih | viydSna va u va | 
e sudhadma dhama | dvih | e stidhama dhaéma || 
4 vajamo ivajam TB viviho iviviTB 4-5 viyasnava iviTB viyagnavaT 5 adbhinantaya 
B dra iho druho T prdyam T 6 miyammiyammiyam T 7 matdrastardsta- 


rastarastarah TB 8 viyagnava T viydSnanava B 9 e sitdhadmadhame | avih | 
sudhama dhama T e sidhamadhadmadhama e sidhdma dhama B 


JS I 2.3.1.6. indram naro nemadhitaé havante yat* padrya yunajante 
dhiyas ta | Siro nrsata SravasaS ca kame G gomati vraje bhaja tvam 
nah | | 
ilandam paficanugdnam pafica. V. iya | trih | iya ha | vi ya ha | 
5 dvih | vindrannaro nemadhita hadvante havante havante | havante ha 
ha hé ha ha | trih | havante | trih | yat*parya yiinajanta i dhiyasta 
dhiyasta dhiyastah | dhiyasta ha ha ha ha ha | trih | dhiyasta dhiyasta 
dhiyastah | Siro nrsata SravasaScakame | cakame | dvih | cakadme 
ha ha ha hé ha | trih | cakadme | trih | G gomata i vraje bhaja tuvannas 


78 Nambudiri Sdmaveda 


A 


UL 


Vv 


10 tuvannas tivannadh | tuvanno ha ha ha ha ha [ trih | t(u)vannas 
t(u) vannas t(u) vannah | i ya | trih | iy@ ha | viya ha | dvih | (ha) u va / 
é vratame suvare Sakunah | | 
2 kama CR 4 pankamam ilandam K iyé hd | trih | viyahé | dvih | T 4-5 iyaha 
viyaha viyahd vindra B 5 nemathitaT 70m. haB 8 cakame / trih | T 10 tvanno 
T om. trih TB 10-11 tuv:tv T 12 vrtasuvare B 


irini revasya vratani. adhipdta i mitrapata i ksatrapata i suvaéh 
pata i | manyiind vrtra ha suryena svarad yajnena | maghava daksi- 
nasya priya tanur anye nagayah | prthivyd srnikas samitya parame- 
sthi rajfid visandadhara | vrsabhas tvasta vrtrena sakipatir vasat* 
5 karendrdhabhak | somend somapa agnina visvam bhutam abhyabhavo 
vayund visvah praj@ abhyd pavathah | ye deva deva divi sadastha 
tebhyo vo deva devebhyo namah | ye deva deva antariksasaé da stha 
tebhyo vo devad devebhyo namah | ye deva deva prthivi sddastha te- 
bhyo vo deva devebhyo namah | ye deva deva apsu sddastha tebhyo vo 
10 deva devebhyo namah | ye deva deva diksu sddastha tebh yo vo deva 
devebhyo namah | ye deva deva bhita sadastha tebh yo vo devG deve- 
bhyo namah | avajyami va dhanvano vi te manyun nayamasi | 
mrlatanna ihd asmabhyam ila bhaya idam visvam bhitayyu yo a u va / 
namah | | 


I trini devasya vratani rsyasya caturtham bhitecchandasdm va KB 4 rarajfia B 
vindadhara T tvastrd TB saciTB 5 somdpagninad T 10-11 ye deva deva diksu... 
namah om. K 13 mrlatana T mrjatanneha K bhita yyam T 


JS HI 4.5. yad varco hiranyasya yadva varco gavam uta | satyasya 
brahmano varcah tena ma samsrjam asi | | 
disam daSdnugdnam dasa. 1. habu / trih | aham annam | trih | 
aham annddo | trih | aham vidharayo | dvih | aham vidharayah / 
3 habu | trih | yadvarco hiranyasya / yad va varco gavam uta | satyasya 
brahmano vareah | tena ma samsrjamasa i | habvadi rayah ityantam 
bhiyah | hdbu habu ha u va | e aham annam aham annddo aham 
vidharayah | trih | e Gham suvarjyotih // ) 


2 hadi 3-4 variants, with Caland’s comment in margine: “toch moet 
jeder driemaal gelezen worden” TB 4 ham vidha- T 6 habvddivat B 7- 
vidhadrayah T 8 aham KB i nee 


JS 114.7. yad itas tanvo mama dosa rasasya bhejire | naradSamsena 
somena aham tat* Punar ddade | yusmad apsarasas pari || 

purusavratam nava. l.ihahahahahaihdihahahahahai / 
trih | yadi tas tanvo mama | dosa rasasya bhd idire | naraSamsena 


E 


0 


Tv 


p 


Nambudiri Sdmaveda 79 


5 soma ila | ahantat* punar Gdade | yusmad apsarasas pa ra i | & ha 
hahahahathaéihahahaha ha | dvih | thahahahaha ii ha i 
ha ha ha ha ha u va | e suvarjyotih | | 


Il. habu | trih | hau | trih | kahvahvahvahvahva | trih | ha ui | dvih | 
kahvahvahvahvahva u | trih | yasyedamdrajoyijah | tuje jane vanam 
10 sivah | habvadi sarvam stobham bhiyah | indrasya rant(i)yam 
brhat* | ndma svar ila || 
1 ratasyaC n.1 2 somendham CR apsarasasvatiCn.2 3 tha ka haha ha u ha | 
davih | a | ha haha hé ha i ha T om. ult. hd B 4 ratasya B ijire B 5 ina TB 
yusad T asparasas TB a ha sicut supra T “hddivat B 7 svar T 8 hvanvahva- 
nvanva T ha aia a | trih | T 9 nvanvanvadnvanva | trih | & nvdnvaGnvadnvadnva ii | 
trih | T 10 ro(?)-ddivat B hdbvdadi: the reciter mentioned he had left out this 
repetition rantyam T: rantiyam B 


JS I 2.3.1.9. brahma jajiGnam prathamam purastdd* vi simatah 

suruco vena Gvat* | sa budhnyad upama asya visthah satas ca yonim 

asatas ca vivah || 

purusavratam nava. 1X. habu | trih | bhambhambhambhambham- 
5 bham | trih | habu | trih | brahma jajfidnam prathamam purdstat* | 

vi simatassuruco vena dGvat* | sa buddhnyad upama asya va isthah | 

sdtaSca yonim asataSca va ivah | habvaddi dvayam bhiyah | habu- 

hadbuha a va | brahma devanadm bhati parame vyoman | dvih | brahma 

devanam bhati parame vyoman || 

4 bhambhambhambhambham TB 6 sura ico T 

The reciter said there are two similar candrasamans with respectively phal and 

hau in the place of bham. This refers to JArG 10.7 and 10.8, which may be 


compared to K-R ArG 142.1 and 143.1 respectively. There seems to be no 
corresponding K-R ArG saman with the stobha bham. 


brhat prajapatyam bharadvdjasya va. auho itvam iddhi havamaha 
e | sdtau vajdsya karadvah | tivad au ho va | vrtra isu va indrdsa 
ot*patin narah | tivam kdasthé au ho va | siivarvata ho va u va | has | | 
Cf. C. 2 tava au ho v4 om. K 3 tuviT kastha TB 


JS LIT 4.3-5. kaya@ na§ citra @ bhuvad* iti sadavrdhah sakha | 
kayG Sacistaya vrtd kas tva@ satyo madanadm mamhisto mat*sad 
andhasah | drda cid adruje vasu abhi su nah sakhinam avitd jarit7jnadm | 
Satam bhayasy itaye || 

5 (vamadevyam.) kaya nascad i tra aya bhuvad* | iti sadavrdha 
sakhé auho hai — kaya Sa cai] stayauho hm ma | varto | hai || 
kastva satyo madanam | madmhistomat*saddandhasaé — au ho ha i - 
drda cidaé | rujau ho hm ma | vaso | ha i || 


80 


10 


15 


10 


15 


Nambudiri Sdmaveda 
Abhi su na sakhinadm | avita jara i tf(ndma — au ho ha i - Satam bhava | 
siyau ho hm m4 | ta yo | hai || 
(aniruktagadna.) kaya nasca i tra aya bhuvad* |oo000000- 
Gbu hau ho h4-o0000/] stayauhohm m4 | vak o | hai || 
kastva satyo madaném | 00000000 - Gbu hau ho h4doooo| 
rujau ho hm m4 | vak o [| ha i || 
Gbhi su na sakhinam |000000000- 4bu hau hoha-oooo| 
siyau ho hm m4 | vak o | ha i || 
12, 14,160/hédiom.K 


(Gmahiyavam, aniruktagadna?) ucca ta i jatamandhasa | 0 0 o o 
bhi o o dada i | ugram Sarma | 0 0 0 ha va u va | stau se || 
Cf. 7. 


JS 111 6.9. indra jusasva pra vaha 4G yahi sara hariha | piba sutasya 
matirna madhos ca kdGnaS carur madaya | | 

(sodasa.) ohm| indrajusa sva pra vaha | o ya hi Stra hariha va i ba | 
suta sy@ | ma tirna G4 madhoh | ca& ka nascah | o mo (?) 

ba dayo ha i || 

1 vaha yahi CR 


(?) Sanno devir abhistaya i | o nam (?) bhuvam bhi bhi hm ma i | ta 
y@ i] oo yyor abhi Sravantu na bhu | va || 
Cf. y. 


JS II 4.1-2. abhi tvad Sira nonumah adugdha iva dhenavah | 
isGnam asya jagatah svardrsam isadnam indra tasthusah || na tvavam 
anyo divyo na parthivah na jato na janisyate | aSvayanto maghavann 
indra vajinah gavyantas tva havamahe || 

(rathamtaram.) obhitvaSiranonumovad [| Gdugdhd iva dhenava 
isGnamasya jagatassuvardrsam | isGnama@ indra | ta sthii sG o va ha u 
va | as || 

iso va | na@mindratasthuso na tv@vam anyo divyo na parthivah | na 
jato na ja | n@ isyad ta o va hau va | as || 

najova | tonajanisyate ’Svayanto maghavannindra vajinah | gavya- 
ntastva ha | va ma ha o va hé u va | as || 

(bhakdra-rathamtaram.) abhitvaSiranonumova | o bhu bha bhi bha 
bhe bha bha bhi bha bha bha bha bhi bha bha bha suvardrsamoyi | 
Sanam indra | ila o sthii $@ 0 va hau va | as | | 

iso v@ | o bhi bha bha bhu bha bha bhu bha bha bha bha bhi bhi bha na 
parthivah | na jato na@ ja | ild o isyé ta o va hau va | as || 


Nambudiri Sdmaveda 81 


najova | o bha bha bhi bha bhe bha bhu bha bha bha bha bha bha bhi 
drava jinah | gavyantastva ha | ila o ma hao va hau va | as | | 

1 nonumo ’dugdha CR 2 tvavam C 3 parthivo CR 4 vajino CR 7,9,11 as: 
hd ds K 10 asvayanto K 


x JS [II 15.(7-)8. sa tvam nas citra vajrahasta dhrsnuya maha sta- 
vano adrivah | gam aSvam rathyam indra sam kira sattra vdjam na 
jigyuse | | 
(?) auho itvam iddhi havadmahd e | o tau vajasyé kardvah | tiva 

5 au ho va | vrtrad isu va indradsad ot*patin narah | tavam kastha au 
ho va | o varvata o va u va | has || 
auho ituvam e | o stha sivarvata | satva au ho va | nasca i travajra 
o sta dhrsni ya | mahastava au ho va | 0 G dra i va o va u va | has || 
auho ima e | 0 va no adra i va | ga ma au ho va | Suvam ratha ya ma o 
10 indra sanka i ra | sattravaja au ho va | o ja igyusad o va u va | has || 
Cf. C, 7m. 


Y (2) tihahahahahathathahahahahai|trih]... 
Cf. v. — Only the initial stobha was chanted. 


4. NOTATIONS, PITCH AND RHYTHM. DISTRIBUTION 
OF THE JAIMINIYA 


The above material is not sufficiently large and varied to justify any very 
general conclusions. As regards the variant traditions it may be re- 
marked that the Nambudiri J (to be referred to as N) rks differ from C 
and R only in that they chant each pada separately; this explains all the 
variants. In addition to this it may be worth noting that N seems to be 
nearer to B than to T. This is in accordance with the fact that T is from 
Tiruccirappalli (Trichinopoly). That both T and B differ from N is not 
surprising in view of the fact that both are grantha mss., whereas Nam- 
budiri Vedic mss. are generally written in Malayalam script. It is likely 
that both T and B represent the Tamil J tradition. If the provisional 
survey given above of SV in South India be considered an adequate 
picture of the situation during the last few centuries, T may represent the 
Tanjore District J, and B a Tamil J tradition nearer to the Kerala frontier, 
which survives in Kéduntirappulli and in Tinnevelly District. In fact 
there are two cases in which K and B have the same reading which differs 
from the others.?¢ 


% 6 Cf. also the variant reading vdg-vdk, above p. 69. 


82 Nambudiri Sdmaveda 


In the grantha mss. T and B a syllable notation occurs which was not 
intelligible to Caland.*”? In T the notation syllables are written under each 
syllable, in B they are given in a special, sometimes very large, parvan 
inserted after each parvan of the text. The notations of T and B differ 
considerably from each other. Moreover, Burnell remarked on the fly 
leaf of T that the notation of T differed greatly from the notation of an 
old (XVIIth century) ms. from Tinnevelly which he inspected. Whether it 
differed also from B we do not know. 

Simon, who deciphered the syllable notation of the Ranayaniya, could 
not decipher the notation of B.22 He made no use, however, of Burnell’s 
Samalaksana ms. in the India Office,?® with the help of which it might be 
possible to understand something of the notation of T. 

This situation does not give much reason to expect that the Nambudiri 
recitation might enable us to decipher the J notation: even within the 
Tamil tradition there is no one notation. It is therefore unlikely that one 
(oral?) syllable notation was at the background of the different Tamil ms. 
traditions and a fortiori of the Tamil and Malayalam traditions. Hence 
the N recitation may not throw any light on the notations of T and B. 

It is difficult to describe the “‘musical”’ qualities of N adequately. As 
far as the pitch goes the chant makes a monotonous impression and 
does certainly comply with the view that the J utilize fewer notes than the 
K-R. Upon a closer analysis the monotony is seen to be partly caused 
by the extreme extension of certain syllables over a long period of time 
within an interval of at the most a fourth. Within such a pitch interval, 
wavering or kampa is frequent. The deviations from this interval stand 
out clearly. These deviations are in general about a whole tone higher or 
lower. Rarely one syllable is chanted more than a tone higher (e.g. in 
saman x, line 4, syllable: i(ya) ). The following is a list of the deviations 
from the middle pitch occurring in the sdmans « — |). Deviations are the 
parts which are not bracketed. 


LOWER 
BS hiy 5 vir 6 va(ntu) bhitix Snte7 sta 8 me*® o4 (bham)bham(bham) 


a7 ~«JS ed. Caland, 19. 

#8 ~R. Simon, “Die Notationen der vedischen Liederbiicher”, WZKM, 27 (1913), 
345-6. 

29 —~B 497 fol. 119b—120a: “brief treatise explaining in Sanskrit and Tamil the notation 
used in the ganas of the Jaiminiya school of the SV”. Cf. Caland, ibid. 

80 These lower pitch svaras in the ““Ravana-stuti” (the name given to the saman x), 
are said to symbolise bhakti, which is interpreted as “love”, but may well have referred 
to the technical meaning “one of the five portions of a saman’’. | 


Nambudiri Sdmaveda 83 


bham(bhambham) x1 au p 5 ka 6 sta 6 ka 8 ru9 410 sit4avu1(Sa)nno 
@ 5 o(bhi) a (du). 


HIGHER 

a 3 savitur godevasya © 4 isu v3 jam (1) * 4 ya(Ssna) (III) 6 ya(mmi) (II) 
x 4 i(yd) pw 3,4.ann 5 hit 9 syejeo5S hma ja 6 simatassu  buddhnya upa 
7 taSca % 2 tau tra isu 3 ya hi @ © SG na 8 mindratasthuso tva 10 najanisya 
SvG y 4 ho i (id)dhi tau 5 tra isu7 Séa i tra 9 vam ra. 


A comparison of these syllables with the notation syllables allotted to 
them in either T or B yields no trace of a possible correlation. Neither 
can a correlation be established with the original accents of the rks 
(udatta etc.). As in the K-R sakhd, it seems that the tonal pattern of a 
saman does not depend on the words. It seems certain that most of the 
samans came into being by adapting the rks to pre-existent “‘melodies”’. 
It is also possible that melodies were composed to certain rks only, after 
which other rks were adapted to these same melodies. This may be the 
case for instance in the UG and RG, if the melody of each of the three 
stotriyas of a stotra is the same (in the J stotras published above this 
applies to p and to 9). As the text of the first stotriya is given in the 
Purvarcika, it might be possible to find a correlation between the text and 
the melody in some ganas of the GG. In the UGand the RG the correlat- 
ion between text and melody may be expected to be closer for the first 
stotriya of each stotra than for the other two. 

For the K-R the study of the printed UG and RG editions might enable 
us to arrive at more definite conclusions. For the J there are no UG or 
RG mss. with which any results could be checked. 

In the Nambudiri J recitation the lengthening of many of the syllables 
is quire extraordinary. Among the above samans rt contains the largest 
number of long syllables and the longest syllables. The duration in 
seconds can be written under each syllable or group of syllables as follows: 


o hm| indra ju-sa sva pra vaha | o ya hi sura harihé vai ba | sii-ta sya | 
18/5/ 45 /15/ 6.5 / 7.5 / 18/3 /16.5 /4/ 
ma tirna G@ madhoh| ca kana-Scah| o mo(?) ba dayo hai|| 

{5.5 / 13.5 /9 /3/18/4/18/11 /7/ 7/ 3.5 


The kampa or wavering referred to above is of a very complicated nature. 
Mr. N. A. Jairazbhoy analysed the pattern of the first two parvans of 


81 jam (1) means: the first occurrence of jam, etc. 


84 Nambudiri Sdmaveda 


gna. u 
a ya bi va. L 


gna. i 
AVA UI I — / 
G& ya he va. L 


0 DURATION IN SECONDS. 


a ya hiva-G& b-o-t 


Fig. 6. Four records of the first two parvans of JGG. 1.1. 


Nambudiri Sdmaveda 85 


J GG 1.1 (0 gna i / a ya hi va i): (A) Dr Bake’s first recording of 1938; 
(B) Dr Bake’s second recording of 1938 (repeated by the same sAmaga); 
(C) the present writer’s recording of 1957 (tape XVIII(1)); (D) the present 
writer’s recording of 1957 (tape IV(5)f). The result of his analysis is 
given in Fig. 6, which reproduces the diagram which Mr. Jairazbhoy 
kindly placed at my disposal. In each recording specific patterns occur 
which seem to combine according to certain rules. The patterns are 
not always identical in all the records, but sometimes they are combined 
in the same way. Some deviations might be explicable by lack of breath. 
The variation of pitch in the waverings seems to be roughly constant in all 
the recordings, being about a major tone above and a minor third below. 
Mr. Jairazbhoy is analyzing this material further. 

Even where the above description does not replace the actual experience 
of listening to a Nambudiri sdman, it may show how different this chant 
is from other Indian SV chanting. It is possible that the Nambudin SV 
chanting preserves an old stage of the developement of SV chanting. 
This may be thought likely in view of the comparatively small total 
compass which is used on the one hand, and in view of some con- 
siderations, which may show that some of the J is older than the K-R 
SGkha, on the other hand. Apart from the occurrence of a K-R rca, 
mentioned earlier, which is apparently based upon a J trca** attention 
may be drawn in this connection to Caland’s observation that the se- 
quence of parvans in the J ArG (vrata, arka, dvandva) is the original one.*8 
Renou observed that the J division of the text also is less complicated 
than the K-R divisions: “c’est 14 un aspect comparativement rudi- 
mentaire, qui concorde avec la raideur caractérisant en général toute cette 
tradition”.** These traces of antiquity in the Nambudiri SV are in 
accordance with the survivals met with earlier in the Nambudiri RV and 
YV. 

For some SV concepts the Nambudiri J use technical terms of their 
own. The two most important of these are candrasdmani for the sGmans 
of the ArG and asani for the samans of the RG. The term rahasya seems 
to refer to what is called aniruktagdna in the K-R tradition.*® As re- 
marked earlier,** the sdémans recited during the sacrifices are referred to as 


83 See above, p. 72. 

88 WW. Caland, The Jaiminiya Grhya Sitra (Lahore, 1922), transl. 26, note 2. Cf. 
Renou, Ecoles védiques, 98, note 1. 

3 _L. Renou, “Les divisions dans les textes sanskrits”’, Indo-Iranian Journal, I (1957), 6. 
85 See Caland-Henry, L’ Agnistoma, s.v.; and Renou, Vocabulaire du rituel védique, s.v. 
86 See above, p. 29. 


86 Nambudiri Sdmaveda 


(yaga)stuti. This term may also refer, however, to a limited number of 
these, which was specified as twenty-nine. Amongst these the sa@man t was 
said to be the sixteenth. These numbers may refer to the atirdtra, which 
is a soma sacrifice consisting of twenty-nine stotras of which the sodasi- 
stotra is the sdman + ;°" it may be assumed that the Nambudiris performed 
or perform this sacrifice. As for other sacrificial recitation there is not 
yet much that is known, but reference may be made to the Subrahmanya- 
hvana mentioned in the catalogue.*® 

Of all the Vedic traditions of the Nambudiri Brahmans the SV tradition 
is the most feeble and faces most seriously the danger of becoming soon 
extinct. In the whole of Kerala only the following twenty manas are SV 
manas: 


37 


Mana: Grama: District: 

1. Muttatukkatji Mamannt Panjal Cérutirutti 
2. Néllikkatta Mamannia os “ 

3. Pérumangattu 5 a 

4, Todttuttil = a 

5. Korattikkara ws 

6. Mangalatteri Mukkdla P6dnnani 

7. Pakaravur ne i 

8. Miittiringotti Mannéngoti Pattambi 

9. Tirippatta Bhattatiri Kottumungu - 

10. Muntaya Kdtalmanna Katambalippuram 
11. Vatakkaficéri Enkakkatu Vatakkaiicéri 
12. Malamél Kidangutr Kottayam 
13. Muriyyottu Malamél ce fs 

14. Mulavelippuram 2. = 

15. Pattiyala a se 

16. Kallampilli 33 = 

17. Nellippula i s 

18. Valana = + 

19. Pattiyala Onanturuti Atirampula 
20. Pottiira 3 om 


See e.g. P. E. Dumont, L’ Asvamedha (Paris, 1927), 215-9; A. Hillebrandt, Ritualli- 


teratur (Strassburg, 1897), 138; Renou, Vocabulaire, s.v. atirdtra. 


XIX(1), cf. XXI1(16), below p. 96-7 and cf. above, p. 30. 


A CATALOGUE OF RECORDS OF VEDA 
RECITATION AND INDIAN MUSIC 
(Recorded in South India, April-July 1957) 


References in the margin are to sections (in Arabic numerals) of tape sides 
(in Roman numerals). Abbreviations are as in M. Bloomfield, A Vedic Con- 
cordance. HOS, 10 (Cambridge, Mass., 1906). 

For references to the Samaveda see above, page 9. 

The texts of Kathakali songs are published in: Attakkathakal, ed. K. Gopala 
Pilla, Kollam (Quilon) 1128-9 M. E. = 1953-4 A. D., to be referred to as: ed. 
Quilon. 

Brahman names, if not followed by a caste name, are of (Tamil speaking 
and smarta or Saiva) Aiyar Brahmans of Madras. The Sastris and Sarmas 
mentioned are Aiyars. The other Brahmans are (Malayalam speaking) Nam- 
budiri(pad)s of Kerala and (Tulu speaking and madhva) Sivalli Brahmans of 
South Kanara. 

If not stated otherwise, the Brahmans recite only texts of their own §akha. 

It has not been attempted to give a scientific transliteration of individual and 
geographical names. 


I (1) IsaU, Kanvasakha. 
By: G. Balasubrahmaniam (Tiruvidaccheri, Nannilam taluk, Tan- 
jore Dt.). Gotra: Maudgalya. 
Recorded: Madras 5—4—57 and 21-4—57. 
(2) RG 3.2.4. from SV 2.746-8 (B./., V, 480). 
RG 3.2.5 from SV 2.821-3 (B.1, V, 481). 
RG 3.2.6 from SV 2.209-11 (B.1., V, 481-2). 
By: G. Ramaswami Sastri (Tappalampuliur, Tanjore Dt.). Gotra: 
Srivatsa. Siitra: Drahyayana. Sakha: Ranayaniya (?). 
R: Chidambaram 7-4—57. 
(3) VSK 3.5-8; SBK I. 1. 4.23-26. 
By: G. Balasubrahmaniam (v. supra I (1)). 
R: Madras 21-4—57. 
(4) BrhUK 3.1.1-2; 4.5.1-6. 
By: id. 
R: id. 
(5) RV 10.127: jata (from 3: “‘u hasate’’). 
(6) id.: ghanam. 
By: Venkatesvaran (Tenipur, Tanjore Dt.). Gotra: Samkyti. Sitra: 
ASvalayana. 
R: Chidambaram 7-4—-57. 


A catalogue of records 


(7) TS 7.1.6.8: samhita; ghanam (from “tasyah/upotthaya/karnam”’), 
Varnakrama (from ‘“‘devah’’). 
By: M. S. Krishnamurti (Manakkal, Tiruchinrappalli Dt.). Gotra: 
Samkyti. Sitra: Apastamba. 
R: Chidambaram 7-—4—57. 

(8) UG 1.4.2 from SV 2.32-4 (B.1., DI, 89-90). 
By: Narayanan (Mahadanapuram, Tiruchirappalli Dt.). Gotra: 

Bharadvaja. Sitra: Drahyayana. 

R: Chidambaram 7-—4—-57. 
Abhogi raga (cf. e.g. B. Faddegon, Studies on the SV, 1, Amsterdam, 
1951, 48-9). Arohanam - avarohanam — raga (Sloka: ‘“‘vande 
mataram...”’). 
By: T. G. Anantasubrahmaniam (Chidambaram). 
R: Chidambaram 7-457. 


(1) TS 6.3.1.6: samhita — padam - kramam — ghanam. 
(2) TB 3.3.8.55. TA 1.32.1-3. TUA 4.11.15 (TU 4.9.19). 
By: Vedabhisanam N. Subrahmaniam Ghanapathikal (Tiruvi- 
sanallur, via Kumbakonam). Gotra: Kaundinya. 
R. Narayana Sastri (Thethiyur, Nannilam, Tanjore Dt.). 
Gotra: Kasyapa. (Pupil of the former). 
In the TA four recite occasionally. 
R: Chidambaram 8-4—57. 
(3) SV 2.99 
RG 1.1.2. from SV 2.99-100 (BJ. V, 382). 
UG 2.4.1.1-3 from SV 2.99-100 (B./., II, 238-40). 
UG 1.6.1.1 from SV 2.53-4 (B.1, II, 180). 
(4) ChU 5.24 (text differing). 
By: Gopalan (Tappalampuliur, Nagapatnam, Tanjore Dt.). 
Gotra: Harita. 
T. K. Ranganathan (Ponnur, Mayavaram, Tanjore Dt.). Gotra: 
Harita. (Pupil of the former). 
A younger pupil recites occasionally. 
R: Chidambaram 8-4—57. 
(5) TS: varnakrama (from “‘dyuh” and “‘mama4’’). 
By: Dharmajfia K. D. SundareSsvara Sastri (Kalpathi, Palghat). 
Gotra: Maudgalya. Sitra: Apastamba. 
R: Kalpathi (Palghat) 13-—5—57. 
(6) Kathakali song: Kicakavadham. Pati raga. Sloka: ‘“‘Vilocana...” 
(ed. Quilon I 91-2). 
(7) Prayer. Puranira raga. 
By: Olappamanna Vasudevan Nambudiripad. 
R: Ottappalam 8—6—57. 


(1) RV 1.164.1-52: samhita. 
(2) RV 1.164.1: padam — kramam — jata — ghanam (until 4: “kva 
svit’’). 


A catalogue of records 89 


By: N. S. Krishnamurti (Chidambaram). Gotra: Srivatsa. 
S. Vaidyanathan (Nachiar Koil, via Kumbakonam). Gotra: 
Atreya. (Pupil of the former.) 
R: Chidambaram 9-—4~—57. 
(3) ArG 104.1 (B./., I, 289-90). 
By: Anantanarayanan Srautikal (Kallidaikurichi, Tinnevely Dt.). 
Gotra: Bharadvaja. 
R: Kalpathi (Palghat) 14—5-57. 
(4) Slokas from Narayaniya: 1.1 b-d; 69.1-4 (v. ed. K. Sambaégiva 
Sastri, TSS XVIII, Trivandrum 1934, 1; 226-8). 
By: Akavoor Narayanan Nambudiripad. 
R: Trichur 11—5—57. 
(5) Kathakali song: A. Nalacaritam 4th day. Mukhari raga-cempata 
(i.e., adi) talam. ““NaiSadhanivan...”’ (ed. Quilon, I, 321). 
B. Kucelavrttam. Punnagavarali raga — cempata talam. 
*Dhatrini...”’ (ed. Quilon I 627). 
By: O. M. Vasudevan Nambudiripad. Mrdangam: M. Narayanan 
Nambudiripad. 
R: Ottappalam 15-—5-—57. 
(6) Yadukulakamboji raga: 4drohanam — avarohanam. 
Kathakali song: Kucelavrttarn. Nathanamakriya raga — campa 
talam. “‘Karunyanidhe!...°* (ed. Quilon, I, 627). 
By: M. V. Ranganathan (son of M. R. Venkitakrishna Bhagavatar). 
R: Ottappalam 7-6—57. 


(1) A. The 7 notes of the SV. B. RG 1.1.1 (BI V 381-2). C. Kharahara- 

priya raga: avarohanam, from GA to MA, apparently resembling 

the SV notes. D. The SV notes sung with the names GA — MA. E. 

The same notes sung with the names MA - PA. 

By: K. Vasudeva Sastri (originally from Adayappalam, N. Arcot 
Dt.). Gotra: Bharadvaja. Sakha: Randyaniya (2). 

R: Tanjore 11—4—57. 

Kharaharapriya raga: arohanam —- avarohanam — raga. In the 

first half only the lower notes, i.e. (?), those of the SV, are utilised. 

Abhogi raga: arohanam — avarohanam. 

By: Miss V. Ranganayaki (Tinnevelly Dt.). 

R: Madras 27-4—57. 

RV 8.99.5. 

SV 1.311. 

GG 311.1 (B.L, I, 624). 

RG 1.1.5 (BL, V, 384). 

RG 1.1.1 (B., V, 381-2). 

UG 1.4.2 (BI, Il, 89-90). 

ArG 38.1 (B.4, Il, 421). 

A. ArG 141.1 (B.1., Il, 497); cf. v. d. Hoogt, Vedic Chant, 36-37, 

B. Id.: the portion with the krusta, sung in a higher pitch. 

By: Pandita S. R. Krishnamurti Sastri (Seruvamani, Tanjore Dt.; 


(2 


www 


(3 


ws 


(4 


ww’ 


90 


A catalogue of records 


at present Sanskrit College, Mylapore, Madras). Gotra: Sri- 
vatsa. 
R: Madras 26—4—57. 
(5) a JS Ill. 4.3.-5 JUG from id. Cf. UG 1.4.2 (B.1, Ill, 89-90), 
bJS 11.5.1. JGG from id. Cf. GG 45.1 (B.L, I, 168). 
cJS 1.3.1.1. JGG from id. Cf. GG 467.13 (B.1., HU, 5-6). 
d JS 1.2.2.1.1. JRG from id. Cf. ArG 49.1 (B.L, Ul, 425-6). 
e JS 1.3.6.5. JGG from id. Cf. GG 529.1 (B.L, I, 122). 
~ f£JS_ 1.1.1.1. JGG from id. Cf. GG 1.1 (BL, I, 94). 
By: Thottam Sridharan Nambudiri (Panjal). Gotra: VasSista. 
R: Trichur 13—6—57. 
(6) Kaikottikkali (or: Thiruvathirakkali): 
A. Folk song about Krsna and Rukmini. 
B. “Kummi” song from Uttarasvayamvaram (also Kathakali). 
C. *“‘Naisadhanivan...”’ from Nalacaritam (not Kathakalli). 
R: Kirakkumpattukara (Trichur) 14-6—57. 


(1) TU 1.1-3; 9-11; 2.1.4—7; 9; 3.1.-10. 

(2) MahanU 10.20-24 (cf. MahanU (Andhra) 12.26-8. MahanU = 
TU4). By four smarta brahmins. 

R: Mylapore (Madras) 28—4—57. 

(3) Kathakali song: Kucelavrttam. Sri raga — cempata talam. “‘Ajita 
Hare!...”’ (ed. Quilon, I, 629-30). 

By: O. M. Vasudevan Nambudiripad (this song taught by Ven- 
kitakrishna Bhagavatar). Mrdangam: O. M. Kunhan Nambu- 
diripad. 

R: Ottappalam 9-5-—57. 

(4) A. Mangala Slokas (at the end of the Kathakali). Indalam raga. 
B. Kathakali song: Nalacaritam Ist day. Kantharam raga — atanta 
talam. “Siva Siva!...” (ed. Quilon, I, 271; also published and 
translated by K. Bharat lyer, Kathakali, London, 1955, 127: 1-11). 
By: O. M. Vasudevan Nambudiripad. 

R: Ottappalam 8-6—57. 

(5) Kathakali song (soOpana style): Daksayagam. Navarasam raga — 
cempata talam. “(Panka)m pdkkunna...” (ed. Quilon, I, 115). 
By: Akavoor Savitri antarjanam. 

(6) Kathakali song: Nalacaritam 3rd day. Dvijavanti raga — cempata 
talam. “Artti param...” (ed. Quilon, I, 312). 

By: Akavoor Vasudevan Nambudiripad. 

R: Chowwara 10-5—S57. 


(1) RV 1.89.1-10; 1.99.1; 10.178.1-3. 
By: Olappamanna Kunhan and Vasudevan Nambudiripad (Ot- 
tappalam). Gotra: ViSvamitra. Sitra: Kausitaka. 
R: Ottappalam 9-—5-—57. 
(2) RV 1.164.1-5: samhita. 
(3) RV 1.164.1: padam — kramam - jata. 


A catalogue of records 91 


(4) id.: ratha. 
(5) A. A specimen of the difference between Trichur and Thirunavaya 
yoga (“ghrta ’prsthah/asya”’). 

B. TS 1.5.5.2 (or: 4.2.4.3; or: 4.7.13.5). 

C. (RV) Gayatri. 

By: Matangarli Paramesvaran and (in jata and ratha) his brother 
Matangarli Raman Nambudiri (Kavalappara, Shoranur). Go- 
tra: Angirasa. Sitra: Asvalayana. 

R: Trichur 12—5—57. 

(6) KB (?) (‘‘Prajapatir vai samvatsarah...’’). 
By: Kédanat Narayanan Nambudiripad (Vellarakad, near Kun- 
namkulam). Gotra: Visvamitra. Sitra: Kausitaka. 
R: Trichur 31—5—57. 
(7) TU 1.1; 1.11; 3.10 (from “iman lokan’’...”’). 
(8) TS 6.5.6.1: cantadikkal. 

TS 5.7.26.1: samhita — padam — kott - ghosam. 
(9) TS 4.7.3.1-2 (‘camakam’’). 

TS 4.5.1 (‘Radram’’). 

(10) MahanU 11.25-6 (with insertions; cf. MahanU (Andhra) 13. 29- 

30). 

By: Chittoor Narayanan Nambudiripad and (occasionally) Kun- 
natu Patinjarédhatu Narayanan Bhattatiripad (a Rgvedi, edu- 
cated amongst Yajurvedis) (Cherpu). Gotras: Visvamitra and 
Bhargava. 

R: Cherpu 1-—6—57. 

(11) RV 1.1.1: (special kind of) padam (until: ‘“‘ehavaksati’’). id.: 
varam (kramam). 

By: Paredatt Sankaranarayanan Nambudiripad (Lakkiti). 

Gotra: Angirasa. Sitra: Asvalayana. 

R: Ottappalam 3-6—-57. 

(12) (YV) Gayatri. 

By: Madampu Narayanan Nambudiri (Vadakancheri). Gotra: 
Visvamitra. 

R: Vadakancheri 5—6—57. 

(13) (SV) Gayatri. 

By: Muthiringot Bhavathrathan Nambudiripad (Mannegod, Pat- 
tambi). Gotra: Kasyapa. 

R: Ottappalam 6(?)—6—57. 


VII-VIII_ Kathakali performance in the Visnu temple at Chowwara during 


vil 


the night of 18/19-5-—57. 

Singers: Nambisan Bhagavatar and Kottakkal Vasudevan Nedun- 
gadi. 

Cenda: Krishnan Kutti Poduval. 

Maddalam: Appu Kutti Poduval. 


(1) Melappadam: ‘“‘Manjutara...”’ (from Gita Govinda 18/19). 


92 


Vill 


IX 


XI 


A catalogue of records 


(2) Kucelavsttam. Punnagavarali, sri, maddhyamavati, anandabhai- 
ravi and balahari ragas — cempata talam (ed. Quilon, I, 627-8; 
629-31). 


(1) id. 
(2) Nalacaritam 4th day. Mukhari raga - cempata talam. Sloka: 
“Atyascaryyam,..’” (ed. Quilon, I, 321). 


(3) Id. “‘NaiSadhanivan...” (ibid.). 


(1) Kathakali song: Kucelavrttam. Anandabhairavi raga — cempata 
talam. ‘“‘Sarasanetra!...” (ed. Quilon, I, 630). 
By: O. M. Vasudevan Nambudiripad; (occasionally) O. M. Pa- 
ramesvaran Nambudiripad; mrdangam: M. N. Nambudiripad. 
R: Ottappalam 7-—6—57. 
(2) Kitiyattam. From: Subhadra Dhanamjaya by Kula Sekhara 
Perumal. 
By: P. K. Narayanan Nambiar and P. K. Govindan Kutti Nam- 
biar (Lakkiti; sons of Mani Madhava Cakkyar). 
R: Ottappalam 7-6—57. 


(1) TS 6.6.9.1: ghosam. 

(2) 1d.: kott. 

By seven Yajurvedi Nambudiris. 

(3) RV 3.27.1 (thrice); 6.16. 10-12; 3.27.13-15; 1.12.1; 3.27.4; 5.28.5; 
5.28.6 (thrice); ‘‘Agne maham asi brahmana bharata” (=TS 2.5. 
9.1): Sastram — samidheni stanzas (cf. SSS 1.4.7-14; ASS 1.2.7-8; 
27). 

By: Kapplinghat Vaidikan Divakaran Nambudiri (Yajurvedi) 
(Neruvissery, Arattupuram). Gotra: Angirasa. 
(4) TS 6.5.6.1: cantadikkal (cf. supra VI (8)). 
By: seven Yajurvedi Nambudiris. 
R: Cherpu 28-6—57. 


Concerto given by Chembai Vaidyanathan Bhagavatar at Olappa- 
mannamana, Ottappalam, on 4—6—57. 

2nd singer: Olappamanna Vasudevan Nambudiripad. 

Violin: Master Mani (V. V. Subrahmaniam, Madras). 

Mrdangam (in (1)-(6)): K. Paramesvaran Nambudiri. 

Mrdangam (in (7)-(11)): Appu Aiyar from Chunangad. 

Ganjira: Sivanandam from Palni. 

The Arabic numerals below refer to the actual order of songs during 
the performance. 


(1) Sri raga — adi talam. Telugu: ‘““Entaro Mahanubhava...” 
(Tyagaraja). 

(2) Gauda raga - migra chapu talam. Sanskrit: “Sri Mahaganapatir 
avatumam...” (Mutusvami Diksitar). 


XII 


XIII 


XIV 


A catalogue of records 93 


(3) Pantuvarali (=Kamavardhani) raga — adi talam. Telugu: “Siva 
iva Siva yana rada...” (Tyagaraja). 
(4) Malaya marutam raga — ripaka talam. Telugu: “‘Manasa yadulo...” 
(Tyagaraja). 
(5) Kanada raga — adi talam. Sanskrit: ““Akhilandesvari...” (Lalita- 
dasar, i.e., Krishna Aiyar, Madras). 
(11) Anandabhairavi, varali, nilambari and other ragas: “‘Manjiram 
Manjunathan...” (Slokas from Narayaniya). 


(6) Saveri raga — ripaka talam. Sanskrit: ‘“Sankari...” (Syama 
Sastrikal). 
(7) Todi raga — adi talam. Telugu (Tyagaraja). 
(8) Kedara gauda raga — adi talam. Telugu: “Saraguna palimpa...”’ 
(Picci, i.e. RAamnad Srinivasa Aiyankar). 
(9) Tani avartana. 
(10) Vekata raga — cempata (i.e., Adi) talam, Kathakali song: Kicaka- 
vadham. ‘“‘Sadaram ni...”’ (ed. Quilon, Il, 92). 


(1) JGG, three ganas, from JS 1.1.1.1. Cf. GG 1.1-3 (B.L, I, 94-95). 
(2) JArG, two ganas, from JS I.2.1.7.7. Cf. ArG ad 94: 1-2 (B.L, II, 
464). 
(3) JRG from JS II.4.1-2. Cf. RG 1.1.1 (B.1, V, 381-2). 
(4) JArG, two ganas, from JS I.2.3.1.6. Cf. ArG 123.1-2 (BL, I, 
485-6). 
(5) JArG from JS I.2.2.1.2. Cf. ArG 14.1 (B.1., II, 402-3). 
(6) JUG from JS HI.4.3-5: aniruktagana. Cf. UG 1.4.2 (B.1, IL, 
89-90). 
(7) JArG from JS 1.2.3.1.6. Cf. ArG 126.1 (B.1., II, 487-8). 
(8) A. JUG (2) from JS I1.1.1-2. Cf. SV 2.1178-80 (B.1., V, 335-7; cf. 
also W. Caland-V. Henry, L’agnistoma, Paris, 1906, 134). 
B. JGayatram from JS IV. 3.8. Cf. Kauthuma Gayatram (B.1., V, 
601). 
(9) JGG from JS 1.2.3.1.9. Cf. GG 321.1-2 (B.1., I, 648-9). 
(10) JArG from JS I.2.4.6.8. Cf. ArG 54.1 (B.1., IL, 433-4). 
(11) JArG, two ganas, from JS I.2.1.8.8. Cf. ArG 85.1-2 (B.1., If 460-1). 
(12) JGG from JS 1.2.1.6.7. Cf. GG 171.1 (B.L., I, 388). 
(13) JArG from JS U1.4.5. Cf. ArG 140.1 (B.1., I, 325-6). 
(14) JArG (“Riidram’”’). Cf. ArG ad 127:1 (BL, IL, 488-9). 
(15) JArG from JS I.1.3.11 and JS 11.4.6. Cf. ArG 161-162.1 (BL, II 
516-7) or ArG 176-177.1. 
By: Kodunthirappully Thiruvenkatanatha Ramasvami Sastri 
(Kodunthirappully). Gotra: Visvamitra. 
R: Kalpathi (Palghat) 1-7-57. 


(1) “YV Anobhadram”. See Bodhayana Grhya Sitra I.3.35-39 
(with reading ‘“‘sadhaya”’, cf. ed. L. Srinivasacarya, Mysore 1904, 
13). 


94 A catalogue of records 


By: Idavarippuram Vasudevan Nambudiri (Perumanam). Gotra: 
igirasa,. 
(2) RV and YV “pani grahanam”’: 
RV 10.85.36 (cf. AG 1.7.3; SG 1.13.2). 
By: Paredatt Agnitradhan Nambudiri (near Trichur). Gotra: 
Angirasa. 
ApMB 1.3.3. 
By: Madampu Narayanan Nambudiri (Vadakancheri). Gotra: 
Visvamitra. 
(3) TS 1.4.26.1: sidhdrana matra — sala matra — cantadikkal. 
By: Madampu Narayanan Nambudiri (Vadakancheri). 
R: Vadankancheri 5—6—57. 
(4) AiU intr. (=AiA 2.7). 
AiA 1.1.2 (until: “jatavat’’). 
By: Paredatt Sankaranarayanan Nambudiripad (Lakkiti). 
Gotra: Angirasa. Satra: Agvalayana. 
R: Ottappalam 7-6—57. 
(5) AiA 1.1.1; 2.3.8.1-5 (until: *“*bruvan’’), 
AiU intr. (= AiA 2.7). 
By: Mananampatta Sridharan Nambudiri (Karekkad, Shoranur), 
Gotra: Bhargava. Satra: Asvalayana. 
(6) RV 1.164.1-2a taught by Matangarli Paramesvaran Nambudiri to 
Thottam Sridharan Nambudiri. 
R: Trichur 14~6-57. 
(7) TB 3.10.1 (until: “kIrptam’”’); 3.11.1; 3.12.1. 
By: Madampu Astamurti Nambudiri (Kiraloor, Velur, near Tri- 
chur). Gotra: Visvamitra. 
R: Trichur 14-6—57, 


XV (1) GG 1.1-3; 2.1; 3.1; 175.1; 176.1; 179.1-2 (B.I., I, 94-5; 96; 97: 
394; 395; 400-1). 
By: M. Rajagopala Samaga (Matpadi, Brahmavara, near Udipi). 
Gotra: Visvamitra. Sakha: Jaiminiya (? - doubtful). 

(2) RV 6.7.16-20 (Pavamanasikta). 
By four (YV) boys (age 10-15). 

(3) RVKh 2.6.1-15 (with variant readings, also mentioned by Schefte- 
lowitz, 75-6). 
By: A. Varadaraja Ballal (Ambalpady). Gotra: Visvamitra. 
R: Ambalpady (near Udipi) 22-6-57. 

(4) TU 3.1-4 (until: “vyajanat”). 

(5S) Mahotsavam: RV — YV - SV. 
RV 8.3.23 (‘“navonavobhavati. . . dirghamayuh’”’) — kind of kra- 
mam. 
TS 3.5.11.5 (“‘yajfiena ... devah’”) — kind of kramam. 


SV: cf. GG 115.1 (B.1, I, 289) with stobhas from SrG 140.1 (B.I., 
II, 325-6), etc. 


(Sa) TS 1.8.6.2 (“tryambakam ... amrtat’’). 
RV 10.18.1 (‘param mrtyo ... viran’’). 


XVI 


XVII 


XVII 


A catalogue of records 95 


(6) RV 1.141.1-5 (Balityasikta); 10.166.1-5 (Rsabhasikta) (“‘pado” 
is left out after “sapatna me’’). 
(7) Samkirtana: a kind of bhajan in Kannada, sung before paja in the 
Krsna Matha, Udipi. 
By: Ranganna Upadhyaya Agnihotri (YV) (Manipura, near 
Udipi). Gotra: Bharadvaja. 
(8) TB 3.8.1.1; 3.12.5.4-5. 
By: K. Seshacarya M. A., Principal Udipi Sanskrit College (Kau- 
lagi; originally from Maharastra?). Gotra: Bhargava. Sitra: 
Aévalayana. ° 
(9) TS 1.1.92 — 10.1. 
By: K. Ramakrishna Bhatt (Kaudur, South Kanara). Gotra: 
Angirasa. 
R: Udipi 23-6—57. 


(1) GG 378.1 (B.L, I, 775). 
ArG 97.1 (B.1., I, 284). 
GG 358.1 (B.L, I, 730-1). 
GG 386.1 (B./., I, 794). 
GG 535.1 (B.L, II, 132). 
ArG 142.1 (B.L, II, 498). 
ArG 166.1 (B.1., IL, 349-50). 
(2) Gana or Uha of SV 2.812 (Gayatri saman). 
By: Venkataramanna Samaga (Kurkal, near Udipi). Gotra: 
Visvamitra. Sakha: Jaiminiya (? - doubtful). 
R: Ambalpady (near Udipi) 23-6—57. 


(1) TS 6.5.6.6; sadharana matra — sala matra — cantadikkal. 
(2) TU 3.1-10. 

By seven Yajurvedi Nambudiris (cf. supra X(1), (2), (4)). 
(3) RV 10.84.6 (from: ‘“‘mahadhanasya...’’) — 10.85.47. 

By: K. P. C. Narayanan Bhattatiripad. 
(4) YV marriage. Cf. ADMB 1.5.2. 

R: Cherpu 28-6—57. 


(1) JS 1.1.1.1. JGG from id. Cf. GG 1.1 (B.L, I, 94). 

(2) JS 11.3.1. JUG from id. Cf. UG 3.1.3 (B.L, UL 24 sq., esp. (6)) and 
GG 467.13 (B.1, Il, 5-6). 

(3) JS If.15.7-8. JGG from JS 1.2.2.1.2. Cf. GG 234.2 (BI, I, 482). 
JArG from id. Cf. ArG 14.1 (B.1, Il, 402-3). 

(4) JRG from JS III.15.7-8. Cf. RG 1.1.6 (B.1, V, 384—5). 

(5) JS I11.4.1-2. JRG from id. Cf. RG 1.1.1.1 (B.., V 381-2) 
and two more rathamtara ganas. 

(6) Id.: bhakara-rathamtara (see Caland-Henry, 308-9.) 

(7) JS. Iff.4.3-5. JUG from id. Cf. UG 1.4.2 (B.1, If, 89-90). 

(8) Id.: aniruktagana. 


96 
XIX 


XXI 


A catalogue of records 


(1) A. Subrahmanyahvanam (see Caland-Henry 64-66; cf. also Fadde- 
gon, Studies on the SV, 23 and P. Thieme in: Indian Culture, 4, 
1938, 203-8). Last line om “‘tryahe’’. 

B. (cf. Caland-Henry, 119 and Thieme, 204): “(Narayana Sarma 
yajate / Narayana Sarmanah putro yajate / Narayana Sarmanah 
pautro yajate / Narayana Sarmano napta yajate / Narayana 
Sarmanah pita yajate / janisyamananam pita pitamahah prapita- 
maho yajate”’. 

C. “Svasutyam agaccha maghavan deva brahmana dAgacchata- 
gacchatagacchata’”’. 

D. “Adya sutyam ... agacchatagacchatagacchata”’. 

(2) JArG from JS 11.4.8. Cf. ArG 141.1 (B.L, II, 497). 

(3) JArG (“‘Ridram’’). Cf. ArG ad 127: 1 (B.1., II, 488-9). 

(4) JS 11.4.5. JArG from id. Cf. ArG 140.1 (B.1.,, If, 325-6). 

(5) JS 11.4.7. JArG from id. 

(6) JRG from id. (beginning only). 

(7) JS 1.2.3.1.6. JArG from id. Cf. ArG 126.1 (B.1., Il, 487-8). 

(8) Kena(J)U 1.1-3 (until: “‘piirvesam’’). 


(1) JS 1.2.3.1.9. JArG from id. 
(2) JS IV.3.8. JGayatram from id. Cf. Kauthuma Gayatram (B.I, V 
601). 
(3) JS 11.6.9. JUG from id. Cf. UG 5.7.3.1 (BL, III, 584). 
(4) JS 1.3.8.8. JArG from id. Cf. ArG 100.1 (B.., Il, 469-70). 
(5) RV 10.9.4. 
TB 1.2.1.1. 
JS 1.1.3.13. JGG, two ganas, from id. Cf. GG 33.1-2 (B.L, I, 143). 
JUG from id. 
By: Muttathukattu Itti Ravi Nambudiri (Panjal). Gotra: Bhara- 
dvaja. 
(6) Kathakali song: Kicakavadham. 
By: Muttathukattu Uma Devi. 
(7) Kerala folk song. 
By: K. P. C. Anujan Bhattatiripad. 
R: Cherpu 28/29-6-57. 


(1) RV: 7 svaritas; 3 kampas. Specimina. 
By: T. K. Ramabhadra Sarma Ghanapathikal (Pudukottai). 
Gotra: Kausika. 
(2) GG 1.1-3 (B.L, 1, 94-5). 
(3) ArG ad 94: 1-2 (BL, II, 464). 
(4) ArG 49.1 (B.1., II, 425-6). 
(5) ArG 123.2 (B.1, I, 486). 
(6) ArG 51.4 (B.L, Il, 428-9). 
(7) ArG 142.1 (B.L, II, 498); ArG 126.1 (B., II, 487-8). 
(8) GG 321.1-2 (B.1., I, 648-9). 
By: M. N. Ramamurti (Marathurai, near Kumbakonam). Gotra: 
Harita. 


A catalogue of records 97 


(9) RG 1.1.1.1 (BJ. V 381): bhakara-rathamtara (see Caland-Henry, 
308-9). 

(10) RG? Cf. ArG 54.1 (B.., I, 433-4). 

(11) ArG 140.1 (B.1., U, 325-6). 

(12) ArG ad 127: 1 (B.L, II, 488-9). 

(13) Bahispavamanastotra: from SV 2.1-3; Cf. UG 1.1.1 (BJ, UL, 6 
and 265-6) (see Caland-Henry, 178 and 466-7). 
Id.: aniruktagana (see ibid., 180). 

(14) (cf. (9) supra). RG 1.1.1.2-3 (BL, V 381-2): bhakara-rathamtara. 

(15) ArG 100.1 (B.1., Il 469-70). P 

(16) Subrahmanyahvanam (cf. supra XIX (1)). Last line: “dvyahe 
dvyahe adya sutyam Agaccha...”’. 
TB 3.7.7.12-13 (see Caland-Henry, 65). 

(17) ArG 61.1 (BL, HI, 441-2). 

(18) ArG 57.1 (BL, If, 257-8). 
By: S. Laksminarayana Sastri (from Mayavaram, Tanjore Dt.). 
Gotra: Bharadvaja. 
R: Madras 9/10—7-57. 


XXII (1) GG 1.1 (BF, I, 94). 


(2) RG 1.1.1 (B.L, V, 381-2): bhakara-rathamtara. 
(3) RG 1.1.1 (BL, V, 381-2). 
(4) Gayatram (B./., V, 601). 
(5) RG 1.1.5 (BL, V, 384-5). 
By: Mullandram Ramanatha Dikshitar (Mullandram). Copy from 
a record by Sri T. K. Rajagopala Aiyar (Madras). 
(6) GG 1.1 (BL, I, 94). 
(7) UG 1.4.2 (B.L, TIT, 89-90). 
(8) ArG 54.1 (B.J., IL, 433-4). 
By: Rama Sankara Trivedi (Saurastra). Copy from a record by 
Sri T. K. Rajagopala Aiyar (Madras). 


SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Aiyar, T. K. Rajagopala, “The music of the Samaveda chants”, Journal of the Music 
Academy (Madras), 20 (1949), 144-51. 
Allen, W. S., Phonetics in ancient India (London etc., 1953). 
Apte, V. M., “‘Some problems regarding Samagana that await investigation”, Bulletin 
of the Deccan College Research Institute, 4 (1942-43), 280-95. 
—, “Sound records of Samaginas: A prospect and retrospect”, ibid., 296-314. 
—, “The ‘spoken’ word in Sanskrit literature”, ibid., 269-79. 
Bake, A. A., “The practice of Simaveda’’, Proceedings of the Tth All-India Oriental 
" Conference (Baroda, 1935), 143-55. 
—, “The music of India”, in: New Oxford history of music, 1 (London, 1957). 
Bhatta Dravida, L. S., “The mode of singing Sama Gana’’, The Poona Orientalist, 4 
1939), 1-21. 
see F., ‘Die Betonungssysteme des Rig- und Samaveda”, ZDMG, 35 (1887), 
456-72. 
Buitenen, J. A. B. van, “Aksara”, JAOS, 79 (1959), 176-87. 
Burnell, A. C. (ed.), Arseyabrahmana (Mangalore, 1876). 
— (ed.), Jaiminiya Arseyabrahmana (Mangalore, 1878). 
—, Catalogue of a collection of Sanskrit manuscripts, V: Vedic manuscripts 
(London, 1896). 
Caland, W. (ed.), Jaiminiyasamhita (Breslau, 1907). 
—, “Uber das rituelle Sitra des Baudhayana”, Abhandlungen fiir die Kunde des Mor- 
genlandes, 12 (1910), 1 sq. 
—, Das Jaiminiya Bréhmana in Auswahl (Amsterdam, 1919). 
—, The Jaiminiya Grhya Sutra (Lahore, 1922). 
—. “Mitteilungen iiber das Vadhilasitra”, Acta Orientalia, I (1923), 3-11; I (1924), 
142-67; IV (1926), 1-41; 161-213; VI (1928), 97-241. 
—. “Roberto de Nobili and the Sanskrit language and literature”, Acta Orientalia, 
3 (1925), 38-51. 
— et Henry, V., L’Agnistoma (Paris, 1906). 
Dumont, P.-E., L’Asvamedha (Paris, 1927). 
—, L’Agnihotra (Baltimore, 1939). 
Faddegon, B., Studies on the Samaveda, | (Amsterdam, 1951). 
Felber, E., Die indische Musik der vedischen und der klassischen Zeit (Wien, 1912). 
Frohnmeyer, L. J., A progressive grammar of the Malayalam language (Mangalore, 
1913). 
Sees S. J., D., Historia do Malavar, ed. J. Wicki S. J. (Minster, 1955). 
Gough, E. K., “The Nayars and the definition of marriage’”’, JRAI, 89 (1959), 23-34. 
Gray, J. E. B., “An analysis of Rgvedic recitation”, BSOAS, 22 (1959), 86-94. 
—, “An analysis of Nambudiri Rgvedic recitation and the nature of the Vedic accent”’, 
ibid., 499-530. 
Haug, M., “Uber die vedischen Accente”, ZDMG, 17 (1863), 799-802. 
Heesterman, J. C., The ancient Indian royal consecration (The Hague, 1957). 


Select bibliography 99 


Hillebrandt, A., Ritualliteratur (Strassburg, 1897). 

Hoogt, J. M. van der, The Vedic chant studied in its textual and melodic form (Wage- 
ningen, 1929). 

Innes, C. A., Malabar (Madras, 1951). 

Iyer, K. Bharatha, Kathakali (London, 1955). 

Menon, K. P. Padmanabhan, History of Kerala, { (Ernakulam, 1924). 

Ohm, T., Die Gebetsgebdrden der Volker und das Christenthum (Leiden, 1948). 

Raghavan, V., “Present position of Vedic chanting and its future”, Bulletin of the 
Institute of traditional cultures (Madras, 1957), 48-69. 

Raghu Vira (ed.), Jaiminiyasamhita (Lahore, 1938). 

Raja, K. Kunjunni, ““Narayana Bhatta of Melputtir’’, Annals of Oriental Research of 
the University of Madras, 12 (1954-55), 1-38. 

Raja, K. Ramavarma, “The Brahmins of Malabar’, JRAS, 1910, 625-39. 

Rao, M. S. A., Social change in Malabar (Bombay, 1957). 

Renou, L., Les écoles védiques et la formation du Véda (Paris, 1947) 

—, “Récitations du Véda’’, in: Sanskrit et Culture (Paris, 1950). 

—, La civilisation de Inde ancienne (Paris, 1950). 

—, Vocabulaire du rituel védique (Paris, 1954). 

—, ‘Les divisions dans les textes sanskrits”, Indo-Iranian Journal, I (1957), 1 sq. 

—, Le destin du Véda dans I’ Inde ( = Etudes védiques et Paninéennes, VI) (Paris, 1960). 

—, et Filliozat, J., L’dnde Classique, I (Paris, 1947). II (Paris, 1953). 

Rogerius, A., De open-deure tot het verborgen heydendom, ed. W. Caland (’s-Graven- 
hage, 1915). 

Samaveda (Kauthuma) ed. Th. Benfey (Leipzig, 1848). 

— ed. Satyavrata Samasrami, I-V (Bibliotheca Indica) (Calcutta, 1874-78). 

Samhita, ed. D. Santavalekar (Bombay, 1956). 

—, Grdamageyagdana-Aranyageyagana, ed. R. Narayanasvami (Bombay, 1942). 

Simon, R., Das Puspasitra mit Einleitung und Ubersetzung (Minchen, 1908). 

—, “Die Notationen der vedischen Liederbiicher”, WZKM, 27 (1913) 345-6. 

—, (ed.), Paficavidhasutra (Breslau, 1931). 

Shastri, M. Seshagiri, Notes on Aryan and Dravidian philology, 1 (Madras, 1934). 

Shastri, M. Seshagiri-Rangacharya, A descriptive catalogue of the Sanskrit manuscripts 
in the Government Oriental Manuscript-Library, I, Vedic Literature (Madras, 
1901-05). 

Staal, J. F., ‘‘Notes on some Brahmin communities of South India”, Art and Letters. 
Journal of the Royal India Pakistan and Ceylon Society, 32 (1958), 1-7. 

Thieme, P., ‘‘On the identity of Varttikakara”’, Indian Culture, 4 (1938), 189-209. 

Unni, K. Raman, ‘‘Polyandry in Malabar’, Sociological Bulletin (Bombay), 7 (1958), 
62-79, 123-33. 

Varadachari, K.C., “‘Recitation of the Vedas and other sacred texts’ Traditional 
Cultures. Proceedings of the Seminar organized by ths University of Madras under 
the auspices of UNESCO (Madras, 1956), 114. 

Varma, Siddheswar, ‘““The Vedic accent and the interpreters of Panini’, JRAS (Bom- 
bay), 26 (1950), 1-9. 

Weber, A. (ed.), Kandanukrama, in: Indische Studien, 3 (1855) 375-401. 

—, “Uber den Padapatha der Taittiriya-samhita”, ibid., 13 (1873) 1-128. 

Whitney, W. D., Oriental and linguistic studies, 11 (London, 1875). 

Zoete, B. de, The other mind. A study of dance and life in South India (London, 1953). 


INDEX OF NAMES 


Aiyar, T. K. R., 66 
Allen, W. S., 22, 58, 61 
Apte, V. M., 21, 27, 29 
Aufrecht, Th., 22 


Bake, A. A., 21, 27-29, 41, 73-5, 85 
Bhatta Dravida, L. S., 22, 65 
Bhattacharya, J. N., 18, 53 
Bhafttatiripad, M. N., 36 

Bhat{atiripad, K. P. K., 35 

Boxer, C. R., 20 

Bréhier, E., 14 

Brough, J., 16 

Buitenen, J. A. B. van, 52, 67 

Burnell, A. C., 21, 35, 64, 67, 68, 74-82 


Caland, W., 20, 33, 52, 56, 57, 63, 69-72, 
74-82, 85 

Caland, W. — Henry, V., 30,85 

Caldwell, R., 39 

Chandra, Lokesh, 75 

Christ, 13 

Coomaraswamy, A. K., 15 

Curtius, E. R., 13, 14 


Dante, 14 

Diehl, C. G, 16. 
Diksitar, M. R., 51 
Diksitar, R., 67 
Duméry, H., 12 
Dumont, P. E., 86 


Emeneau, M. B., 16 
Erman, A., 13 
Euripides, 14 


Faddegon, B., 30 
Fawcett, 31 

Felber, E., 21, 27 
Frohnmeyer, L. J., 38, 39 


al- Ghazzali, 12 
Gongalves, D., 20,39 
Gough, K., 31 


Gray, J. E. B., 23, 52, 62 
Gundert, H., 59 


Haug, M., 21, 22 
Heesterman, J. C., 40 
Hillebrandt, A., 86 

Hoogt, J. M. van der, 28, 56 


Innes, C. A., 34,40 
Iyer, K. B., 36, 37 


Jairazbhoy, N. A., 83-5 
Jowett, B., 13 


Keith, A. B., 15, 55-7 
Kerényi, K., 13 


Lavelle, L., 14 
Logan, W., 31, 35 
Liiders, H., 38 


Macdonell, A. A., 23, 24, 39, 42 


Madhva, 73 

Mahadeva, 63 

Mahidasa, 18 

Mayer, A. C., 33 

Menon, K. P. M., 31, 33-4 
Moses, 12 

Muhammad, 12 

Miiller, M., 23 


Nambudiri, A. M. N., 54 
Nambudiri, M. I. R., 74 
Nambudiri, M. N., 55 
Nambudiri, T. S., 74 
Narayana (comm. SGS), 54 
Narayana Bhatta, 35 
Narayanasvami, R., 28,75 
Nayar, S. K., 37 

Nobili, R. de, 57 
Novalis, 14 

Nyberg, H. S., 16 


Ohm, T., 41, 45 
Oldenberg, H., 54 


Index of names 


Panini, 22, 23, 30, 42, 43, 52, 61, 62 
Parvati, 38 

Patafijali, 52 

Plato, 13 

Plotinus, 14 

Poduval, R. V., 38 


Raghavan, V., 18, 19, 34, 41, 66, 67 

Raghu Vira, 73, 75, 76 

Raja, C. K.,-75 

Raja, K. K., 35 

Raja, K. R., 31 

Ramanuja, 20 

Rao, M. S. A., 31, 32 

Renou, L., 15, 17-19, 38, 39, 49-53, 57, 
63-5, 69, 71, 85, 86 

Renou, L. — Filliozat, J., 15, 17, 62 

Rogerius, A., 20 

Ross, W. D., 14 

Rhys Davids, T. W., 15 


Sabara, 50, 64 
Samkaracarya, 18 
Santavalekar, D., 47, 64, 75 
Sastri, S., 23 


Sastri, S. S. S., 11 

Seshat, 13 

Sharma, S. K., 34 
Sharvananda, Swami, 15 
Shastri, M. S., 21 

Simon, R., 28, 65, 69, 72, 82 
Siva, 37 


Thieme, P., 17, 30 
Thoth, 13 


Unni, K. R., 32 
Varma, S., 23 


Wackernagel, J., 21, 39, 42 
Weber, A., 56, 58 
Wensinck, A. J., 12 
Whitehead, A. N., 14 
Whitney, W. D., 22, 23, 55 
Wicki, J., 20 

Wilson, H. H., 19 
Winternitz, M., 15 


Zoete, B. de, 41 


101 


$34 


} 


| 


| 


ll 


LW Mangalur ( Mangalore ) 
\ 


“tM, 
Pay. annor , 
: ; . ‘ ; 
a7) 
‘ie 
“~, i 


s 
( 
& 


AML 
~ ae 
R2 
z 
r/ 
4 
MN one 
"ay, 
| ) 
» sara ldy My fe 
“iver 


win nes aati es aa w Kolikord 
(Calicur! 


| 


: 


tie 
Wry O Coimbatore 


Tirunavayi ny 
‘75 ap Oftappatsinni< 
u ig 

tae 3 OPalakkaru (Palghar) 
oe Fafijal_sKoruntirappulli 

Vafakkaficéri « ” 7 

OIrssivaperdr (Trichur) 

eCerpt Mus, 


bd fa satya 
Coustrs 


4, 


RPE PE I IIE OCIS 
PAPO LOLI DG 
ag ie eae  ee ae ee apie ets ange, 2 
Ec ac 
ete ta tain Rar eae aera aaa gis 
SSS 


Se 


Wiig 


\ HN, 
AD Ernakulam | 
a RL ICOchIN 


4) 


oon ae 


2) 


4p>3 
RN iia 
we" 


»" 
> 
< 


%, Me, 
i 


ir 
= 
vn = 
3 


gf 
s 


» 
we i 
WS 
ue ie 


\ 
s 


. 
} 


nN 


Tirunelveli 
(Tinnevelly) 


| 


? 
Oliruvanantapuram 


rivandru mi 
mM tine | ; 


Map of Kerala 


