WORLD HERITAGE LIST No 667 ANGKOR 
IDENTIFICATION 
Nomination : The archaeological parks of Angkor, 
Roluos, and Banteay Srei 
Location . . Province of Siem Reap 
State Partv . . Cambodia 
Date . . 22 September 1992 
DESCRIPTION AND HISTORY 
At the beginning of the 9th century AD the two states that 
covered the territory of modern Cambodia were united by 
Jayavarman II. who laid the foundations of the Khmer Empire, 
which was the major power in south-east Asia for nearly five 
centuries. One of the sites where his court resided for some 
years was in central Cambodia, to the north of Tonle Sap (The 
Great Lake), where half a century later Jayavarman’s son, 
Yashovarman, was to establish Yashodapura, the permanent 
capital of the Khmer Empire until the 15th century. It was later 
given the name Angkor (from the Sanskrit “nagara”, meaning 
city or capital). 
The first capital was at latter-day Roluos, itself a pre-Angkorian 
capital, Hariharalaya. This conformed with the classic form of 
Khmer capital. This comprised certain fundamental elements: a 
defensive bank and ditch with a state temple at its centre built 
in brick or stone, and a wooden palace. Leading dignitaries 
would also build temples, both inside and outside the enceinte, 
which were dedicated, like the state temple, to Hindu divinities, 
notably Shiva. There would also have been many secular 
buildings, constructed almost entirely of wood, in and around 
the enceinte. The state temple at Roluos, the Bakong, and the 
temple built in memory of the royal ancestors, Preah Ko, were 
erected around 880. Another essential feature of a Khmer 
capital, a large reservoir, was added a decade later, with in its 
centre a third temple. Lolei. 
Yashodapura was built to the north-west of Roluos, around the 
hill of Phnom Bakeng. The enclosure was square, each side 
measuring 4km, and it was equipped with a vast reservoir 
(baray) measuring 7km by 1.8km, now known as the Eastern 
Baray. The state temple was built at the summit of Phnom 
Bakeng around 900. 

Following a short period when the Khmer capital was 
transferred to Koh Ker, some 60km north-east of Angkor, the 
second capital at Angkor proper was built by Rajendravarman in 
the 960s. the state temple being situated at Pre Rup. He also- 
constructed a temple, the Eastern Mebon, on an artificial island 
in the centre of the Eastern Baray. During his reign 
Rajendravarman’s guru built the exquisite temple of Banteay 
Srei, some 25 km north-east of Angkor. 
Rajendravarman’s son. Jayavarman V, abandoned the Pre Rup 
site in favour of a new location. with its state temple at Ta Kev. 
which was consecrated around 1000. Shortly afterwards he was 
overthrown by Suryavarman I, who was responsible for the 
formidable fortifications around his Royal Palace and state 
temple, the Phimeanakas, and also for the construction of the 
great Western Baray, extending over an area of 8x2.5km. In 
1050 his successor created a new and more impressive state 
temple, the Baphuon, to the north of the temple. 
The succeeding rulers left little traces in the form of 
monumental buildings, and it was not until the accession of 
Suryavarman II in 1113 that the next great phase of building 
began. It was he who was responsible for the greatest of all 
Khmer monuments, Angkor Vat, set within an extensive 
enclosure and dedicated to Vishnu. Among other important 
monuments dating from this period are Thommanon and Chau 
Say Tevoda. 
The death of Suryavarman II around 1150 was followed by a 
period of internal strife and external pressure, culminating in 
1177 with the sack of Angkor by the Chams. The situation was 
restored by Jayavarman VII, who celebrated his military success 
by creating yet another capital at Angkor Thorn and launching an 
unprecedented building campaign. His state temple was the 
towering Bayon (dedicated to Buddha): among the many other 
monuments of Jayavarman VII’s reign are Ta Prohm, Preah 
Khan, Ta Som, and Banteay Prei. 
Such was the grandeur of this capital that none of Jayavarman 
VII’s successors saw fit to replace it. Nor were there any major 
monumental additions between his death around 1200 and the 
end of the Khmer Empire in the first half of the 15th century. 
The Angkor group, including Roluos and Banteay Srei, has to be 
treated as an ensemble which steadily grew over some three 
centuries, Masterpieces such as the Bayon and Angkor Vat have 
to be seen in their contexts and integrated with the temples and 
other constructions, particularly the great reservoirs. It is also 
essential to take into consideration that the areas of jungle 
between the brick and stone monuments constitute a reserve of 
buried archaeological remains of immense importance in the 
study and interpretation of Khmer culture. Another significant 
element of the Angkor complex is the irrigation system of the 
a .~-i-.- - -. . I.. 

region based on the great reservoirs, which provided the 
economic infrastructure for the successive Khmer capitals and 
their rulers. 
AUTHENTICITY 
The authenticitv of the monuments is not in doubt. However, 
some comments on conservation and restoration interventions 
made since 1907, when the monuments came under the 
supervision of the Ecole Francaise de 1’Extreme Orient (EFEO), 
are relevant in this context. 
In the first phase of EFEO intervention (1907-3 1), most of the 
work was confined to the erection of supporting structures for 
those buildings most at risk (in addition, of course, to the 
removal of vegetation and its subsequent control). The initial 
wooden shoring was found to offer little resistance to humidity 
and termite attack, and so it was replaced with reinforced 
concrete, which was also used for replacing missing structural 
elements such as lintels. Steel bars, plates, and bands were also 
introduced for bracing and strengthening purposes. 
A visit by Henri Marchal, then Conservateur d’Angkor. to Java in 
1931 led to the adoption of the principle of anastylosis, which 
was being employed very effectively by the Dutch authorities. 
This was extended to the complete dismantling and rebuilding 
of certain structures, combined with the internal use of 
reinforced concrete. Structural deficiencies were also made 
good using reworked original stone from the immense stock of 
such material in the area. This regime continued until the 
political upheavals of 1972. 
From then until 1989 no conservation work was carried out at 
Angkor. The monuments suffered from drastic vegetational 
invasion, and there was some damage from military operations, 
largely confined to bullet holes. In 1989 the Archaeological 
Survey of India began a three-year campaign at Angkor Vat. This 
consisted of removing vegetation (with the use of fire), 
reconstruction, and stone cleaning by abrasion with stiff bamboo 
brushes and water. Some work has also been carried out by the 
Polish conservation body PKZ, and a clearance and recording 
project on the temple of Preah Kahn sponsored by the World 
Monuments Fund and carried out under the supervision of 
British experts began in November 1992. 
These successive interventions have had no significant impact 
on the overall authenticity of the monuments that make up the 
Angkor complex. They are discreet and do not obtrude upon the 
impression gained from individual monuments. It can be stated 
with ample justification that their effect is considerably less 

substantial than those carried out on many other monuments 
that are already on the World Heritage List. 
MANAGEMENT AND PROTECTION 
Legislation and administration 
The main obstacle to the inscription of the Angkor monumental 
ensemble on the World Heritage List lies in the current political 
situation in Cambodia. The Paris Accord of 23 October 1991 has 
brought the four factions together as members of the Supreme 
National Council (SNC), with HRH Prince Norodom Sihanouk as 
Head of State. The existing authorities are being assisted at the 
present time by UNTAC (United Nations Transitional Authority 
for Cambodia) in preparing for full democratic government. 
Responsibility for monuments protection lies with the Ministry 
of Culture, of which the Conservation d’Angkor forms part. 
However, the uncertain political situation at the present time 
and the difficulties of communication between Phnom Penh and 
Siem Reap, coupled with the extreme scarcity of trained 
personnel of all grades, means that management of the Angkor 
monuments is minimal. 
The situation is exacerbated by the absence of any antiquities 
legislation in Cambodia or of a properly constituted professional 
heritage protection authority or agency. A draft Resolution on 
the Protection of Cultural Property has been prepared by 
M. Ridha Fraou, an international lawyer, at the request of 
UNESCO. This covers basic elements such as the protection. 
registration, and classification of monumental cultural property, 
trade in cultural property, chance discoveries, and the 
regulation of archaeological excavations. It also establishes the 
National Heritage Protection Authority (NHPAC) as the 
competent authority for the implementation of the Resolution. 
The Resolution is currently (November 1992) being considered 
by the SNC ; however, it is unlikely to be promulgated until early 
1993. 
Once the NHPAC has been established, it will still be at a 
disadvantage owing to the lack of Cambodian professional 
personnel. Degree courses in archaeology and architecture are 
currently being taught at the Universite des Beaux Arts in 
Phnom Penh, but the Faculty of Archaeology is grossly under- 
staffed and under-resourced. Short field training courses in 
excavation and conservation methods are provided regularly at 
Angkor by Sophia University (Tokyo), but the first group of 
graduates will inevitably be of only limited value in their initial 
years. It is essential therefore that international collaboration in 
training and field operations, as well as infrastructural projects 
(inventory, general administration, procurement, logistics) 

should be made available to the NHPAC in its early years through 
multilateral and bilateral agreements. 
Protection 
The Angkor group of monuments that form the subject of this 
nomination fall within the much wider UNDP-funded Zoning and 
Environmental Management Plan (ZEMP) for the region: there 
is also funding in this project from the governments of Hungary 
and Sweden. ZEMP is intended to produce an integrated 
environmental and site management plan for the 300 sq. km. for 
the Angkor Archaeological Park, including the formulation of 
long-term, sustainable, and environmentally sound management 
strategies for the Park’s natural resources (water, land, flora, 
fauna), the establishment of a realistic framework incorporating 
the Angkor Archaeological Park into the development strategy 
for the Siem Reap region (taking into account tourist impact, 
employment creation, and land-use zoning), and the creation of 
a legal framework and implementation guidelines. 
Pending the implementation of this project (by June 1993). no 
buffer zones have been proposed for Angkor, Roluos, or Banteay 
Srei. In the case of Angkor, the boundaries of the nominated 
World Heritage Site are essentially those of the existing 
Archaeological Park, whilst those proposed for the other two 
sites were proposed by the Cambodian representatives at the 
2nd Round Table on the Protection of the Monuments of 
Cambodia, held in Paris in September 199 1. 
These can be seen as no more than minimum areas. Ground and 
aerial survey suggest that a much larger area may be considered 
to be archaeologically sensitive. The secular buildings of the 
Khmer capitals were constructed almost entirely in wood, which 
has now disappeared. Prospection and excavation would without 
any doubt provide abundant information about town planning and 
domestic architecture of the period, which is at present almost 
entirely unknown. It would also provide much more detail about 
the economically vital and technologically innovative irrigation 
system introduced by the Khmer rulers. 
Conservation 
The monuments of the Angkor ensemble present a combination 
of conservation problems. 
The most fundamental is probably the hydrology of the area. The 
remarkable irrigation system created by the builders of the 
Angkor capital ensured hydrological stability in the whole 
region. Its falling into disuse and disrepair in the 14th century 
led to destabilization, and the subsoil was exposed to the regular 
impact of monsoon rainfall. causing violent fluctuations in the 
water table. This has seriously weakened the sandy clay subsoil, 
particularly beneath the larger monuments such as the Bayon 

and Angkor Vat. One of the most urgent tasks of the ZEMP is to 
carry out a study of the hydrology of the area and its geological 
and soil structures, with the objective of restoring something 
resembling the ancient system. 
Associated with this is the problem of water penetration of the 
structures by capillary action. This, combined with thermal 
shock and the growth of lichens and mosses, is prejudicial to 
the survival of the masonry, especially the fine-grained red 
sandstone used as the main construction material on some of 
the more important monuments, such as Angkor Vat and the 
Bayon. The result is widespread “stone disease” caused by the 
concentration of deleterious salts inside the stone following 
evaporation of rising groundwater. The laterite and Grauwacke. 
as well as brick, used elsewhere, are less severely impacted. 
It has to be added in this context that the impact of more recent 
cleaning and restoration work, especially at Angkor Vat. 
involving the use of stiff brushes with abundant water, has had an 
adverse effect on some structures, or parts of them. 
The type of construction at Angkor, using double-faced walls 
with sand filling, becomes vulnerable once facing or capping 
elements disappear by collapse or removal. Rainwater 
percolating into sand cores causes leaching and resultant 
instability, especially through blockage of the original, effective, 
drainage system. 
The structures are also affected by vegetational growth. The 
drystone construction method allows easy root penetration (and 
in manv cases this has been facilitated by structural damage or 
the use of reinforced concrete. which hinders evacuation of 
water from masonry joints). Mature trees cause severe physical 
damage (as dramatically illustrated at Ta Prohm and Preah 
Khan), both from root growth and wind-rock when the trees are 
alive and decay after death. 
Other structural problems are caused by the use of roughly cubic 
blocks of stone with inadequate bonding. This has led in places 
to the propagation of very large vertical cracks, which in their 
turn encourage water penetration, core leaching, and 
vegetational growth. 
Finally, there is damage resulting from human interventions. 
Mercifully, the monuments suffered little during the wars that 
have wracked Cambodia for decades. More damage has been 
caused inadvertently by the use of certain restoration 
techniques, especially the introduction of reinforced concrete 
and over-abrasive water cleaning. Finally, there has been serious 
damage in some places to reliefs and other decorative elements 
by looters, who have torn saleable material from its setting for 
the international art market. This attrition is continuing, owing 
to the inadequate security measures in place. 

None of these threats is insuperable, but they require the 
systematic and prioritized application of modern conservation 
techniques by a properly organized antiquities service. 
EVALUATION 
There can be no doubt regarding the eligibility of the Angkor 
complex of monuments for inclusion on the World Heritage List. 
It has, indeed, been argued, with justification, that their absence 
devalues the List. 
The importance of the Khmer religious architecture in the 
subsequent development of temple-building techniques and 
styles is great. It is to be seen all over south-east Asia, notably in 
Thailand and Laos. The Angkor monuments also graphically 
illustrate the Khmer Empire at the height of its powers. 
The complex is also of great importance in social and economic 
terms. The layouts of the successive capitals bear witness to high 
level of social order within the Khmer Empire, a factor that is 
reinforced by the evidence of the elaborate irrigation system. 
Additional comments 
One of the most serious potential threats to the Angkor 
monuments is the probability that, once the political problems 
have been resolved, tourism will become a major source of 
revenue for Cambodia. the impact of increased tourist facilities 
(hotels. restaurants. shops, an extended airport, car parks, etc) 
around the monuments could be catastrophic if they are allowed 
to encroach too closely. This factor must be given the highest 
priority in defining eventual buffer zones and the constraints 
that apply within them, so as to avoid irreparable damage to the 
setting of the monuments. Already a restaurant has been built 
into the south bank of the Eastern Baray, whilst houses are 
remorselessly creeping northwards from Siem Reap towards the 
monuments. 
Much of the conservation work carried out at Angkor since 1931 
does not accord fully with ICOMOS doctrine, as set out in the 
Venice Charter and subsequent documents. It is essential that 
any future work should rigidly eschew the extensive use of 
concrete and that stone-cleaning treatments should take into 
account the special characteristics of both the stone itself and 
the environmental conditions. A vital prerequisite in drawing up 
the conservation policy for the Angkor complex is the 
establishment of standards and approved methodologies. 
.-.-~ -_... 

ICOMOS RECOMMENDATION 
That the procedure for the inclusion of the nominated cultural 
properties on the World Heritage List be commenced. on the 
basis of criteria i, ii, iii, and iv. 
- Criterion i : The Angkor complex represents the entire range 
of Khmer art from the 9th to the 14th centuries, and includes a 
number of indisputable artistic masterpieces (eg Angkor Vat, the 
Bayon, Banteay Srei). 
- Criterion ii : The influence of Khmer art, as developed at 
Angkor. was a profound one over much of south-east Asia and 
played a fundamental role in its distinctive evolution. 
- Criterion iii : The Khmer Empire of the 9th-14th centuries 
encompassed much of south-east Asia and played a formative 
role in the political and cultural development of the region. All 
that remains of that civilization is its rich heritage of cult 
structures in brick and stone. 
- Criterion iv : Khmer architecture evolved largely from that of 
the Indian sub-continent, from which it soon became clearly 
distinct as it developed its own special characteristics, some 
independently evolved and others acquired from neighbouring 
cultural traditions. The result was a new artistic horizon in 
oriental art and architecture. 
It is further recommended that final inscription be completed 
once the Committee has been satisfied on the following points: 
a 
b. 
C. 
d. 
e. 
a comprehensive and effective monuments law is in force in 
Cambodia: 
an adequate monuments protection agency has been 
established. is properly staffed and resourced. and is 
carrying out its work competently: 
the boundaries of the World Heritage Site are reconsidered 
in the light of the results of the UNDP Zoning and 
Environmental Management project: 
meaningful buffer zones which can be effectively managed 
are defined (also in the light of the ZEMP); 
an effective mechanism has been set up to monitor and 
coordinate existing and projected international 
conservation and exploration projects in the Angkor area. 

Following the production and acceptance of the UNDP Project 
report, an ICOMOS mission should visit Cambodia to evaluate the 
extent to which the above conditions have been met at an 
appropriate time in the future. 
ICOMOS, 16 November 1992 
., 

LISTE DU PATRIMOINE MONDIAL No 667 ANGKOR 
Bien DrODOSk : Les parts archeologiques d’A.ngkor, 
Roluos et Banteay Srei 
ueu . . Province de Siem Reap 
Etat mrtie : Cambodge 
Date . . 22 septembre 1992 
DESCRIPTION ET HISTOIRE 
Au debut de 9eme siecle, les deux etats qui constituent le 
Cambodge actuel furent reunis par Jayavarman II qui posait ainsi 
les fondations de 1’Empire Khmer qui fut pendant pres de cinq 
siecles le plus puissant pouvoir de I’Asie du Sud-Est. Pendant 
quelques annees, la Cour a reside au centre du Cambodge, au 
nord du Tonle Sap (Le grand Lac), la ou un demi-siecle plus 
tar-d, le fils de Yasovarman fit edifier Yasodhapura, qui restera la 
capitale permanente de 1’Empire Khmer jusqu’au 15eme siecle. 
Plus tard, cette ville recevra le nom d’Angkor (du Sanskrit 
“nagara” qui signifie capitale). 
La premiere capitale fut Hariharalaya, a la place actuelle de 
Roluos. Cette premiere capitale respectait la forme classique des 
capitales khmeres; elle comprenait certains elements 
fondamentaux dont une muraille defensive avec un fosse et en 
son centre le temple de l’etat construit en brique ou en Pierre 
et le palais construit en bois. Les grands dignitaires de 1’Empire 
se faisaient egalement construire, aussi bien a l’interieur qu’a 
l’exterieur de l’enceinte, des temples dedies aux divinites 
hindous en particulier ti Shiva. 
On y trouvait aussi un grand nombre de constructions ldiques 
presque toutes en bois et elles aussi soit a l’interieur soit a 
l’exterieur de l’enceinte. “Bakong”, temple de 1’Etat a Roluos et 
“Preah Ko”, temple a la memoire des ancetres royaux furent 
edifies vers 880. Le grand reservoir, autre trait caracteristique 
des capitales khmeres, fut ajoute une dicennie plus tard avec en 
son centre un troisieme temple d’etat “Lolei”. 
Yasodhapura a ete construit au nord-ouest de Roluos sur la 
colline de Phnom Bakang. L’enceinte y est carree, chaque tote 
mesure 4 kilometres, on y trouve egalement un reservoir qui 
mesure 7 kilometres, sur 1,8 kilometre, il est maintenant 
denomme le “Barai oriental”. Le temple de 1’Etat a et6 erige au 
sommet de la colline de Phnom Bakang vers l’an 900. 

Apres une courte periode pendant laquelle la capitale khmere 
fut transferee a Koh Ker a quelques kilometres au Nord-Est 
d’Angkor, la seconde capitale d’Angkor meme a ete construite 
pendant les annees 960 et suivantes par Rajendravarman, le 
temple d’Etat &ant a Pre Rup. Cet empereur fit egalement 
realiser un autre temple le “Nebon oriental” situe sur une ile 
artificielle au centre du “Barai oriental”. Le gourou de 
Rajendravarman a fait construire le charmant temple de Banteay 
Srei a environ 25 kilometres au Nord-Est d’Angkor. 
Le fils de Rajendravarman, Jayavarman V delaissa le site de Pre 
Rup pour une autre dont le temple d’Etat edifie a Ka Tev fut 
consacre aux environs l’an 1000. Peu apres, Jayavarman fut 
renverse par Suryavarman I a qui l’on doit les remarquables 
fortifications autour du Palais Royal et du temple de l’etat “le 
Phimeanakas” ainsi que la construction du grand “Batai 
occidental” dont les dimensions atteignent 8 kilometres sur 2,5 
kilometres. En 1050, son successeur fit edifier un nouveau 
temple d’etat encore plus impressionnant le “Baphuon”, au nord 
du precedent. 
Les dirigeants suivants laisserent peu de traces de grands 
monuments et ce n’est qu’avec Suryavarman II, en 1113, que 
recommenCa une autre grande periode de construction. Ce 
souverain est a I’origine de toutes les plus imposantes 
constructions khmeres - Angkor Vat, sit& a l’interieur d’une 
grande enceinte et dedie a Vishnu, Thomannon et Chau Say 
Tevoda. 
La mort de Suryavarman II aux environs de 1150 fut suivie d’une 
periode de frictions internes et de pressions externes qui 
culminerent en 1177 avec la destruction d’Angkor par les 
Chama. La situation fut redressee par Jayavarman VII qui celebra 
ses succes militaires en creant une autre capitale Angkor Thorn 
et en initiant une politique de constructions d’une ampleur 
encore jamais atteinte. Son temple d’etat est la tour “Bayon” 
dediee a Bouddha et parmi les autres monuments du regne de 
Jayavarman VII on peut titer Ta prohm, Pregh Khan. Ta Som et 
Banteay Srei. 
La magnifiscence de cette capitale etait telle qu’aucun des 
successeurs de Jayavarman VII ne jugea bon de la remplacer. 
Aucun non plus ne decida, entre la mort de Jayavarman vers l’an 
1200 et la fin de 1’Empire khmer dans la premiere moitie du 
quinzieme siecle, d’ajouter le moindre grand monument a 
l’ensemble existant. 
Le groupe d’Angkor qui comprend Roluos et Banteay Srei doit 
etre considere comme un tout dont la construction s’etale sur 
quelque trois siecles. Des chefs d’ceuvres tels le “Bayon” et 
“Angkor Vat” doivent etre vus dans leur contexte et associes aux 
temples et aux autres constructions en particulier le grand 
reservoir. 11 est egalement essentiel de prendre en 

consideration que cette region de jungle entre les divers 
monuments de briques et de pierres constitue une reserve de 
tresors archeologiques d’une extreme importance pour l’etude 
et l’interpretation de la culture khmere. Le systeme d’irrigation 
de toute la region, qui fonctionnait a partir des grands 
reservoirs et sur lequel reposait toute l’infrastructure 
economique des diverses capitales khmeres est un autre 
element qui confere une qualite exceptionnelle a l’ensemble 
d’Angkor. 
AUTHENTICITE 
L’authenticite des monuments est indiscutable. Cependant, 
quelques commentaires sont necessaires quant a certaines 
mesures de restauration et de conservation qui ont ete 
effectuees depuis 1907, annee ou I’Ecole FranCaise de 1’Extreme 
Orient (EFEO) a ete chargee de la surveillance de ces 
monuments. 
Au tours de la premiere phase de l’intervention de l’EFE0, la 
majeure partie des travaux a consiste a mettre en place une 
structure de soutient sur les elements les plus menaces (en plus 
du travail de destruction de la vegetation et de prise en charge 
des consequences de cette operation). L’etanconnage initial en 
bois resista peu a l’humidite et aux termites ; il fut done 
remplace par un etayage de beton arme ; ce materiau fut 
egalement utilise pour remplacer certains elements manquants 
comme par exemples des linteaux. Des barres, des plaques et 
des bandes d’acier furent mises en place comme renfort. 
Une visite a Java en 1933 du Conservateur d’Angkor, Henri 
Marchal, conduisit a l’adoption du principe d’anaslylosie ??? qui 
etait tres souvent utilise par les hollandais. Ce principe a ete 
applique pour le demontage suivi dune reconstruction totale de 
certaines structures associee a l’uilisation interne de beton 
arm& Les deficiences structurelles furent egalement resolues en 
remplacant certains blocs de Pierre d’origine abimes par 
d’autres choisis dans l’immense stock trouve sur place. Ces 
mesures de restauration se poursuivirent jusqu’aux soulevements 
politiques de 1972. 
Entre 1972 et 1989, aucun travail de conservation n’a et realise 
a Angkor. Les monuments se trouverent a nouveau abimes en 
premier lieu par une vegetation envahissante et aussi par 
quelques traces de balles provenant des operations militaires. 
En 1989. 1’Enquete Archeologique Indienne commenca une 
campagne de trois ans a Angkor Vat. Les premieres 
interventions vi&rent a degager la vegetation (en ayant recours 
au feu), puis a reparer et a nettoyer les pierres avec des brosses 
en bambou rigide et de l’eau. Quelques travaux ont egalement ete 
entrepris par le PKZ, organisme polonais de conservation des 

monuments. En outre, un programme de nettoyage et de 
repertoriage du temple de Preah Kahn soutenu par le Fonds 
Mondial des Monuments et supervise par des specialistes 
britanniques a commence en novembre 1992. 
Les interventions successives n’ont pas eu d’incidence sur 
l’authenticite generale des monuments qui constituent 
l’ensemble d’Angkor. Elles sont disc&es et ne perturbent en 
rien l’impression produite par les monuments pris 
individuellement. 11 est possible de prouver que ces 
interventions sont infiniment moins genantes que celles qui ont 
ete effectuees sur certains momuments deja inscrits a la Liste 
du Patrimoine Mondial. 
GESTION ET PROTECTION 
Juridiction et administration 
L’obstacle majeur a l’inscription de l’ensemble d’Angkor a la 
Liste du Patrimoine Mondial n’est autre que la situation politique 
actuelle du Cambodge. Les Accords de Paris du 23 octobre 1991 
ont conduit les quatre factions a devenir membres du Conseil 
National Superieur (SNC) aux cot& du Prince Norodom 
Sihanouk a la We de 1’Etat. Les autorites actuellement au 
pouvoir sont assistees de 1’UNTAC (Autorite des Nations Unies 
pour la Transition au Cambodge) avec pour mission de preparer 
la mise en place d’un gouvemement totalement democratique. 
La protection des monuments (dont Angkor) est confide a la 
responsabilite du Ministere de la Culture. Cependant, la situation 
politique encore incertaine actuellement et les difficult& de 
communication entre Phnom Penh et Siem Reap auxquelles 
viennent s’ajouter le trop petit nombre de personnels 
correctement form& a tous les echelons, explique la gestion 
minimaliste de l’ensemble d’Angkor. 
La situation est exacerbee par l’absence totale de legislation pour 
la protection des antiquites au Cambodge ou d’un organisme ou 
agence adequatement constitue et responsable de la protection 
du Patrimoine. Un projet de Resolution pour la protection de la 
propriete culturelle a ete prepare par un avocat international, M. 
Ridha Fraou, a la demande de 1’UNESCO. Ce projet couvre les 
points fondamentaux tels que la protection, l’enregistrement, la 
classification de la propriete des monuments culturels, le 
commerce des biens culturels, les decouvertes dues au hasard et 
les regles relatives aux fouilles archeologiques. 11 prevoit 
egalement la creation du “National Heritage Protection Agency” 
(NHPAC - agence pour la protection du patrimoine national) 
entite responsable et competente pour la mise en application de 
ces resolutions. Les resolutions sont en ce moment (nov 1992) 

etudiees par le SNC mais elles ne devraient pas etre adoptees et 
promulguees avant le debut de1993. 
Une fois la NHPAC creee. cette agence se trouvera dans une 
situation difficile en raison du manque de personnels 
competents. Des tours de formation en architecture et 
archeologic sont actuellement dispenses a 1’Universit.e des 
Beaux-Arts de Phnom Penh mais la Faculte d’Archeologie 
manque cruellement de professeurs et de fonds. De breves 
formations de terrain en techniques de fouilles et de 
conservation sont offertes sur place a Angkor par 1’Universite 
Sophia de Tokyo, mais le premier groupe de dipldmes sera 
dune valeur limitee au moins pendant les premieres annees. 11 
est indispensable qu’aux termes d’accords multilateraux ou 
bilateraux, des personnels specialises dans les operations de 
terrain et la formation ainsi que des projets d’infrastructure 
(inventaire, administration g&r&ale, logistique) soient mis a la 
disposition du NHPAC . 
Protection 
L’ensemble d’Angkor, objet de cette nomination fait partie d’un 
programme beaucoup plus vaste le “Zoning and Environmental 
Management Plan” (ZEMP) finance par 1’UNDP et qui concerne 
toute la region. Les gouvernements de Hongrie et de Suede ont 
egalement propose de participer au financement de ce 
programme de protection. Le ZEMP a pour mission d’elaborer 
un plan global de gestion du site et de son environnement 
portant sur les 300 km2 du Part Archeologique d’Angkor. Ce 
plan global incluera une strategie de gestion a long terme des 
ressources naturelles du Part (eau, terres, flore, faune) qui soit 
raisonnable et acceptable du point de vue de l’environnement. 11 
devra prevoir aussi la mise en place dune structure realiste 
destinee a integrer le Part Archeologique d’Angkor dans une 
politique de developpement de la region de Siem Reap (en 
tenant compte de l’impact touristique, de la creation d’emplois. 
et du zonage des terres) et l’elaboration d’un cadre juridique 
ainsi que les lignes directrices necessaires a sa mise en oeuvre. 
En attendant que ce plan soit termine (d’ici a juin1993), aucune 
zone tampon n’a ete proposee pour Angkor, Roluos et Banteay 
Srei. Pour ce qui est d’Angkor, les limites du site, telles qu’elles 
sont precisees pour son eventuelle inscription a la Liste du 
Patrimoine Mondial, sont les memes que celles du Part 
Archeologique. Celles des deux autres sites ont ete proposees 
par les representants cambodgiens lors de la 2eme Table Ronde 
sur la Protection des Monuments du Cambodge qui s’est tenue & 
Paris en septembre 199 1. 
Ces limites doivent etre considerees comme minimales. Des 
etudes aeriennes et au sol font apparaitre qu’une surface bien 
superieure est riche au plan archeologique Les constructions 
non-religieuses des capitales kmeres sont presque toutes en 

bois et ont, de ce fait, presque totalement disparues. 
Prospection et fouilles devraient apporter des informations sur 
l’urbanisme et l’architecture domestique d’une periode dont on 
ne sait a peu pres r-fen ; elles devraient egalement fournir plus 
de renseignements sur le systeme d’irrigation a la fois vital au 
plan economique et innovant au plan technologique que les 
dirigeants Kmers avaient mis en place. 
Consemation 
Pour ce qui est de la conservation, les monuments de l’ensemble 
d’Angkor revelent une serie de problemes. 
Le premier probleme et sans doute le plus crucial concerne 
l’hydrologie de la region. Le remarquable systeme d’irrigation 
tree par les constructeurs de la capitale d’Angkor a permis la 
stabilite hydrologique de toute la region. L’arret de son 
utilisation et de son entretien a partir du XIVeme siecle a 
conduit a un profond dereglement : le sous-sol expose de facon 
recurrente B la mousson a genere des violentes fluctuations des 
nappes aquatiques qui a leur tour ont provoque un 
affaiblissement des couches sablo-argileuses en particulier sous 
les batiments les plus grands tels le Bayon et Angkor Vat. L’une 
des taches les plus urgentes consiste a realiser une etude de 
l’hydrologie, de la geologie et des sols de la region dans le but 
de reconstituer un systeme proche de celui mis en place par les 
souverains Kmers. 
En relation directe avec le probleme precedent, la penetration 
par capillarite de l’eau dans les monuments. Cette penetration, 
associee aux variations thermiques et a l’action des lichens et 
mousses mettent en danger la survie des elements de 
maconnerie en particulier ceux en granit fin rose, principal 
materiau de construction des plus importants batiments comme 
Angkor Vat et le Bayon. La “maladie de la Pierre”, qui resulte de 
la concentration de sels deleteres a l’interieur des pierres apres 
evaporation de l’humidite degagee par le sol, est largement 
repandue. La laterite, le “Grauwacks” et meme la brique utilises 
a d’autres endroits ont moins souffert. 
De plus, les recents nettoyages et travaux de restauration en 
particulier a Angkor Vat realises au moyen de brosses dures et 
d’eau en grande quantite ont eu un effet desastreux sur certaines 
structures. 
Le type de constructions que l’on trouve a Angkor avec des murs 
double face et un garnissage de sable deviennent tres 
vulnerables quand le revetement protecteur a disparu ou qu’il 
est decape. Les eaux des pluie pen&rent au cceur de la Pierre 
_- - .- -- 

avec pour resultat d’entraver le systeme d’ecoulement prevu ti 
l’origine et done de provoquer une grande instabilite. 
Les structures sont egalement menacees par la croissance de la 
vegetation. La methode de construction a pierres seches facilite 
la penetration des racines (phenomene rendu encore plus facile 
et done frequent par les eboulements et aussi par les 
reparations effectuees en beton arme qui rend plus difficile 
l’evacuation de l’eau au niveau des joints de maconnerie). Les 
grands arbres - croissance de leurs racines ou mouvement de 
leurs branches sous l’effet du vent quand ils sont vivants ou 
encore pourrissement quand ils sont morts - sont responsables 
de graves degats physiques (de nombreux exemples existent a 
Ta prohm et Preah Khan). 
D’autres problemes structurels resultent de l’emploi de blocs de 
Pierre cubiques sans jointement. Ainsi, de nombreuses fissures 
verticales sont apparues laissant la voie aux infiltrations d’eau 
jusque dans le coeur de la Pierre et la croissance vegetale y est 
done facilitee. 
Pour finir, on trouve les dommages occasionnes par les 
interventions humaines. Fort heureusement, les monuments ont 
peu souffert pendant les guerres qui ont ruine le Cambodge 
pendant plusieurs decennies. En revanche les travaux de 
restauration faisant usage de techniques malencontreuses sont a 
l’origine de degats bien plus importants : utilisation de beton 
arm& nettoyages a l’eau trop abrasifs. Certains bas-reliefs et 
autres elements decoratifs ont ete tres abimes par les pillards 
qui ont arraches ce qui pouvait etre vendu sur les marches 
intemationaux des objets d’art. Dans la mesure ou il n’existe pas 
de mesures de surveillance adequates, le pillage continue. 
Aucune des menaces qui pesent sur le site n’est insurmontable 
mais toutes exigent la mise en ceuvre systematique et prioritaire 
de techniques de conservation modernes par une entite 
correctement organisee au service des antiquites. 
EVALUATION 
caractCristiques 
11 n’y a aucun doute quant a l’eligibilite de l’ensemble d’Angkor 
pour son inscription a la Liste du Patrimoine Mondial. 11 a meme 
ete avance que l’absence d’A.ngkor sur la Liste du Patrimoine 
Mondial remet en question la valeur de cette liste. 

L’influence de l’architecture religieuse km&-e sur les techniques 
et les styles de construction des temples est considerable. On la 
percoit dans toute 1’Asie du Sud-Est surtout en Thdilande et au 
Laos. En outre, les monuments d’Angkor donnent une 
illustration de la grandeur de 1’Empire Kmer au sommet de sa 
gloire. 
Cet ensemble a aussi une grande valeur au plan social et 
economique. La configuration des capitales successives temoigne 
du haut niveau d’organisation sociale a l’interieur de 1’Empire 
Kmer, caracteristique que le systeme d’irrigation hautement 
elabore met aussi en evidence. 
Observations supplCmentaires 
Une fois les difficult& politiques qui secouent le Cambodge 
auront ete resolues, on peut craindre que le tourisme et les 
revenus consequents qu’on en attend ne constituent une tres 
grave menace pour les monuments qui composent Angkor. 
L’augmentation du nombre des installations a vocation 
touristique (hotels, restaurants, boutiques, aeroports, parts de 
station-nement de voitures . . .) a proximite des monuments 
pourrait avoir un impact catastrophique si aucune 
reglementation ne les maintient pas a une distance raisonnable 
des sites visit&. Ce risque doit etre considere en priorite pour 
eviter une degradation irreparable des sites ; des zones tampon 
et les reglements qui y seront appliques doivent etre definis. 
Deja, un restaurant a ete construit sur la rive sud du “Barai- 
oriental” et les habitations gagnent vers le nord done vers les 
monuments depuis Siem Reap. 
La majeure partie des travaux de conservation entrepris a 
Angkor depuis 1931 ne s’inscrit pas dans la philosophie de 
1’ICOMOS telle qu’elle a ete definie dans la Charte de Venise et 
dans les documents qui s’y rapportent. 11 est essentiel qu’a 
l’avenir, l’utilisation intensive du beton soit proscrite de tous les 
programmes de travaux et que les traitements de nettoyage des 
pierres prennent en compte les caracteristiques non seulement 
de la Pierre mais aussi des conditions ambiantes. 11 est 
egalement fondamental d’adopter des normes et des methodes 
ayant fait leur preuves et de les integrer a une politique de 
conservation de l’ensemble d’Angkor. 
-’ ._ 

RECOMMANDATIONS DE L’ICOMOS 
Nous recommandons que la procedure d’inscription de 
l’ensemble d’Angkor sur la Liste du Patrimoine Mondial repose 
sur les criteres i, ii, iii et iv. 
- Critbre i : L’ensemble d’Angkor presente l’art Kmer depuis ses 
debuts au 9 eme siecle jusqu’a son terme au 14eme siecle avec 
en particulier un grand nombre de chefs-d’oeuvre artistiques - 
Angkor Vat, le Bayon, Banteay Srei - 
- CritCre ii : L’influence de l’art Kmer tel qu’on le voit a Angkor 
est perceptible dans la plus grande partie du 1’Asie Sud-Est ; on 
voit le role fondamental qu’il a joue dans l’evolution particuliere 
de cette region. 
- CritCre iii : L’Empire Kmer s’est etendu entre le 9eme et le 
14eme siecle sur la majeure partie de 1’Asie du Sud-Est ; il a eu 
une influence tres formatrice sur l’evolution politique et 
culturelle de ces regions. Cette civilisation nous a laisse un 
grand nombre de constructions religieuses de briques et 
pierres. 
- CritCre iv : L’architecture Km&e a evolue a partir de celle du 
sous-continent indien dont elle s’est rapidement demarquee au 
fur et a mesure qu’elle developpait ses propres caracteristiques 
dont certaines ont muri de facon libre et d’autres en s’inspirant 
des traditions culturelles voisines. il en est resulte un horizon 
artistique totalement nouveau dans les domaines de l’art et de 
l’architecture orientaux. 
Nous recommandons enfin qu’il soit procede a l’inscription 
finale du site d’Angkor a la Liste du Patrimoine Mondial apres 
que le Comite ait obtenu satisfaction sur les points suivants : 
a Adoption au Cambodge d’une loi g&r&ale pour la protection 
des monuments ; 
b. mise en place d’une agence pour la protection des 
monuments disposant de personnels competents et de 
moyens suffisants et ayant commence a agir effcacement ; 
C. reexamen des limites du site du Patrimoine Mondial a la 
lumiere des resultats de l’etude du ZEMP de I’UNDP ; 
d. definition (egalement a la lumiere de l’etude du ZEMP) de 
zones tampon gerables de facon positive ; 

e. mise en place d’un systi3me efficace pour la surveillance et 
la coordination des divers projets internationaux existants 
et & venir pour la conservation et la prospection dans la 
region d’hgkor. 
Aprh elaboration et acceptation du projet de rapport de 
l’UNDP, une mission de 1’ICOMOS se rendra au Cambodge pour 
proceder, B une date future appropriee, & une Etvaluation du 
degre de rhlisation des conditions ci-dessus. 
ICOMOS, 16 novembre 1992 