Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2018  with  funding  from 
University  of  Toronto 


https://archive.org/details/vedicgrammarOOmacd 


T«*  V 


Grundriss  der  Indo-Arischen  Philologie  und  Altertumskunde 


(ENCYCLOPEDIA  OF  INDO -ARYAN  RESEARCH) 


i.  General  Scope  of  this  Work. — Yedic  grammar  has  never  till  now 
been  treated  separately  and  as  a  whole.  Both  in  India  and  in  the  West 
the  subject  has  hitherto  been  handled  only  in  connexion  with  Classical 
Sanskrit.  Hundreds  of  Panini’s  Sutras  deal  with  the  language  of  the  Vedas; 
but  the  account  they  give  of  it  is  anything  but  comprehensive.  In  the  West, 
Benfey  was  the  first,  more  than  half  a  century  ago  (1852),  to  combine  a 
description  of  the  linguistic  peculiarities  of  the  Vedas  with  an  account  of  the 
traditional  matter  of  Panini;  but  as  Vedic  studies  were  at  that  time  still  in 
their  infancy,  only  the  Samaveda1  and  about  one-fourth  of  the  Rgveda2 
having  as  yet  been  published,  the  Vedic  material  utilized  in  his  large  grammar3 
was  necessarily  very  limited  in  extent.  In  Whitney’s  work1 5  the  language  of 
the  Vedas,  which  is  much  more  fully  represented,  is  treated  in  its  historical 
connexion  with  Classical  Sanskrit.  Partly  for  this  reason,  his  work  does  not 
supply  a  definite  account  of  the  grammar  of  the  Samhitas  as  Compared 
with  that  of  the  later  phases  of  the  language;  thus  what  is  peculiar  to  the 
Brahmanas  or  to  a  particular  Samhita  is  often  not  apparent.  Professor 
Wackernagel’s  grammar3,  which  when  finished  will  present  the  ancient  language 
of  India  more  completely  than  any  other  work  on  the  subject,  deals  with 
the  combined  Vedic  and  post -Vedic  material  from  the  point  of  view  of 
Comparative  Philology.  Different  sections  or  individual  points  of  Vedic 
grammar  have  been  the  subject  of  separately  published  treatises  or  of  special 
articles  scattered  in  various  Oriental  and  philological  journals  or  other  works 
of  a  miscellaneous  character.  It  is  advisable  that  all  this  as  well  as  additional 
material6  should  now  be  brought  together  so  as  to  afford  a  general  survey 
of  the  subject. 

In  view  of  the  prominent  position  occupied  by  the  Indo-Aryan  branch 
in  Comparative  Philology  and  of  the  fact  that  the  language  of  the  Vedas 


1  Edited  by  Benfey,  with  German  trans¬ 
lation  and  glossary,  Leipzig  1848. 

2  Vol.  1  edited  by  Max  Muller,  London 
1849,  vol.  VI  1875;  2nd  ed.  London  1890 — 
92;  edited  by  Aufrecht,  Berlin  1861  and 
1863  (vols.  VI  and  VII  of  Indische  Studien), 
2ad  ed.  Bonn  1877. 

3  Vollstandige  Grammatik  der  Sanskrit- 
sprache,  Leipzig  1852. 

4  A  Sanskrit  Grammar,  Leipzig  1879;  3rd 
ed.  1896. 

5  Altindische  Grammatik  von  Jacob 

Indo-arische  Philologie.  I.  4. 


Wackernagel,  I.  Lautlehre,  Gottingen  1896; 
II,  I.  Einleitung  zur  Wortlehre.  Nominal- 
komposition,  1905.  (Cp.  Bartholomae,  Bei- 
trage  zur  altindischen  Grammatik,  ZDMG. 
5°,  674-735).  . 

6  Such  additional  material  is  supplied  in 
this  work  from  collections  made  for  me  by 
my  pupils  Prof.  H.  C.  Norman  (Benares) 
from  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  and  Mr.  A.  B. 
Keith  from  the  Taittirlya  Samhita,  the 
Mantras  in  the  Aitareya  Aranyaka,  and  the 
lvhilas  of  the  Rgveda. 


1 


2 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


represents  the  foundation  of  the  subsequent  strata,  it  seems  important  for  the 
sake  of  clearness  and  definiteness  that  the  earliest  phase  should  be  treated  as 
a  whole  independently  of  later  developments.  The  present  work  will  therefore 
deal  with  the  grammar  of  only  the  Mantra  portions  of  the  Samhitas;  that  is 
to  say,  it  will  embrace  the  whole  of  the  Rgveda,  the  Atharvaveda l,  the 
Samaveda2,  and  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita3,  but  will  exclude  those  portions  of 
the  Taittirlya  Samhita4,  the  MaitrayanI  Samhita5  and  the  Kathaka6  which 
have  the  character  of  Brahmanas7.  Reference  will  also  be  made  to  Mantra 
material  not  found  in  the  canonical  texts  of  the  Samhitas,  that  is,  to  the 
Khilas8  of  the  Rgveda  and  the  occasional  Mantras  of  this  type  occurring 
in  the  Brahmanas9  and  Sutras.  As  the  linguistic  material  of  the  Rgveda  is 
more  ancient,  extensive  and  authentic  than  that  of  the  other  Samhitas,  all 
of  which  borrow  largely  from  that  text10,  it  is  taken  as  the  basis  of  the 
present  work.  Hence  all  forms  stated  without  comment  belong  to  the  Rgveda, 
though  they  may  occur  in  other  Samhitas  as  well.  From  the  other  Vedas, 
such  matter  only  is  added  as  occurs  in  their  independent  parts  or,  if  borrowed 
from  the  Rgveda,  appears  in  an  altered  form,  the  source  being  in  such  cases 
indicated  by  an  abbreviation  in  parentheses  (as  VS.,  TS.,  AV.).  The  addition 
of  the  abbreviation  ‘RV.’  means  that  the  form  in  question  occurs  in  the 
Rgveda  only. 

2.  Verbal  Authenticity  of  the  Texts11. — In  dealing  with  the  linguistic 
material  of  the  Samhitas  the  question  of  the  authenticity  of  the  forms  which 
it  embraces  is  of  great  importance.  What  guarantees  then  do  we  possess 
that  the  original  form  of  the  texts  handed  down  by  tradition  has  not  in  the 
course  of  ages  undergone  modification  and  modernization  in  respect  to 
vocabulary,  phonetics,  and  grammatical  forms?  This  question  must  first  be 
applied  to  the  Rgveda,  the  oldest  of  the  Samhitas,  which  forms  the  very 
foundation  of  Vedic  tradition.  The  evidence  of  the  SarvanukramanI12,  which 
states  the  number  of  stanzas,  the  metre,  and  the  deity  for  every  hymn  of 
the  RV.,  shows  that  in  general  extent,  form,  and  matter,  this  Samhita  was 
in  the  Sutra  period  the  same  as  now.  The  Pratisakhya 13  demonstrates  that 
its  phonetic  character  was  also  the  same.  Yaska’s  commentary 14  proves  that, 


1  Edited  (Samhita  text  only)  by  Roth  and 
Whitney,  Berlin  1856  (Index  Verborum  in 
JAOS.,  vol.  xn);  translated  by  Whitney 
'Books  I — xix),  with  a  critical  and  exegetical 
commentary,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  1905  (vols. 
vii  and  vm  of  the  Harvard  Oriental  Series); 
also  edited  by  Shankar  P.  Pandit  (both 
Samhita  and  Pada  text),  Bombay  1895  —  99- 

2  Besides  Benfey’s  edition  also  that  of 
Satywvrata  Sam  a  ami,  5  vols.,  Calcutta 
1874  —  78  (Bibliotheca  Indica). 

3  Edited  by  Weber,  with  the  commentary 
of  Mahldhara,  London  and  Berlin  1852. 

4  Edited  by  Weber  (vols.  xi  and  xii  of 
Indische  Studien),  Berlin  1871 — 72. 

5  Edited  by  L.  v.  Schroeder,  Leipzig 
1881—86. 

6  Edited  by  L.  v.  Schroeder,  vol.  I 
(books  I — xvm),  Leipzig  1900. 

7  Cp.  Oldenberg,  Die  Plymnen  des  Rigveda, 
Band  1  (Prolegomena),  Berlin  18S8,  p.  294 ff. 

8  See  Aufrecht,  Die  Hymnen  des  Rigveda2, 

vol.  11,  672— 88;  Max  Muller,  Rgveda2, 

vol.  IV,  519— 41 ;  cp.  Macdonell,  Brhad- 

devata,  vol.  I,  introduction,  §  [5  (Cambridge, 


Mass.,  1904);  Scheftelowitz,  Die  Apokry- 
phen  des  Rgveda  (edition  of  the  Khilas), 
Breslau  1906  (cp.  Oldenberg,  Gottingische 
Gelelirte  Anzeigen  1907,  210 — 41). 

9  Cp.  Oldenberg,  op.  cit.,  359  ff. ;  Auf- 
recht,  Das  Aitareya  Brahmana,  Bonn  1879, 
p.  420  f. 

Cp.  Oldenberg,  op.  cit.,  chapter  111 ; 
Macdonell,  History  of  Sanskrit  Literature, 
181  and  186. 

n  Cp.  Oldenberg,  op.  cit.,  chapter  in 
(271 — 369)  Der  Riktext  und  der  Text  der 
jiingeren  Samhitas  und  der  Biahmanas; 
Ludwig,  Ueber  die  Kritik  des  Rgveda- 
Textes,  Abhandlungen  d.  k.  bohrn.  Gesell- 
schaft  der  Wissenschaften,  Prag  1889. 

12  Edited  by  A.  A.  Macdonell,  Oxford 
1886. 

13  The  Rgveda  Pratisakhya,  edited  with 
German  translation  by  Max  Muller,  Leipzig 
1856 — 69;  edited  with  Uvata’s  commentary, 
Benares  Sanskrit  Series  1894. 

14  Yaska’s  Nirukta,  edited  by  Roth,  Gdt- 
tingen  1852;  edited  by  Satyavrata  Sama- 
sramI,  4  vols.  (11 — IV  with  the  commentary 


Introduction. 


3 

as  regards  the  limited  number  of  stanzas  explained  by  him,  his  text  was 
verbally  identical  with  ours.  The  frequent  statements  of  the  Brahmanas 
concerning  the  number  of  verses  contained  in  a  hymn  or  liturgical  group 
agree  with  the  extant  text  of  the  Rgveda.  The  explanatory  discussions  of  the 
Brahmanas  further  indicate  that  the  text  of  the  Rgveda  must  have  been 
regarded  as  immutably  fixed  by  that  time.  Thus  the  Satapatha  Brahmana, 
while  speaking  of  the  possibility  of  varying  some  of  the  formulas  of  the 
Yajurveda,  rejects  as  impossible  the  notion  of  changing  the  text  of  a  certain 
verse  of  the  Rgveda  as  proposed  by  some  teachers1. 

Brobably  soon  after  the  completion  of  the  actual  Brahmanas  the  hymns 
of  the  Rgveda  were  fixed  in  the  phonetic  form  of  the  Samhita  text;  and 
after  no  long  interval,  in  order  to  guard  that  text  from  the  possibility  of  any 
change  or  loss,  the  Pada  text  was  constituted  by  Sakalya,  whom  the  Aranyakas 
or  appendixes  to  the  Brahmanas,  the  Nirukta,  and  the  Rgveda  Pratisakhya 
presuppose2.  By  this  analysis  of  the  Samhita  text,  its  every  word,  stated  in 
a  separate  form  as  unaffected  by  the  rules  of  euphonic  combination,  has 
come  down  to  us  without  change  for  about  2,500  years. 

The  Samhita  text  itself,  however,  only  represented  the  close  of  a  long 
period  in  which  the  hymns,  as  originally  composed  by  the  seers,  were  handed 
down  by  oral  tradition.  For  the  condition  of  the  text  even  in  this  earlier 
period  we  possess  a  large  body  of  evidence  corresponding  to  that  of  Mss. 
for  other  literary  monuments.  It  was  then  that  the  text  of  the  other  Vedas, 
each  of  which  borrowed  extensively  from  the  Rgveda,  was  constituted.  With 
each,  of  them  came  into  being  a  new  and  separate  tradition  in  which  the 
borrowed  matter  furnishes  a  body  of  various  readings  for  the  Rgveda.  The 
comparison  of  these  variants,  about  1200  in  number,  has  shown  that  the  text 
of  the  Rgveda  already  existed,  with  comparatively  few  exceptions,  in  its  present 
form  when  the  text  of  the  other  Vedas  was  established.  The  number  of 
instances  is  infinitely  small  in  which  the  Rgveda  exhibits  corruptions  not 
appearing  in  the  others.  We  have  thus  good  reason  for  believing  that  the 
fixity  of  the  text  and  the  verbal  integrity  of  the  Rgveda  go  several  centuries 
further  back  than  the  date  at  which  the  Samhita  text  came  into  existence. 
As  handed  down  exclusively  by  oral  tradition,  the  text  could  hardly  have 
been  preserved  in  perfectly  authentic  form  from  the  time  of  the  composers 
themselves;  and  research  has  shown  that  there  are  some  undeniable  corruptions 
in  detail  attributable  to  this  earliest  period.  But  apart  from  these,  the  Samhita 
text,  when  the  original  metre  has  been  restored  by  the  removal  of  phonetic 
combinations  which  did  not  prevail  in  the  time  of  the  poets  themselves,  nearly 
always  contains  the  very  words,  as  represented  by  the  Pada  text,  actually 
used  by  the  seers.  The  modernization  of  the  ancient  text  appearing  in  the 
Samhita  form  is  only  partial  and  is  inconsistently  applied.  It  has  preserved 
the  smallest  minutiae  of  detail  most  liable  to  corruption  and  the  slightest 
differences  in  the  matter  of  accent  and  alternative  forms  which  might  have 
been  removed  with  the  greatest  ease.  We  are  thus  justified  in  assuming  that 
the  accents  and  grammatical  forms  of  the  Rgveda,  when  divested  of  the 
euphonic  rules  applied  in  the  Samhita  text,  have  come  down  to  us,  in  the 
vast  majority  of  cases,  as  they  were  uttered  by  the  poets  themselves. 

Though  the  tradition  of  nearly  all  the  later  Samhitas  has  in  a  general 
way  been  guarded  by  AnukramanTs,  Pratisakhyas,  and  Pada  texts,  its  value 
is  clearly  inferior  to  that  of  the  Rgveda.  This  is  only  natural  in  the  case 


1  See  Oldenberg,  op.  cit.,  352. 

2  See  Oldenberg,  op.  cit.,  380  f. 

1* 


of  Durga),  Calcutta  18S2 — 91  (Bibliotheca 
Indie  a). 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  Yedic  Grammar. 


4 

of  collections  in  which  the  matter  was  largely  borrowed  and  arbitrarily  cut 
up  into  groups  of  verses  or  into  single  verses  solely  with  a  view  to  meet 
new  liturgical  wants.  Representing  a  later  linguistic  stage,  these  collections 
start  from  a  modernized  text  in  the  material  borrowed  from  the  Rgveda,  as 
is  unmistakable  when  that  material  is  compared  with  the  original  passages. 
The  text  of  the  Samaveda  is  almost  entirely  secondary,  containing  only 
seventy-five  stanzas  not  derived  from  the  Rgveda.  Its  variants  are  due  in 
part  to  inferiority  of  tradition  and  in  part  to  arbitrary  alterations  made  for 
the  purpose  of  adapting  verses  removed  from  their  context  to  new  ritual  uses1. 
An  indication  that  the  tradition  of  the  Yajur  and  Atharva  Vedas  is  less  trust¬ 
worthy  than  that  of  the  Rgveda  is  the  great  metrical  irregularity  which  is 
characteristic  of  those  texts2.  Of  all  these  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita  is  the  best 
preserved,  being  not  only  guarded  by  an  Anukramam,  a  Pratisakhya,  and  a 
Pada  text,  but  partially  incorporated  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana,  where  the 
first  1 8  books  are  quoted  word  for  word  besides  being  commented  on.  The 
Taittiriya  Samhita  has  also  been  carefully  handed  down,  being  protected  by 
an  Anukramam,  a  Pratisakhya,  and  a  good  Pada  text3.  The  Maitrayani  Samhita 
is  not  so  well  authenticated,  having  no  Pratisakhya  and  only  an  inferior 
Pada  text,  of  which  but  a  single  somewhat  incorrect  Ms.  is  known4.  Least 
trustworthy  of  all  is  the  tradition  of  the  Kathaka  which  lacks  both  a  Pratisakhya 
and  a  Pada  text.  Moreover  only  one  complete  Ms.  of  this  Samhita  is  known3. 
As  that  Ms.  is  unaccented,  it  has  only  been  possible  to  mark  the  accent 
in  small  portions  of  that  part  of  the  text  which  has  as  yet  been  published 
(Books  i— xviii).  As,  however,  the  texts  of  the  Black  Yajurveda  often  agree 
even  verbally,  and  the  Maitrayani  Samhita  is  closely  connected  with  the 
Kathaka,  the  readings  of  the  latter  can  to  some  extent  be  checked  by  those 
of  the  cognate  Samhitas. 

The  inferiority  of  tradition  in  the  Atharvaveda  was  increased  by  the 
lateness  of  its  recognition  as  a  canonical  text.  It  contains  many  corrupt 
and  uncertain  forms,  especially  in  Book  xix,  which  is  a  later  addition6. 
The  text  is  guarded  by  Anukramanls,  a  Pratisakhya,  and  a  Padapatha7.  The 
latter,  however,  contains  serious  errors  both  in  regard  to  accentuation  and 
the  division  of  compound  verbal  forms,  as  well  as  in  other  respects.  The 
Padapatha  of  Book  xix,  which  is  different  in  origin  from  that  of  the  earlier 
books8,  is  full  of  grave  blunders9.  The  critical  and  exegetical  notes  contained 
in  Whitney’s  Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda  accordingly  furnish  important  aid 
in  estimating  the  value  of  the  readings  in  the  SaunakTya  recension  of  the 
Atharvaveda.  The  Paippalada  recension  is  known  in  only  a  single  corrupt 
Ms.,  which  has  been  reproduced  in  facsimile  by  Professors  Garbe  and 
Bloomfield10.  About  one-eighth  or  one-ninth  of  this  recension  is  original, 
being  found  neither  in  the  SaunakTya  text  of  the  Atharvaveda  nor  in  any  other 
known  collection  of  Mantras11.  The  various  readings  of  this  recension,  in  the 


1  On  the  Padapatha  of  the  Samaveda  see  | 
Benfey’s  edition  of  that  Samhita,  p.LVil — LXiv.  ' 

2  See  Whitney’s  Introduction  to  the 
Atharvaveda,  p.  cxxvil;  Bloomfield,  The 
Atharvaveda,  Grundriss  II,  l  b,  §  1. 

3  Cp.  Weber’s  edition  p.  vm  f.,  and 
Indische  Studien  13,  1  — 114  (Ueber  den 
Padapatha  der  Taittirlya-Samhita). 

4  See  L.  v.  Schroeder’s  edition,  Intro¬ 
duction,  p.  xxxvi  f. 

5  Cp.  L.  v.  Schroeder’s  Introduction  to 
his  edition,  §  I. 


6  See  Lanman’s  Introduction  to  Book  xix 
in  Whitney’s  Translation  of  the  Atharva¬ 
veda. 

7  See  Lanman’s  Introduction  to  Whitney’s 
Translation,  p.  lxix— lxxiv. 

8  The  Padapatha  of  the  Atharvaveda  has 
been  edited  in  full  by  Shankar  P.  Pandit 
in  his  Atharvaveda. 

9  Cp.  Bloomfield,  The  Atharvaveda  p.  16. 

Jo  The  Kashmirian  Atharva-Veda,  Balti¬ 
more  1901. 

11  Bloomfield,  The  Atharvaveda  p.  15; 


I.  Phonology.  Pronunciation.  Sounds.  5 

material  common  to  both  recensions,  are  given  in  the  critical  notes  of  Whitney’s 
Translation.  The  variations  range  from  slight  differences  to  complete  change 
of  sense,  and  exact  textual  agreement  between  parallel  stanzas  is  comparatively 
rare1.  The  text  of  this  recension  has  not  yet  been  critically  edited  except 
Book  I2. 


I.  PHONOLOGY. 

Rgveda  Pratisakhya,  ed.  with  German  translation  by  Max  Muller,  Leipzig  1856 — 69; 
with  Uvata’s  Commentary,  Benares  Sanskrit  Series,  1894.  —  Atharvaveda  Pratisakhya,  ed. 
Whitney,  JAOS.  vols.  vii  and  x.  —  Taittirlya  Pratisakhya,  ed.  Whitney,  JAOS.  vol.  ix, 
1871.  —  Vajasaneyi  Pratisakhya,  ed.  Weber,  IS.  vol.  iv,  1858;  with  Uvata’s  Commentary, 
Benares  Sanskrit  Series,  18S8.  —  Riktantravyakarana  (=  Pratisakhya  of  the  SV.),  ed.  and 
transl.  by  Burnell,  Mangalore  1879. 

Benfey,  Vollstandige  Grammatik  p.  I — 70.  — Whitney,  Sanskrit  Grammar  p.  1  —  87.  — 
Wackernagel,  Altindische  Grammatik.  I.  Lautlehre  (very  full  bibliography). 

3.  Ancient  Pronunciation.  —  Evidence  throwing  light  on  the  phonetic 
character  of  the  language  of  the  Samhitas  is  furnished  not  only  by  the 
pronunciation  of  its  sounds  by  the  Brahmans  of  to-day,  who  still  recite  those 
texts,  but  also  by  the  transcription  of  Sanskrit  words  in  foreign  languages, 
particularly  Greek,  in  ancient  times;  by  the  summary  information  contained  in 
the  works  of  the  old  Sanskrit  grammarians,  Panini  and  his  successors;  and 
more  especially  by  the  detailed  statements  of  the  Pratisakhyas  and  the  Siksas. 
From  these  sources  we  derive  a  sufficiently  exact  knowledge  of  the  pronunciation 
prevailing  about  500  b.  c.  This  pronunciation,  however,  need  not  necessarily 
have  coincided  in  every  particular  with  that  of  the  Samhitas,  which  date  from 
many  centuries  earlier.  Nevertheless,  judging  by  the  internal  evidence  supplied 
by  the  phonetic  changes  and  analogical  formations  occurring  in  the  language 
of  the  texts  themselves  and  by  the  external  evidence  of  comparative  philology, 
we  are  justified  in  concluding  that  the  pronunciation,  with  the  possible  exception 
of  a  very  few  doubtful  points,  was  practically  the  same. 

4.  The  Sounds  of  the  Vedic  Language.  —  There  are  altogether 
52  sounds,  13  of  which  are  vocalic  and  39  consonantal.  They  are  the  following: 

A.  Vocalic  sounds. 

1.  Nine  simple  vowels:  a  a  i  T  u  u  r  f  /. 

2.  Four  diphthongs:  e  <?3  ai  au 4. 

B.  Consonantal  sounds. 

1.  Twenty-two  mutes,  divided  into  five  classes,  each  of  which  has  its 

class  nasal,  making  a  group  of  twenty-seven: 

a)  five  gutturals:  k  kh  g  gh  n , 

b)  five  palatals:  c  ch  j  jh  n , 

c)  seven  cerebrals:  t  th  d  and  /5  dh  and  Ih 5  //, 

d)  five  dentals:  t  th  d  dh  n, 

e)  five  labials:  p  ph  b  bh  m. 


cp.  Whitney’s  Translation  of  the  Atharva¬ 
veda  p.  1013 — 23. 

1  On  the  readings  of  the  Paippalada  re¬ 
cension,  see  Lanman’s  Introduction  p.LXXix — 
LXXXIX. 

2  The  Kashmirian  AtharvaVeda,  Book  One. 
Edited  with  critical  notes  by  I.eroy  Carr 
Barret,  in  JAOS.  26,  197 — 295. 


3  These  are  really  simple  long  vowels, 
being  diphthongs  only  in  origin  (=  ai,  au). 

4  Pronounced  ai,  au  (see  WHITNEY  on 
APr.  I.  40  and  TPr.  II.  29),  but  derived 
from  diphthongs  with  a  long  first  element. 

5  These  sounds  take  the  place  of  d  dh 
respectively  between  vowels;  e.  g.  tie  (but 
idya),  milhtise  (but  niidhvan). 


6 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


2.  Four  semivowels:  y  r  l  v. 

3.  Three  sibilants:  s  (palatal),  s  (cerebral),  t  (dental). 

4.  One  aspiration:  h. 

5.  One  pure  nasal:  m  ( m )  called  Anusvara  (‘after-sound’). 

6.  Three  voiceless  spirants:  h  (VisarjanTya),  h  (Jihvamuliya),  h  (Upa- 

dhmanlya). 

5.  Losses,  changes,  additions.  —  In  order  that  the  phonetic  status  of 
the  Vedic  language  may  be  understood  historically,  the  losses,  changes,  and 
additions  which  have  taken  place  in  it  as  compared  with  earlier  linguistic 
stages,  must  be  pointed  out. 

a.  It  has  lost  the  IE.  1)  short  vowels  e  d  and  p;  2)  long  vowels  e  0; 
3)  diphthongs  ei  di,  eu  oir,  di  ei  di ,  du  eu  oir,  4)  sonant  nasals;  5)  voiced 
spirant  2. 

b.  It  has  replaced  a  number  of  IE.  sounds  by  others:  1)  the  short  vowels 
e  0  by  d,  p  by  1;  2)  the  long  vowels  eo  by  0;  3)  the  diphthongs  ei  di  by  e, 
eu  du  by  d;  also  dz  ez  oz  by  e  d ;  4)  f  by  Jr  (dr),  L  by  r ;  5)  di  ei  di  by  di, 
du  eu  du  by  du ;  6)  r,  when  followed  by  a  nasal,  has  become  f;  7)  gutturals 
(velars)  have,  under  certain  conditions,  become  palatals1;  8)  a  palatal  mute 
has  become  the  palatal  spirant  s'2. 

c.  It  has  added  the  whole  series  of  eight  cerebrals  (including  the 
spirant  s). 

The  above  innovations  are  specifically  Indian,  excepting  (1)  the  loss  of 
the  vowels  e  0  p ,  together  with  the  diphthongs  formed  with  them;  (2)  the  loss 
of  the  sonant  nasals;  and  (3)  the  addition  of  the  spirants  s'  and  s.  These 
the  Avesta  shares  with  the  Vedas. 

1.  The  simple  vowels. 

6.  The  vowel  a. — This  is  by  far  the  commonest  vowel,  being  much 
more  than  twice  as  frequent  as  d;  while  these  two  ^-vowels  combined  occur 
as  often  as  all  the  rest  (including  diphthongs)  taken  together3.  According  to 
the  modern  Indian  pronunciation,  a  has  the  sound  of  a  very  short  close 
neutral  vowel  like  the  English  u  in  but.  That  such  was  its  character  as  early 
as  the  time  of  Panini  appears  from  his  last  Sutra,  according  to  which  a  is 
not  the  short  sound  corresponding  to  a.  To  the  same  effect  are  the  statements 
of  the  Pratisakhyas4,  which  describe  a  as  a  ‘close’  (samvrta)  sound.  This 
pronunciation  is  borne  out  by  the  reproduction  of  Indian  words  in  Greek, 
where  the  vowel,  though  usually  represented  by  a,  appears  as  e  or  d  also; 
on  the  other  hand,  the  frequent  reproduction  of  the  Greek  a  by  the  Indian 
d  indicates  that,  to  the  Indian  ear,  that  vowel  was  both  longer  and  had  more 
distinctively  the  sound  of  a.  Similarly,  Hindus  of  the  present  day  make  the 
observation  that  the  English  pronunciation  of  d  in  Sanskrit  words  sounds  long 
0 dlrgha )  to  them.  As  the  ancient  Iranian  languages  have  the  normal  d 
throughout,  the  close  pronunciation  must  be  an  Indian  innovation.  But  whether 
it  already  prevailed  in  the  period  when  the  Samhitas  were  composed  is 
uncertain.  The  fact,  however,  that  in  the  RV.  the  metre  hardly  ever  admits 
of  the  d  being  elided  after  e  or  0,  though  the  written  text  drops  it  in  about 
75  per  cent  of  its  occurrences,  seems  to  indicate  that  when  the  hymns  of 
the  RV.  were  composed,  the  pronunciation  of  d  was  still  open,  but  that  at 


1  Cp.  Brugmann,  Kurze  vergleichende  [  2  Op.  cit.  233. 

Grammatik  der  indogermanischen  Sprachen  3  Cp.  Whitney,  22  and  75. 
1902,  1,  244.  4  APr.  1.  36;  VPr.  I.  72. 


I.  Phonology.  Simple  Vowels. 


7 


the  time  when  the  Samhita  text  was  constituted,  the  close  pronunciation  was 
already  becoming  general. 

a.  Though  a  ordinarily  represents  IE.  deo1,  it  also  often  replaces  an  original 
sonant  nasal2  representing  the  reduced  form  of  the  unaccented  Vedic  syllables  ^-j-nasal : 
i)  an  in  derivative  and  inflexional  syllables;  e.  g.  sat-a  beside  the  stem  sanl-  ‘being’ ;  juhv-ati 
‘they  sacrifice’ (suffix  otherwise  -anti) ;  2)  a-fl-nasal  in  radical  syllables;  e.  g.  ta-ta-  ‘stretched’: 
j/tan-;  ga-taggone’ :  Ygam- ;  das-ma-  ‘wondrous’ :  ydams- ;  stem  pathi-  ‘path’,  beside  pant  ha- \ 
3)  in  words  as  shown  by  comparative  philology ;  e.  g.  sata-m  ‘hundred’  (Lat.  centum ), 
das  a  ‘ten’  (Lat.  decern)  3. 

Very  rarely  a  is  a  Prakritic  representative  of  r,  as  in  vi-kata- 4  ‘monstrous’,  beside 
vi-kr-ta-  ‘deformed’. 


7.  The  vowel  a. — This  sound  represents  both  a  simple  long  vowel5 
and  a  contraction;  e.  g.  a-stha-t  ‘he  has  stood’;  (is am  ‘I  was’  (=  d-as-am ), 
bhardti  ‘may  he  bear’  (=  bhdra-a-ti). 

a.  Like  a ,  the  long  vowel  a  frequently  corresponds  to  or  is  derived  from 
a  syllable  containing  a  nasal;  e.  g.  kha-td-  ‘dug  :  Y  khan- ;  a-tmdn-  ‘soul’  :  an- 
‘breathe\  In  very  rare  instances  the  nasal  is  retained  in  the  RV.:  jighamsati 
‘desires  to  strike’ :  Y  han~)  sranta-  ‘wearied’:  Y sr am- \  d/ivantd-  ‘dark’ :  ]/ dhvati- ; 
there  are  six  or  eight  more  instances  in  the  later  Samhitas6.  Here  the 
reappearance  of  the  nasal  in  a  weak  radical  syllable  is  an  innovation  due  to 
the  influence  of  other  forms  with  nasals7. 

8.  The  vowel  /. — This  sound  in  the  first  place  is  an  original  vowel; 
e.  g.  div-l  ‘in  heaven’.  It  also  frequently  represents  the  low  grade  of  e  and  ya 
both  in  roots8  and  suffixes;  e.  g.  vid-tna  ‘we  know’,  beside  ved-a  ‘I  know’; 
ndv-istha-  ‘newest’,  beside  nav-yas-  ‘newer’.  It  further  appears  as  the  low 
grade  of  d  in  roots  containing  that  vowel:  e.  g.  sidhyati  ‘succeeds’,  beside 
sbdhati ;  sis  id-  ‘taught’,  beside  sdsti  ‘teaches’;  especially  when  the  vowel  is 
final,  as  in  sthi-td-  ‘stood’:  \f sthd-.  From  the  latter  use  it  came  to  assume  the 
function  of  a  ‘connecting’  vowel;  e.  g.  jan-i-tr-  ‘begetter’:  YJan~>  after  heavy 
syllables  also  in  the  ending  -ire  of  3  pi.  pf.  mid.  vavand-ire  (beside  nunudre). 
In  sithird-  ‘loose’  i  would  be  a  Prakritic  representative  of  r,  if  the  word  is 
derived  from  \f srat/i- 9. 

g.  The  vowel  7.  —  This  sound  is  an  original  vowel,  e.  g.  in  jivd-  ‘living’ I0. 
It  also  often  represents  the  low  grade  of  yd  both  in  roots  and  suffixes; 
e.  g.  jl-td-  (A V.),  ‘overcome’:  1  fjyd-\  as-i-mdhi  Sve  would  attain’,  beside  as-ydm 
‘I  would  attain’.  It  further  seems  to  represent  the  low  grade  of  both  radical 
and  suffixal  d\  but  this  can  probably  in  all  instances  be  explained  as  either  a 
low  grade  of  ai  or  a  later  substitution  for  i;  e.  g.  gi-tha- ( AV.)  beside  gd-thd- 
‘song’,  is  from  the  root  gai-\  adl-mahi  (VS.)  and  dl-sva  (VS.),  from  Y2dd- 
and  y^dd-,  occur  beside  forms  in  i  from  the  three  roots  da-  which  have  i  only 
in  the  RV.;  hind-  ‘forsaken’,  from  \fhd-,  occurs  once  in  RV.  x  beside  forms  with 
i  only  in  RV.  1— ix.  A  similar  explanation  probably  applies  to  the  -in-  of  the 
ninth  class  of  verbs  beside  ?ia -,  e.  g.  grbhm- :  grbhnd-11. 


1  Cp.  Brugmann,  KG.  92,  104,  1 16. 

2  Cp.  Brugmann  184. 

3  See  Wackernagel  i,  7  (p.  7  — 10). 

4  Cp.  Wackernagel  i,  146. 

5  It  represents  IE.  a  e  o\  cp.  Brugmann, 
KG.  98,  110,  122.  It  also  appears  for  IE. 
0  before  single  consonants:  cp.  Wacker¬ 
nagel  1,  10. 

6  See  below,  past  passive  participles  574, 
2  a. 

7  See  Wackernagel  i,  13. 

8  This  term  will  be  retained  in  the  present 


work  in  its  conventional  sense  (cp.  Brug¬ 
mann,  KG.  365),  and  ‘roots’  will  be 
quoted  in  the  usually  low  grade  form  in 
which  they  appear  in  Sanskrit  grammar. 
The  term  ‘base’  will  be  used  to  designate 
the  phonetic  unit  which  is  the  starting  point 
of  vowel  gradation  (cp.  Brugmann,  KG. 
21 1).  Thus  bhava -  or  bfiavi-  is  a  ‘base’,  bhu- 
is  a  ‘root’. 

9  Cp.  Wackernagel  i,  16  (p.  19,  note). 

10  Cp.  Brugmann,  KG.  73. 

11  See  Wackernagel  i,  18. 


8  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


10.  The  vowel  u. — This  sound  is  an  original  vowel;  e.  g.  up  a  ‘up  to’; 
duhitr-  ‘daughter’;  mctdhu-  ‘sweetness’.  It  also  represents  the  low  grade  of 
0  or  va  both  in  roots  and  suffixes;  e.  g.  yuga-  m.  n.  ‘yoke’,  beside  yoga-  m. 
‘yoking’;  suptd-  (AV.)  ‘asleep’ :  svdpna-  m.  ‘sleep’;  krnu- :  krno-  present  base 
of  kr-  ‘make’. 

11.  The  vowel  u.  —  This  sound  is  an  original  vowel;  e.  g.  bhru-  ‘brow’; 
stir  a-  ‘hero’.  It  is  also  the  low  grade  for  avi,  au ,  va\  e.  g.  bhti-t  ‘has 
become’  :  bhavi-sydti  ‘will  become’;  dZititd- ‘shaken’  :  dhautdri f.  ‘shaking’; 
sud-  ‘sweeten’  :  svtid-  ‘enjoy’. 

12.  The  vowel  r.  — The  vowel  r1  is  at  the  present  day  usually  pronounced 
as  ri;  and  that  this  pronunciation  is  old  is  shown  by  the  confusion  of  the 
two  sounds  in  inscriptions  and  Mss.,  as  well  as  by  the  reproduction  of  r  by 
ri  in  the  Tibetan  script 2.  But  r  was  originally  pronounced  as  vocalic  r.  The 
Pratisakhyas  of  the  RV.,  VS.,  AV.3  describe  it  as  containing  an  r,  which 
according  to  the  RPr.  is  in  the  middle.  According  to  the  commentator 
on  the  VPr.  this  medial  r  constitutes  one-half  of  the  sound,  the  first  and 
last  quarter  being  <£4.  This  agrees  with  pro,  the  equivalent  of  r  in  the  Avesta. 

Except  in  the  acc.  and  gen.  plur.  of  /'-stems  (where  f  is  written),  the 
long  vowel  is  in  the  RV.  represented  by  the  sign  for  r:  always  in  forms  of 
the  verb  mrd- 5  ‘be  gracious’,  in  the  past  participles  trlhd -  ‘crushed’,  drlhd- 
‘firm’,  in  the  gen.  nrntim ,  and  in  the  one  occurrence  of  the  gen.  tisrntim 6 . 
In  the  later  Samhitas,  the  vowel  in  these  instances  was  pronounced  short7 *; 
and  it  was  doubtless  for  this  reason  that  r  came  to  be  erroneously  written  for 
f  in  the  text  of  the  RV. 

13.  The  vowel  rs. — This  long  vowel,  according  to  RPr.  and  APr.9, 
contains  an  r  in  its  first  half  only.  It  appears  only  in  the  acc.  and  gen. 
plur.  masc.  fern,  of  /'-stems;  e.  g.  pitfn ,  matrs;  pitfntim,  svdsfntim.  Thus  the  f 
was  written  only  where  a-  i-  ^-sterns  showed  analogous  forms  with  a  T  u ; 
and  prosodical  evidence  proves  that,  in  the  RV.,  f  is  required  even  in  the 
two  genitives  in  which  r  is  written  ( nrntim  and  tisrntim )10.  In  the  TS.,  how¬ 
ever,  all  these  genitives  plur.  have  rL1  (that  is,  pitrntim  as  well  as  nrntim , 
tisrntim). 

14.  The  vowel  /. — This  sound,  though  pronounced  as  Iri  at  the  present 
day,  was  originally  a  vocalic  /.  Its  description  in  the  Pratisakhyas 12  is  analogous 
to  that  of  r.  It  is  found  only  in  a  few  forms  or  derivatives  of  the  verb 
kip-  ‘be  in  order’:  caklpre \  3  pi.  perf.;  ciklpati ,  3  sing.  aor.  subj.;  klpti-  (VS.) 
‘arrangement’.  In  the  RV.  r  appears  beside  it  in  krp-  ‘form’13. 

2.  The  diphthongs. 

15.  The  diphthongs  e  and  0.  —  At  the  present  day  these  sounds  are 
pronounced  in  India  as  long  monophthongs  like  e  and  0  in  most  European 


1  In  several  instances  r  appears  to  re¬ 
present  an  IE.  /  sound.  Cp.  Wackernagel 
h  P-  33- 

2  See  Wackernagel  i,  28. 

3  RPr.  VIII.  14;  VPr.  iv.  145 ;  APr.  I.  37,  71. 

4  Cp.  Benfey,  Vedica  und  Verwandtes  I,  18. 

5  Except  possibly  RV.  vii.  5617  where  the 
vowel  is  metrically  short;  cp.  op.  cit.  I,  6; 
Arnold,  Vedic  Metre,  p.  143. 

6  RV.  v.  692. 

7  In  the  AV.  the  vowel  is  still  metrically 

long  in  some  of  these  instances:  Olden- 

berg,  Prolegomena  4 77. 


8  The  f  of  the  gen.  pi.  is  an  Indian  inno¬ 
vation;  cp.  5,  b  6  and  17.  On  the  other 
hand,  IE.  f-  is  represented  by  Tr  and  (after 
labials)  ur\  e.  g.  from  kr-  ‘commemorate’, 
kTr-ti-  ‘fame’;  pr-  ‘fill’  :pftr-ta-,  n.  ‘reward’;  as 
low  grade  of  rd  in  dlrgh-d-  ‘long’,  beside 
dragh-lyas -  ‘longer’.  Cp.  Wackernagel  I,  22. 

9  RPr.  XIII.  14;  APr.  I.  38. 

T0  See  above,  5,  b  6. 

11  Cp.  Benfey,  Vedica  und  Verwandtes 

b  3- 

12  RPr.  xiii.  14;  VPr.  iv.  145. 

13  Cp.  Wackernagel  1,  31. 


I.  Phonology.  Simple  Vowels.  Diphthongs. 


9 

languages.  That  they  already  had  this  character  at  the  time  of  the  Pratisakhyas  1 
and  ofPanini’s  successors  Katyayana2  and  Patanjali3,  appears  from  the  accounts 
given  by  those  authorities,  who  at  the  same  time  recognize  these  two  sounds 
to  be  in  many  instances  the  result  of  the  euphonic  combination  (, samdhi ',  Sandhi) 
of  a  +  i  and  a-\-u  respectively.  This  evidence  is  borne  out  by  the  reproduction 
of  Indian  words  by  the  Greeks4  and  of  Greek  words  by  the  Indians5  from 
about  300  b.  c.  onwards. 

a.  These  two  sounds  as  a  rule  represent  earlier  diphthongs  of  which  the  second 
element  was  i  or  u  respectively.  1.  This^is  most  evidently  so  when  they  are  produced 
in  Sandhi  by  the  coalescence  of  a  with  T  and  it.  As  the  result  of  such  a  combination 
they  are  explicable  only  on  the  assumption  of  an  earlier  pronunciation  of  these  sounds 
as  the  genuine  diphthongs  di  and  an.  —  2.  They  are  further  based  on  prehistoric  con¬ 
tractions  within  words  in  declension  and  conjugation;  e.  g.  loc.  sing,  of  diva-  ‘horse’  : 
dive  (cp.  nav-i-  ‘in  the  ship’);  nom.  acc.  du.  neut.  of  padd-  ‘step’  :  pade  (cp.  vdcas-T  ‘two 
words’);  3.  sing.  pot.  mid.  bhaveta  ‘should  become’ (cp.  as-i/a  ‘would  sit’);  maghon-  weak 
stem  (=  magha-un)  of  maghdvan-  ‘bountiful’;  d-voc-at  3.  sing.  aor.  of  vac-  ‘speak’  (=  a-va- 
uc-at )6.  —  3.  These  two  sounds  also  represent  the  high  grade  corresponding  to  the  weak 
grade  vowels  i  and  tr,  e.  g.  secati  ‘pours’,  beside  sik-ta-  ‘poured’;  bhoj-am ,  beside  bhuj-am , 
aor.  of  bhuj-  ‘enjoy’  7. 

b.  1.  In  a  small  number  of  words  ex°  represents  Indo-Iranian  az  (still  preserved  in 
the  Avesta)  before  d  dh  and  h  (=  dfi) :  dehi  ‘give’,  and  dhehi  ‘set’  (Av.  dazdi );  e-dhi  ‘be’, 
beside  ds-ti;  ned-iyas-  ‘very  near’,  ned-isfha -  ‘nearest’  (Av.  nazdyo,  nazdisia-) ;  medhd-  ‘insight’ 
(Av.  mazdad) ;  miycdha -  ‘meat-juice’  (Av.  myazda-) ;  vedhas-  ‘adorer’  (Av.  vazdaizh-) ;  scd- 3 8 9 
weak  perf.  of  sad-  ‘sit.’  (Av.  hazd-  for  Indo-Iranian  sazd-) 9.  —  2.  Similarly  0 10  represents 
az  in  stems  ending  in  -as  before  the  bh  of  case-endings,  e.  g.  from  dves-as-  n.  “hatred’, 
inst.  pi.  dveso-bhis ;  and  before  secondary  suffixes  beginning  with  y  or  v:  amho-yu • 
‘distressing’  (but  apas-yu-  ‘active’);  duvo-yu-  ‘wishing  to  give’  (beside  duvas-ytt-);  saho-van- 
(AV.)  ‘mighty’,  beside  sdhas-vant -  (RV.).  In  derivatives  of  sds-  ‘six’,  and  of  vah-  ‘carry’, 
0  represents  az  before  d  or  dh,  which  it  cerebralizes :  sd-daia  (VS.)  ‘sixteen’;  so-dhd  ‘six¬ 
fold’;  vd-dhum  ‘to  carry’. 

16.  The  diphthongs  ai  and  au. — These  sounds  are  pronounced  at 
the  present  day  in  India  as  diphthongs  in  which  the  first  element  is  short.  Even 
at  the  time  of  the  Pratisakhyas  they  had  the  value  of  ai  and  du11.  But  that 
they  are  the  etymological  representatives  of  ai  and  du  is  shown  by  their 
becoming  dy  and  av  respectively  before  vowels  both  in  Sandhi12  and  within 
words;  e.  g.  gdv-as  ‘kine’,  beside  gdu-s  Tow’13.  That  such  was  their  original 
value  is  also  indicated  by  the  fact  that  in  Sandhi  a  contracts  with  to  ai, 
and  with  0  to  auJ$. 

17.  Lengthening  of  vowels.  —  1.  Before  n,  vowels  are  lengthened  only 
(except  r  in  the  gen.  pi.)  in  the  acc.  pi.  in  -an,  -in,  - un ,  -rnl6,  where  the  long 
vowel  is  doubtless  pre-Indian  v. 

2.  Before  suffixal  y,  i  and  u  are  phonetically  lengthened:  a)  as  finals 
of  roots;  e.  g.  ksT-yate  ‘is  destroyed’  (lG£yz-);  su-ydte  ‘is  pressed’  (}dsu-); 
sru-yds  ‘may  he  hear’  ( ]/ sru-) ;  b)  as  finals  of  nouns  in  denominatives  formed 
with  -yd  and  their  derivatives;  e.  g.  janl-ydnt-  ‘desiring  a  wife’  ( jdni -);  valgu- 


1  See  Whitney  on  APr.  1.  40. 

2  Varttika  on  Panini  VIII.  2,  106. 

3  Comment  on  Varttika  I  and  3  on  Panini 

I.  I,  48. 

4  Thus  Kekaya -,  name  of  a  people,  becomes 
AyjKsor,  Gouda-  name  of  a  people,  TovoaXo/. 

5  Thus  vd/zTjXos  becomes  kramela-ka- ;  w pa 
becomes  hora. 

6  Cp.  Wackernagel  1,  33  b. 

7  Op.  cit.  1,  33  c,  cl,  e. 

8  On  this  base  see  below  on  the  Per¬ 
fect,  483  a,  2. 

9  Cp.  Wackernagel  i,  34  a. 

10  These  e  and  0  are  not  distinguished  in 


pronunciation  from  the  monophthongs  re¬ 
presenting  the  diphthongs  di  and  du. 

11  See  Whitney  on  APr.  1.  40  and  TPr. 
11.  29. 

12  See  below  73. 

13  Cp.  Wackernagel  i,  36. 

14  That  is,  originally  d  -f-  (e  ==)  di  be¬ 
came  di. 

c5  That  is,  originally  d  -f-  ( 0  —)  du  be¬ 
came  du. 

For  original  a  i  u  r  -j-  ns. 

x7  As  the  s  which  caused  the  length  by 
position  had  already  for  the  most  part  dis¬ 
appeared  in  the  Vedic  language. 


io  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

ydti  treats  kindly’  (z'a/gu-);  gatu-yati  ‘desires  free  course’  (gatu-\  but  also  gatu- 
ydti) 1.  The  AY.2  has  a  few  exceptions:  arati-ydti  ‘is  hostile’;  jani-ydti  as 
well  as  janT-ydti 3;  c)  i  in  the  suffix  -J-ya  and  in  the  comparative  suffix  -Tyas. 

3.  Before  r,  if  radical,  i  and  71  seem  to  be  lengthened  when  a  consonant 
follows;  e.  g.  gir-bhis  beside  gi?--as  (g/r-  ‘song  of  praise’);  pur-su  beside  pur-as 
( pur-  ‘fort’),  but  ir  and  ur  here  represent  IE.  A4.  In  a  few  instances  this  is 
extended  by  analogy  to  words  in  which  the  r  is  not  radical:  astr  ‘blessing’ 
(as Is-) ;  sajar  ‘together’  (  VJud) 5- 

4.  Before  v,  the  vowels  a  i  71  are  lengthened:  a)  in  some  instances  the 
augment:  avidhyat  ‘he  wounded’  (]Pz yad/1-)6;  b)  once  before  the  primary 
suffix  -z tains  of  the  perfect  participle:  jigT-vhins-  ‘having  conquered’  (]///-); 
c)  often  before  the  secondary  suffixes  -van,  - vana ,  - vant ,  - vala ,  -vin\  e.  g. 
rtd-van-  ‘observing  order’;  kirsT-vana-  (AV.)  ‘ploughman’;  yd-vant-  ‘how 
great’;  svasi-vant-  (RV1.)  ‘snorting’  (  }hs7‘as-) ;  -krsT-vala-  ‘ploughman’;  dvaya-vin- 
1  dishonest’;  d)  often  before  the  second  member  of  a  compound;  e.  g.  gilrtd- 
vasu-  ‘whose  treasures  are  welcome’7. 

5.  Before  Hr.  z  and  z,  when  followed  by  one  or  more  consonants,  vowels 
are  lengthened  by  way  of  compensation  for  the  loss  of  the  z  or  z8;  a)  a 
(=  az)  in  tadhi  ‘hew’  (} htaks-)\  badha-  ‘firm’  (  ]/ bajnh-) ;  sAdhr-  ‘conquering’, 
d-sadha-  ‘invincible’  (]Psa/i-);  b)  T—iz  in  id-  ‘adore’  (] f yaj-  ‘sacrifice’,  or  ]/A- 
Svish’);  nidd-  ‘nest’;  pJd-  ‘press’;  mJdhd-  ‘reward’;  mTdhvdms-  ‘bounteous’; 
rldhd -  ‘licked’  ( \ZriZi-) ;  vidu-  ‘swift’;  sidati  (=  sizdati )  ‘sits’;  hid-  ‘be  angry’ 
(cp.  hiins-  ‘injure’),  c)  u  —  uz  in  udhd-  ‘borne’  {  ]h vah-) ;  gudhd-  ‘concealed’ 
( \hguh-) 9. 

6.  Vowels  also  appear  lengthened  under  conditions  other  than  those 
enumerated  above  (1  —  5). 

a.  Final  a  i  11  are  very  frequently  lengthened  in  the  Samhitas  before  a 
single  consonant  owing  to  rhythmical  predilections;  from  this  use  the  lengthening 
of  the  vowels  is  extended  to  syllables  which  are  reduplicative  or  precede 
suffixes10. 

b.  For  metrical  reasons  the  length  is  in  a  few  words  shifted  to  another 
syllable.  Thus  didlhi  often  appears  instead  of  the  regular  didibii ;  and  in 
vira-sdt  ‘ruling  men’,  viriz -11  stands  for  vira-.  A  similar  explanation  perhaps 
applies  to  cardtha-  ‘moving’,  beside  cardtha -;  and  mhhlna-  ‘gladsome’,  beside 
mdhina-. 

c.  The  long  vowel  beside  the  short  in  the  same  stem  appears  in  some 
instances  to  be  due  to  vowel  gradation;  as  in  tvdt-pitaras  (TS.)  ‘having  thee 
as  a  father’,  beside  pitdras\  prthu-jaghana-  ‘broad-hipped’,  beside  jaghdna- 


1  Before  this  -yd,  the  final  of  ^-sterns  is 
sometimes  lengthened,  but  probably  not 
phonetically;  see  below  6  d. 

2  See  Whitney  on  APr.  m.  18. 

3  No  lengthening  takes  place  in  the 
optative  present  of  verbs  of  the  5[h  or  S1*1 
class,  e.  g.  srnu-yama  ( sru -  ‘'liear’j;  nor  in 
adverbs  formed  with  -y a  from  //-stems ;  e.  g. 
asu-ya  ‘swiftly’ ;  amu-yci  ‘thus’. 

4  See  above  on  r,  p.  8,  note  8. 

5  Cp.  Wackernagel  1,  23.  When  ir  stands 

for  suffixal  -is,  it  remains  unchanged;  e.  g. 

havirbhis  ‘with  oblations’  ( Ziciv-is -),  krivir-dai-i 

‘saw-toothed’;  -ur,  with  genuine  u,  remains 

short  in  uruara-  ‘field’,  urvi-  ‘wide’,  urzdya 

‘widely’  (iiru-  ‘wide’),  itrv-dsT-  ‘desire’,  dur- 


(for  dus-)  e.  g.  in  dur-gd-  ‘hard  to  tra¬ 
verse’. 

6  The  lengthening  of  the  augment  in 
dyunak,  dyukta  []/yuj-)  and  drinak,  draik 
(\/ric-\  follows  this  analogy. 

7  The  lengthening  here  probably  started 
from  that  in  Sandhi:  cp.  Wackernagel 
1,  42. 

8  This  appears  to  be  the  only  kind  of 
compensatory  lengthening  in  the  Vedic 
language.  Cp.  17,  I • 

9  On  e  and  0  for  az  az,  see  above,  15,  a,  b, 
and  cp.  Wackernagel  i,  40. 

10  See  Wackernagel  i,  43. 

1 1  Metrical  shortening  of  a  long  syllable 


I.  Phonology.  Lengthening  and  Loss  of  Vowels.  Contraction. 


i  i 


‘hip’;  anu-sak  %  continuous  order’,  beside  dnu-  ‘along'’  as  first  member  of  a 
compound. 

d.  The  lengthening  of  the  vowel  in  a  certain  number  of  instances  appears 
to  be  due  to  analogy;  thus  the  denominatives  in  -dyd  beside  -ay a  from 
^-sterns  (e.  g.  rtayd-  ‘observe  order’,  beside  rtayd-)1 ,  seem  to  follow  the 
model  of  those  in  -lydti  and  - uydti ,  which  would  account  for  the  fluctuation 
in  quantity.  Tlksnd-  ‘sharp’  (beside  tigma- :  tij-  ‘be  sharp’)  and  hdliksna-  (TS.) 
beside  haliksna-  (VS.),  a  kind  of  animal,  appear  to  owe  their  T  to  the  influence 
of  desideratives  which  in  several  instances  have  I  (partly  for  older  i)  before  ks. 
The  reason  for  the  u  in  tusnim  ‘silently’  it  us-  ‘become  quiet’),  and  in 
sumna-  (VS.),  otherwise  sumnd-  ‘favour’,  is,  however,  obscure. 

18.  Loss  of  vowels. — Vowels  are  very  rarely  dropped  in  the  language 
of  the  Samhitas.  Medial  loss  is  almost  entirely  restricted2  to  the  isolated 
disappearance  of  u  before  v  and  m.  That  vowel  is  dropped  at  the  end  of 
the  first  member  of  a  compound  in  anvartitd  (RV1.)  ‘wooer’  (=  anu-vartitd ); 
dnvartisye  (AV.)  ‘I  shall  follow’3;  car-vadana-  (AV.  Paipp.)  ‘of  lovely  aspect’ 
(—  caru-vadana -)  and  car-vac-  (AV.  Paipp.)  ‘speaking  pleasantly’4.  The  only 
example  of  the  loss  of  a  in  this  position  seems  to  be  til-pinja-  (AV1.)  a  kind 
of  plant,  beside  tila-pihjz-  (AV1.).  The  vowel  u  is  further  dropped  before  the 
m  of  the  i  pers.  pi.  pres,  ending  of  the  5 A1  (-mt-)  class,  when  the  u  is  preceded 
by  only  one  consonant,  in  krn-mahe  and  krn-mdsi  (AV.)5  ‘we  do’. 

Initial  vowels  also  occasionally  disappear.  The  only  vowel  that  is 
lost  with  any  frequency  is  d,  which  is  dropped  in  Sandhi  after  e  and  0 , 
according  to  the  evidence  of  metre,  in  about  one  per  cent  of  its  occurrences 
in  the  RV.  and  about  twenty  per  cent  in  the  AV.  and  the  metrical  portions 
of  the  YV.°  In  a  few  words  its  disappearance  is  prehistoric :  in  vi-  ‘bird’ 7 
(Lat.  avi-),  possibly  in  ni-  ‘in’  (Greek  sv/)8,  in  pid-  ‘press’ 9,  bhi-sdj-10  ‘healer’. 
d  is  lost  in  tmdn-,  beside  adman-,  but  the  reason  has  not  been  satisfactorily 
explained11.  In  va  ‘like",  beside  iva,  the  loss  of  i  is  probably  only  apparent: 
cp.  va  ‘like’  (Lat.  ve  ‘or’)12.  Initial  u  seems  to  be  lost,  if  the  reading  is  not 
corrupt,  in  imasi  (RV.  11.  316)  beside  uimdsi  ‘we  desire’  ( ]/ vas'-). 

19.  Contraction.  —  Long  vowels  and  diphthongs  are  often  the  result  of 
contraction  in  Sandhi13.  They  have  frequently  a  similar  origin  in  the  interior 
of  words14. 

a.  Contractions  of  a  with  a  vowel  or  diphthong  are  the  following: 

1.  d  often  stands  for  a  +  a,  d  +  a,  or  a  +  d ;  e.  g.  dj-at ,  augmented 
imperfect  (  =  d-aj-at) ;  dd-a,  red.  perf.  (=  a-dd-a );  bhdrati ,  pres.  subj.  (==  bhdra- 
ati) ;  ukthd 1 5,  inst.  sing.  (=  ukthd-a) ;  dsvas  ‘mares’,  nom.  pi.  (=  dsva-as );  ddti , 
aor.  subj.  (===  dd-ati );  dev  dm,  gen.  pi.  (=  deva-am). 

2.  e  stands  for  a  +  i  and  d  + 1;  e.  g.  dive,  loc.  sing.  (=  diva-i) ;  pade, 


(at  the  end  of  a  tristubh-line),  without  inter¬ 
change  of  quantity,  appears  in  sir  a  sit,  loc. 
plur.  of  sir  a-  ‘stream’. 

1  See  below,  Denominatives,  563,  a. 

2  Apart  from  the  syncopation  of  a  in  low 
grade  syllables:  cp.  25,  A  I. 

s  Cp.  Bohtlingk,  ZDMG.  39,  533;  44, 
492 f. ;  cp.  Oldenberg  324. 

4  See  Bohtlingk’s  Lexicon  s.  v.  Per¬ 
haps  also  in  jdmbila -  (MS.)  ‘knee-pan’,  if 
=  janu-vila -. 

5  Cp.  Delbruck,  AIV.  174;  v.  Negelein, 

Zur  Sprachgeschichte  des  Veda  60  (r- 

Wurzeln). 

6  Cp.  Wackernagel  1,  p.  324;  Olden¬ 


berg,  ZDMG.  44,  32 iff.  (Der  Abhinihita 
Sandhi  im  Rgveda). 

7  Cp.  25,  Ai;  Wackernagel  i,  71. 

8  Cp.  Schmidt,  KZ.  26,  24 ;  Wacker¬ 
nagel  21,  p.  73. 

5  Op.  cit.  21,  p.  71  (bottom). 

10  Op.  cit.  2»,  p.  72  (bottom). 

11  Op.  cit.  1,  p.  6 1  (top). 

12  Cp.  op.  cit.  1,  53  c,  note;  Arnold, 
Vedic  Metre,  129  (p.  78). 

J3  See  below  69,  70. 

J4  See  above  15,  a  2. 

J5  The  original  inst.  ending  -a  under  the 
influence  of  this  contracted  form  became  -h; 
cp.  Wackernagel  i,  p.  102,  mid. 


i2  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


nom.  acc.  du.  neut.  (=  padd-t);  bhdves,  opt.  pres.  (=  bhdva-Ts) ;  yame  ‘twin 
sisters’,  nom.  acc.  du.  fem.  (=  yamd-i). 

3.  0  stands  for  apu\  e.  g.  dvocam,  aor.  of  vac-  ‘speak’  (=  dva-uc-ani). 

4.  ai  stands  for  d-\-e  and,  in  augmented  forms,  apf;  e.  g.  tdsmai  ‘to 
him’,  dat.  sing.  masc.  (=  tdsma-e) ;  dcvydi,  dat.  sing.  fem.  (=  devyd-e) ;  dicchat> 

3.  sing.  impf.  (=  d-icchat );  dirata ,  3.  pi.  impf.  (=  d-irata)  ‘set  in  motion’. 

5.  au  stands  for  apii  in  augmented  forms;  e.  g.  ducchat ,  3.  sing.  impf. 
of  vas-  ‘shine’  (=  a-ucchat) ;  anhat ,  3.  sing.  impf.  of  uh-  ‘remove’  (==  a-uh-at). 

b.  Contractions  of  /  with  i  or  a  are  the  following: 

1.  T  stands  for  /+/  in  the  nom.  acc.  pi.  neut.  of  /-stems;  e.  g.  tri  ‘three’ 
(=  tri-i). 

2.  T  stands  for  /  +  /  in  weak  forms  of  the  perfect,  when  the  reduplicative 
vowel  is  immediately  followed  by  /  (either  original  or  reduced  from  ya); 
e.  g.  Ts-ur  (==  i-is-ur  from  is-  ‘speed’);  ij-e  (=  i-ij-e  from  yaj-  ‘sacrifice’). 

3.  T  stands  for  ip  a  in  the  inst.  sing.  fem.  and  the  nom.  acc.  du.  masc.  fem. 
of  stems  in  -/;  e.  g.  mail  (=  mati-a)  ‘by  thought’;  pdti  ‘the  two  lords’  (=  pdti-a , 
cp.  rtvij-a ),  suc-T,  du.  fem.  ‘the  two  bright  ones’  (=  suci-a). 

4.  1  stands  for  /  +  a  in  compounds  of  dvi-  ‘two’,  ni  ‘down’,  prdti  ‘against’, 
with  the  low  grade  of  dp-  ‘water’ :  dvip-d-  ‘island’;  mp-a-  ‘low-lying’  (K.)1; 
pratipdm  ‘against  the  stream’ 2 3. 

5.  T  stands  for  ip  a  when  reduplicative  i  is  followed  by  the  low  grade 
form  of  a  root  beginning  with  a  :  ipsa-ti  (AY.),  desiderative  of  dp-  ‘obtain’ 
(=  i-ip-sa-)  3.  A  similar  contraction  takes  place  when  initial  radical  a  is  long 
by  position,  in  iks-ate  ‘sees’  (cp.  dks-i  ‘eye’)  and  inkh-dyati  ‘swings’  (cp.  pari- 
ahkhdyate  ‘may  he  embrace’).  In  ij-ate  ‘drives’,  beside  dj-ati  ‘drives’,  the 
contraction  to  T  of  i  +  d  is  perhaps  due  to  analogy4. 

c.  Contractions  of  u  with  it  or  d  are  the  following: 

1.  u  stands  for  upu  in  weak  forms  of  the  perfect  when  the  reduplicative 
vowel  is  immediately  followed  by  it  (either  original  or  reduced  from  va)\ 
e.  g.  uc-e,  3  sing.  mid.  (=  u-uc-e)  from  uc-  ‘like’;  uc-ur  (=  u-uc-ur)  from  vac- 
‘speak’. 

2.  u  stands  for  upd  in  the  compound  formed  with  dnu  ‘along’  and  the 
low  grade  of  dp-  ‘water’:  anup-a -4  ‘pond’. 

3.  u  stands  for  upd  in  the  nom.  acc.  du.  masc.  fem.  of  zc-stems;  e.  g.  bdhft 
‘the  two  arms’  (  =  bahu-d). 

4.  u  seems  to  stand  for  up  i  in  the  nom.  acc.  pi.  neuter  of  zz-stems; 
e.  g.  vdsu  (=  vdsu-i ),  from  vdsu-  ‘good’;  but  the  vowel  may  possibly  be 
lengthened  by  analogy5,  for  the  Pada  text  always  has  u. 

20.  Pliatus. —  a.  In  the  written  text  of  the  Samhitas,  hiatus  is,  as  a 
rule,  tolerated  in  diphthongs  only,  vowels  being  otherwise  separated  by 
consonants.  It  nevertheless  appears: 

1.  in  Sandhi,  when  a  final  s  y  or  27  has  been  dropped  before  a  following 
vowel;  when  final  1  u  e  of  dual  endings  are  followed  by  vowels;  when  a 
remains  after  final  e  and  0;  and  in  some  other  instances6; 

2.  in  compounds,  when  the  final  of  the  first  member  has  disappeared 
before  a  vowel;  e.  g.  dyo-agra-  ‘iron-pointed’  (dyas-  ‘iron’);  pura-etr-  ‘leader’ 
( pur  as  ‘before’);  and  when,  by  a  Prakritism,  y  is  lost  in  prd-uga-  ‘fore-part 
of  the  shaft’  (—  prd-yuga-) ; 


1  Cp.  nip-ya-  (VS.),  ‘lying  at  the  bottom’.  4  Cp.  Wackernagel  i,  90  c,  p.  104. 

2  Cp.  anika-  and  prcitika-  ‘face’.  5  That  is,  of  the  a  and  i  stems;  e.  g. 

3  Cp.  Samprasarana  T  and  ii  for  yd  and  bhadra,  tri. 

va.  6  See  below,  Sandhi  69 — 73. 


I.  Phonology.  Contraction.  Hiatus.  Svarabhakti.  13 

3.  in  the  simple  word  titan-'  ‘sieve’  (probably  from  tarns-  ‘shake’),  by 
a  loss  of  s,  due  most  likely  to  borrowing  from  an  Iranian  dialect  (where 
medial  s  would  have  become  1 1 ,  which  then  disappeared). 

b.  1.  Though  not  written,  hiatus  is  common  elsewhere  also  in  the 
Samhitas1 2 3.  The  evidence  of  metre  shows  that y  and  v  must  often  be  pronounced 
as  i  and  u ,  and  that  a  long  vowel  or  a  diphthong  has  frequently  the  value 
of  two  vowels.  When  the  long  vowel  or  diphthong  is  the  result  of  contraction, 
the  two  original  vowels  must  often  be  restored,  within  a  word  as  well  as  in 
Sandhi.  Thus  pdnti  ‘they  protect’,  may  have  to  be  read  as  pa-anti  (=  pa-anti )3, 
dhjan  ‘they  anointed’  as  d-ahjan)  jyestha-  ‘mightiest’  as  jyd-istha-  (=  jyd-istha- 
from  jya-  ‘be  mighty’);  dicchas  as  d-icchas  ‘thou  didst  wish’;  aurnos  as  a-urnos 
‘thou  didst  open’4. 

2.  Hiatus  is  further  produced  by  distraction  of  long  vowels5  which,  as 
the  metre  shows,  are  in  the  Rgveda  often  to  be  pronounced  as  two  short 
vowels.  This  distraction  was  doubtless  originally  due  partly  to  a  slurred 
accentuation  which  practically  divided  a  syllable  into  two  halves,  and  partly 
to  the  resolution  of  etymological  contraction.  From  such  instances  distraction 
spread  to  long  vowels  in  which  it  was  not  historically  justified.  It  appears 
most  often  in  a,  especially  in  the  gen.  pi.  in  -dm,  also  in  the  abl.  sing,  in 
-at,  the  nom.  acc.  pi.  in  -as,  -dsas  of  ^-sterns,  in  the  acc.  sing,  in  -dm  of  such 
words  as  abjdm  ‘born  in  the  water’;  and  in  many  individual  words6.  Distraction 
is  further  found  in  the  diphthongs  of  words  in  which  it  is  not  etymologically 
justified;  as  in  the  genitives  ves  ‘of  a  bird’,  gds  ‘of  a  cow’,  in  tredhd  ‘threefold’, 
netr-  ‘leader’,  reknas-  ‘property’,  sreni-  ‘row’;  and  in  other  words7. 

21.  Svarabhakti.  —  When  a  consonant  is  in  conjunction  with  r  or  a 
nasal,  a  very  short  vocalic  sound  tends  to  be  developed  between  them,  and 
the  evidence  of  metre  shows  that  a  vowel  must  often  be  pronounced  between 
them.  It  is  the  general  view  of  the  Pratisakhyas 8  that  when  an  r  precedes 
another  consonant  a  vowel  is  sounded  after  it;  according  to  some  of  them 
this  also  takes  place  after  /  or  even  after  any  voiced  consonant.  They  call 
it  svarabhakti  or  ‘vowel-part’,  which  they  describe  as  equal  to  '/&,  x/4,  or  Jj2 
mora  in  length  and  generally  as  equivalent  to  a  or  e  (probably  =  e)  in  sound. 

a.  The  metre  of  the  RV.  shows  that  an  additional  syllable  is  frequently 
required  in  words  in  which  r  either  precedes  or  follows9  another  consonant; 
e.  g.  darsatd-  ‘worthy  to  be  seen’  (quadrisyllable);  indra- IO,  name  of  a  god 
(very  often  trisyllabic);  prd  ‘forth’  (dissyllabic)11. 


1  Cp.  Wackernagel  1,  37  b,  note. 

2  See  Oldenberg,  Prolegomena  434 ff. : 
‘Hiatus  und  Contraction’;  Arnold,  Vedic 
Metre,  chapter  iv,  p.  70  ff.  (Sandhi),  chapter  v, 
p.  Si  ff.  (Syllabic  Restoration). 

3  As  a  rule,  one  vowel  (including  e  and  0) 
is  shortened  before  another:  see  Olden¬ 
berg,  op.  cit. ,  465  ft.;  447  ff. 

4  Wackernagel  i,  46  b. 

5  See  Oldenberg,  op.  cit.,  163  ft.  (Vocale 
mit  zweisilbiger  Geltung). 

6  See  Wackernagel  i,  44.  This  is  a  very 
old  phenomenon,  as  it  is  found  in  the  Avesta 
in  the  gen.pl.  and  in  other  forms:  Olden¬ 
berg  1 8 1 ;  Wackernagel  1,  p.  50. 

7  Wackernagel  i,  46.  This  distraction 

of  diphthongs  is  also  pre-Vedic,  parallels 

being  found  in  the  Avesta.  Its  use  gradually 

decreases  in  the  RV.  and  is  lacking  in  the 

later  Samhitas,  doubtless  owing  to  the  dis¬ 


appearance  of  slurred  accentuation:  Wacker¬ 
nagel  1,  47. 

8  RPr.  vi.  13  f.,  VPr.  xv.  16;  TPr.  xxi, 
1 5  f . ;  APr.  I.  ioiff. 

9  The  vowel  which  has  to  be  restored  in 
the  gen.  loc.  du.  termination  -tros,  which  must 
always  be  read  as  a  dissyllable,  is  not  to 
be  explained  as  Svarabhakti,  since  -taros  is 
the  original  ending. 

Cp.  Oldenberg,  ZDMG.  60,  711 — 745 
(Die  Messung  von  indra ,  rudra  u.  a.). 

i1  There  seem  to  be  a  few  instances  of  a 
Svarabhakti  vowel  being  actually  written: 
tar  as  anti,  beside  iras-  ‘tremble’ ;  the  secon¬ 
dary  derivative  svaitarTm ,  beside  svitrci-  (AV.) 
‘white’;  purusa-  and  purns a-  ‘man’,  probably 
for  *pursa -  (Wackernagel  i,  51,  cp.  52). 
The  initial  vowel  of  uloka-,  which  is  commoner 
than  loka-  ‘world’,  has  not  yet  been  satis¬ 
factorily  explained;  cp.  op.  cit.  1,  52  d. 


1 4  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  Vedic  Grammar. 

b.  When  a  consonant  is  followed  by  n,  n,  or  m ,  the  same  parasitic  vowel 
often  appears;  e.  g.  yajhd-  (=  yafnd-)  ‘sacrifice’;  gnd-  (=  pfnd-)  ‘woman’.  It 
is,  however,  here  frequent  only  as  representing  the  second  syllable  after  the 
caesura  in  tristubh  and  jagati  verses;  it  rarely  occurs  at  the  beginning  of  such 
verses,  and  never  at  the  end1. 


VOWEL  GRADATION. 

I.  The  Guna  series:  e  o  ar. 

22.  A.  Low  grade:  /  u  r. — In  the  same  root  or  stem  the  simple  vowels 
i  u  r  l  are  found  to  interchange2 3  with  the  respective  high  grade  forms  e  o  ar  al$ 
called  Guna  (‘secondary  form’?)  by  the  native  grammarians,  according  to  the 
conditions  under  which  the  formative  elements  are  attached.  Beside  these 
appear,  but  much  less  frequently,  the  long  grade  forms  ai  an  ar  called  Vrddhi 
(‘increase’)  by  the  same  authorities.  The  latter  regarded  the  simple  vowels 
as  the  fundamental  grade,  which,  from  the  Indian r point  of  view,  these  vowels 
often  evidently  represent:  thus  from  urnavdbhi-  (SB.)  ‘spider’,  we  have  the 
derivative  formation  auriiavab/id- 1  sprung  from  a  spider’4.  Comparative  grammar 
has,  however,  shown  that  in  such  forms  we  have  only  a  secondary  application 
of  an  old  habit  of  gradation  derived  from  the  IE.  period,  and  that  Guna5 
represents  the  normal  stage  from  which  the  low  grade  form,  with  reduced 
or  altogether  lacking  vowel6,  arose  in  less  accented  syllables.  This  theory 
alone  can  satisfactorily  explain  the  parallel  treatment  of  Guna  gradation 
(e  o  ar  beside  i  u  r)  and  Samprasarana  gradation  (ya  va  ra  beside  i  u  r), 
as  in  dis-ld -,  di-des-a  {did-  ‘point  out’)  and  is-td-,  iydj-a  (ya/-  ‘sacrifice’). 
In  other  words,  i  a  r  can  easily  be  explained  as  reduced  forms  of  both 
Guna  and  Samprasarana  syllables  (as  ending  or  beginning  with  i  u  r),  while 
the  divergent  ‘strengthening’  of  i  u  r,  under  the  same  conditions,  to  e  o  ar 
or  ya  va  ra  cannot  be  accounted  for7. 

The  interchange  of  Guna  and  simple  vowel  is  generally  accompanied 
by  a  shift  of  accent:  Guna  appears  in  the  syllable  which  bears  the  accent, 
but  is  replaced  by  the  simple  vowel  when  the  accent  is  transferred  to  the 
following  syllable.  This  shows  itself  most  clearly  in  inflexional  forms;  e.  g.  e-mi 
‘I  go’,  but  i-mds  ‘we  go’;  ap-nd-mi  (AV.)  ‘I  obtain’,  but  ap-nu-mds  ‘we  obtain’; 
vdrdhaya ,  but  vrdhdya  ‘to  further’.  Hence  it  is  highly  probable  that  change 
of  accent  was  the  cause  of  the  gradation8. 

a.  Long  grade  or  Vrddhi:  ai,  au,  dr.  —  Vrddhi  is  far  more  restricted 
in  use  than  Guna,  and  as  it  nearly  always  appears  where  Guna  is  to  be 
expected,  it  may  be  regarded  as  a  lengthened  variety  of  it9  dating  back  to 
the  IE.  period. 


1  See  Oldenberg,  Prolegomena,  374, 
note. 

2  This  interchange  was  already  noticed 
by  Yaska;  see  Nirukta  x.  17. 

3  The  only  root  in  which  the  gradation 
al'.l  is  found  is  kip-,  cp.  14.  It  is  employed 
in  word-formation  much  in  the  same  way 
as  in  verbal  and  nominal  inflexion. 

4  See  below  a,  3  and  cp.  25  B 2;  Wacker¬ 
nagel  I,  55,  p.  62,  note  (top). 

5  Both  a  and  a  represent  the  Guna  or 


normal  stage  in  the  gradation  of  the  a- 
vowels  in  many  roots;  see  24;  Wacker- 
!  nagel  1,  55  b. 

6  The  vowel  sometimes  disappears  in  the 
low  grade  of  the  a  series  (‘Schwundstufe’) 
see  24. 

7  Cp.  Wackernagel  1,  55. 

8  Occasional  exceptions,  such  as  vrka- 
Svolf’,  are  capable  of  explanation:  cp. 
Wackernagel  i,  57. 

9  ‘Dehnstufe’;  cp.  Wackernagel  i,  61. 


I.  Phonology.  Vowel  Gradation.  Guna  Series. 


i5 


It  is  to  be  found  1)  in  strong  forms  of  a  few  monosyllabic  substantives, 
in  the  nom.  sing,  of  sdkhi-  ‘friend’  and  of  stems  in  -r,  and  in  the  loc.  sing, 
of  stems  in  i  and  u\  su-hdrd-  ‘good-hearted’  (from  hrd-  ‘heart’),  dydu-s  ‘heaven’ 
(from  dyi'i -),  gdu-s  ‘cow’  (from  go-) ;  sakhd1,  pitd2\  agnd 3  (from  agnl-  ‘fire’;, 
aktdn  (from  aktu-  ‘night’);  2)  before  the  primary  nominal  suffixes  - a ,  -ti, 
- tna ,  -man,  - vana ;  e.  g.  sparh-d-  ‘desirable’  (  yspr/i-) ;  htird-i-  ‘heart’  (from  hrd-) ; 
kdrs-i-  (VS.)  ‘drawing’  ( ]/ hrs-) ;  srdus-tl  ‘obedient’  (  Y srus-) ;  cyau-tnd-  ‘stimulating’ 
(Yo,u~)j  bhdrman-  ‘board’  ( Y bhr-) ;  kdrs-T-vana-  (AV.)  ‘ploughman’;  3)  in 
secondary  nominal  derivation,  generally  to  form  patronymics  or  adjectives 
expressive  of  connexion  or  relation4;  e.  g.  gairiksitd-  ‘descended  from  giri-ksif ; 
ausijd-  ‘son  of  Usij ’;  srautrd-  ‘relating  to  the  ear’  ( srdtra -);  hair  any  d-  ‘golden’ 
{hiranya-  ‘gold’);  4)  in  the  singular  pres,  of  a  few  verbs  of  the  second  class 
and  in  the  active  .y-aorist  of  roots  ending  in  vowels:  ksndu-mi  ‘I  sharpen’ 
(  Y  hsnu-) ;  mdrs-ti 5  ‘he  wipes’  {Y  ydu-mi  (AV.)  ‘I  unite’  (  Ydu~)  >  a-jai-sam 

‘I  have  conquered’  (|//V-);  ydu-s,  2  sing,  ‘ward  off’  ( Yyu~)\  ci-bhdr-sam  ‘I  have 
borne’  (Y  bhr-). 

B.  Low  grade:  T  u  Jr. — The  same  Guna  and  Vrddhi  forms  as  a  rule 
correspond  to  these  long  vowels  as  to  their  short  forms  i  u  r.  Thus  bin-  ‘fear’ : 
bi-bhdy-a  and  bi-bhay-a ;  hu-  ‘call’  :  ju-hdv-a ;  tr-  ‘cross’  :  ta-tar-a ,  beside 
tir-dte  and  -tir-na-  (just  like  sri-  ‘resort’  :  si-s ray- a;  sru-  ‘hear’  :  su-srdv-a ; 
hr-  ‘do’ :  ca-kar-a ).  Before  consonants  the  roots  prl-  ‘love’,  vl-  ‘desire’,  vi- 
‘impel’,  si-  ‘lie’,  m-  ‘lead’,  bhT-  ‘fear’,  have  Guna  forms  in  e ,  the  last  two  also 
Vrddhi  forms  in  ai\  but  roots  in  u  and  r  have  aid 6  and  ari  as  Guna,  avi 
and  ari  as  Vrddhi,  respectively;  e.  g.  pu-  ‘purify’,  aor.  pavi-sta  and  apavisur ; 
hr-  ‘scatter’,  aor.  subj.  kari-sat1 . 

a.  T  and  u  instead  of  Guna.  In  a  few  verbs  and  some  other  words 
T  and  u  are  the  old  weak  grade  vowels  (almost  invariably  medial)  of  e  and  0, 
the  length  of  which  has  been  preserved  by  the  accent  shifting  to  them  (while 
when  not  thus  protected  they  have  been  shortened  to  i  and  d),  and  which 
as  thus  accented,  sometimes  appear  instead  of  the  Guna  vowels.  Thus  T  is 
found  in  ris-ant-  ‘injuring’  (=  *rTs-dnt-)f  beside  resa-,  the  low  grade  form  of 
the  radical  syllable  otherwise  becoming  ris- 8.  Similary  gfihati  ‘hides’  appears 
beside  gdh-a-  ‘hiding-place’,  the  root  being  also  shortened  in  guh-ydte ,  etc.; 
dus-dyati  ‘spoils’,  beside  dos-d-  and  dosds-  (AV.)  ‘evening’,  also  dus-ti-  (AV.) 
‘destruction’;  7? h-ati  ‘removes’,  beside  oh- a-  ‘gift’;  nd  ‘now’,  nd-tana -  ‘new’, 
nu-ndm  ‘now’,  beside  ndva-  ‘new’,  also  nu  ‘now’  (never  at  the  beginning  of  a 
sentence);  intis-  ‘mouse’,  beside  mdsatha  ‘ye  rob’,  also  musitd-  ‘stolen’;  ydpa - 
‘post’,  beside yuyopa  ‘has  infringed’,  also yupitd-  (AV.)  ‘smoothed’;  stii-pa-  ‘tutt’, 
beside  sto-kd-  ‘drop’,  also  stu-pd-  (VS.)  ‘tuft’9. 

b.  In  a  few  roots  ending  in  zA°,  the  radical  vowel  T  represents  the  low 


1  With  loss  of  the  final  element,  which 
however,  remains  in  datives  like  tasmai, 
probably  because  the  diphthong  was  here 
pronounced  with  a  slurred  accent:  cp. 
Wackernagel  i,  93. 

2  With  loss  of  r,  the  preceding  vowel 

having  compensatory  IE.  lengthening  (cp. 
Wackernagel  i,  6l  c).  In  a  few  instances, 
the  Vrddhi  of  the  nom.  sing,  spread  to  other 
cases  (cp.  25  B  b  i);  e.  g.  tar-as,  nom.  pi., 
from  old  nom.  sing.  (beside  str-bhis). 

3  Also  agnail ,  like  the  z/-stems. 

4  See  below  1 9 1 . 

5  From  the  present  the  ar  spread  to 

other  forms,  e.  g.  perf.  mamarja  (AV.). 


6  They  have  0  in  the  intensive  redupli¬ 
cation  only;  e.  g.  sosu-  :  ys/7-. 

7  Cp.  Wackernagel  i,  76. 

8  The  accentuation  of  T,  the  low  grade  of 
ya,  is  probably  to  be  explained  similarly  in 
feminines  like  naptl-s (masc. napat-)\  shortened 
to  napli  in  voc. ;  cp.  19  b  3  and  29. 

9  The  accentuation  of  z7,  the  low  grade  of 
vh  is  probably  to  be  explained  similarly  in 
feminines  like  kadru-s  (TS.  B.)  ‘brown’  (masc. 
kddru-m ,  TS.  B.) ;  shortened  to  u  in  voc., 
e.  g.  babhru\  cp.  WACKERNAGEL  I,  82. 

10  That  is,  the  original  form  would  have 
been  iu-  or  id-  according  as  a  vowel  or  a 
consonant  followed. 


1 6  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  Vedic  Grammar. 


grade,  but  early  began  to  supplant  <?;  thus  from  dlv-  ‘play’,  beside  dideva  (AV.), 
dev-ana-  ‘game  of  dice’,  occur  div-yati ,  dlv-e  and  dlv-i  dat.  and  loc.  of  div- 
‘game  of  dice’;  from  srlv-  ‘fail’,  beside  srevdyant -,  srlvayati  (AV.);  but  from 
‘push’,  only  miv-ati  etc.;  from  sTv-  ‘sew’,  only  siv-yati  etc.  It  is  a  peculiarity 
of  these  roots  that  Tv  appears  before  vowels  and  y  only,  becoming  yu  or  u 
before  other  consonants;  thus  dyu-td-  (AV.)  ‘play’;  -mu-ta-  ‘impelled’,  mu-rd- 
‘dull’,  mtt-tra-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘urine’;  syu-ld-  ‘fastened’,  su-cd  ‘needle’,  sfi-tra-  (AV.) 
‘thread’;  srd-  ‘lead  ball’1. 


II.  The  Samprasarana2  series. 

a.  Gradation  of  ya  va  ra. 

23.  Low  grade:  /  u  r 3 *.  —  In  place  of  the  accented  syllables  ya  va  ra 
(corresponding  to  the  Guna  vowels  e  0  ar)  appear  the  low  grade  vowels 
i  u  r*  when  the  accent  shifts  to  the  following  syllable  in  some  fourteen 
roots,  viz.  yaj-  ‘sacrifice’,  vyac-  ‘extend’,  vyadh-  ‘pierce’,  vac-  ‘speak’,  vad- 
‘speak’,  vap-  ‘strew’,  vas-  ‘be  eager’,  vas-  ‘dwell’,  vas-  ‘shine’,  vah-  ‘carry’; 
svap-  ‘sleep \grabh-  and grah-  ‘seize’, pracch-  (properly  pras-)  ‘ask’,  vrasc-  ‘hew’; 
e.  g.  is- id-  :  yds- lave;  us-mdsi  :  vds-ti ;  susup-vdms-  :  susvdpa. 

a.  Besides  these,  a  good  many  other  roots,  in  occasional  verbal  forms 
or  nominal  derivatives,  show  the  same  gradation  in  the  radical  syllable. 

1.  /  appears  in  mimiksur :  mimyaksa  perf.  of  Y inyaks- ;  vithura-  ‘wavering’, 
vithuryati  ‘wavers’,  beside  vydth-ate  ‘wavers’. 

2.  u  in  uksant-  ‘growing’ :  vavdksa  ‘has  grown’;  sus-dnt- :  svas-iti  ‘breathes’; 
ju-hu?'-as  :  hvar-ati  ‘is  crooked’;  ur-u-  ‘broad’:  comp.  vdr-Iyas-,  superl.  vdr-istha- ; 
dur- :  dvdr-  ‘door’;  dhun-i-  ‘resounding’ :  dhvan-l-  (AV.)  ‘sound’. 

3.  r  in  krpate  ‘laments’:  aor.  akrapista ;  grnalti  (AV .)  : grath-itd-  ‘tied’; 
-srth-ita- :  srath-nati  ‘becomes  loose’;  rj-u-  ‘straight’ :  rdj-istha-  ‘straightest’;  rbh-u- 
‘adroit’ :  rdbh-ate  ‘grasps’;  drh-ya  ‘be  firm’  (impv.) :  drah-ydt  ‘firmly’;  prth-u- 
‘broad’ : prdth-ati  ‘spreads  out’;  bhrm-d-  ‘error’ :  bhram-d -  ‘whirling  flame’; 
a-ni-bhrs-ta-  ‘undefeated’:  bhras-at  aor.,  bhras-td-  (AV.)  ‘fallen’;  mrd-u-  ‘soft’: 
mrada  ‘soften’  (impv.),  Tirna-mradas-  ‘soft  as  wool’;  sfk-van- :  srdk-va-  ‘corner 
of  the  mouth’. 

b.  This  gradation  also  appears  in  the  stems  of  a  few  nouns  and  in  certain 
nominal  suffixes:  dyu-bhis :  dydv-i  loc.,  dydu-s  nom. ‘heaven’;  sun- :  svd-,  s'vdn- 
‘dog’; yfm-  ( = yu-un -)  \yuva- ,  yuvdn-  ‘youth’;  catui'- :  catvdr-  ‘four’;  the  superlative 
and  comparative  suffixes  -is-t/ia  and  -yas;  the  perf.  part,  suffix  -us  :  -vat, 
-vdins 5. 

b.  Gradation  of  ya  va  ra. 

24.  Low  grade:  T  u  ir.  —  Corresponding  to  the  reduction  of  the  short 
syllables  ya  va  7'a  to  the  short  vowels  i  u  r,  the  long  syllables  yd  vd  rd 
appear  as  T  u  tr  (—  IE.  f). 


1  The  etymology  of  this  word  is,  how¬ 
ever,  doubtful.  Cp.  Wackernagel  1,  81. 

2  In  the  terminology  of  the  native  gramma¬ 
rians  Samprasarana  (‘distraction’;  designates 
the  change  of  the  semi-vowel  only  to  the 
corresponding  vowel  (but  see  also  Panini  vi. 
1,  108).  Here  we  use  the  word  to  express 
the  reduction  of  the  entire  syllables^  va  ra 
to  the  corresponding  vowels  i  u  r. 

3  Though  r  seems  invariably  to  have 

resulted  from  the  reduction  of  Guna  or 

Samprasarana  syllables,  there  is  no  reason 


to  suppose  that  every  i  and  ti  has  a  similar 
origin.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  more  likely 
that  IE.  i  and  u  have  been  preserved  by 
the  side  of  the  reduced  vowels  and  that  the 
Guna  grade  has  in  many  instances  been 
subsequently  added  to  original  i  and  u. 
Cp.  Pedersen,  IF.  2,  323,  note. 

4  This  reduction  goes  back  to  the  IE.  pre¬ 
tonic  syncope  of  e  0 :  cp.  Wackernagel  i,  62 
(p.  69,  mid.).  —  On  the  two  forms  of  the  roots 
cp.  also  Nirukta  it.  2  and  Mahabhasya  1,  112. 

5  See  Wackernagel  i,  63. 


I.  Phonology.  Samprasarana  Series,  a  -Series.  17 


a.  T  is  found  thus  both  in  radical  and  suffixal  syllables:  1.  in  jT-td-  (AV.) 
ji-ydte  (AV.)  and  ji-yate :  -jyd-  ‘might’,  jyd-yas-  ‘stronger’,  ji-jyci-sant-  ‘desiring 
to  overcome’;  2.  in  the  fern,  suffix  -I:  kan-i-nam  (for  kanT-ndm)  from  han-yd - 
‘girl’;  in  nom.  acc.,  e.  g.  devi ,  devim ,  devis ,  beside  -ya-  in  dat.  abl.  gen.  loc.  sing. 
devydi  (=  devyd-e),  devyds  {=  devyd-as),  devydm  (=  devyd-ani)\  3.  in  the  optative, 
either  before  or  after  the  accented  syllable,  beside  -yd--,  e.  g.  bruv-T-td  and 
bhdret  (=  bhdra-T-t ),  but  i-yd-t. 

b.  u  is  found:  1.  in  forms  of  sud -  ‘put  in  order’  (=  ‘make  palatable’), 
e.  g.  su-sud-ati ,  sud-dyati,  sani-sud-d-  (TS.)  ‘gum’,  beside  forms  and  derivatives 
of  svad-  ‘enjoy’,  ‘taste’,  e.  g.  svada-te ,  svattd -,  svad-u-  ‘sweet’;  2.  in  fern, 
nouns  in  -u  beside  -va  in  dat.  abl.  gen.  loc.  sing.;  e.  g.  svasrU-  ‘mother-in-law’, 
dat.  svasr-vdi  (AV.,  ==  svasr-vd-e),  gen.  svasr-vds  (AV.,  =  svasr-vd-as ),  loc. 
svasr-vdm  (=  svasr-vd-ani). 

c.  Tr  (=  r)  is  found  in  dirgh-d-  ‘long’,  beside  drdgh-Tyas-  ‘longer’,  drdgh- 
istha-  ‘longest’,  dragh-mdn-  ‘length’. 

III.  The  a-series. 

a.  Gradation  of  a. 

25.  A.  Low  grade:  a  or  — Many  roots  and  formatives  have  a  in 
the  Guna  or  normal  stage.  The  reduction  of  r  from  ar  or  ra  indicates 
that  in  low  grade  syllables  this  a  would  normally  disappear.  As  a  rule, 
however,  it  remains1,  doubtless  because  its  loss  would  in  most  cases  have 
led  to  unpronounceable  or  obscure  forms2.  At  the  same  time,  the  syncope 
takes  place  in  a  considerable  number  of  instances: 

1.  in  verbal  forms:  ad-  ‘eat’ :  d-dnt-  (==  old  pres,  part.)  ‘tooth’;  as-  ‘be’: 
s-anti,  s-ydt,  s-dnt-,  beside  ds-ti  ‘is’;  gam-  ‘go’ :  ja-g?n-ur\  ghas-  ‘eat’ :  a-ks-an, 
3.  pi.  impf.,  g-d/ia  (=  ghs-ta ),  3.  sing.  impf.  mid.,  ja-ks-Tydt ,  perf.  opt.,  beside 
ghas-a-t  ‘may  he  eat’;  pat-  ‘fall’ :  pa-pt-ima,  pa-pt-ur ,  pa-pt-ivdms -,  perf.,  a-pa-pt-at , 
aor.,  beside  pat-anti\  pad-  ‘go’ : pi-bd-a-ma?ia-,  red.  pres,  part.,  pi-bd-ana-  ‘standing 
firm’,  beside  pdd-yate  ‘goes’;  bhas-  ‘chew’ :  ba-ps-ati ,  3  pi.  pres.,  bd-ps-at-,  pres, 
part.,  beside  bhds-a-t  ‘may  he  chew’;  sac-  ‘follow’ :  sa-sc-ati ,  3.  pi.  red.  pres., 
sa-sc-ata ,  3.  pi.  impf.  mid.,  sa-sc-ire \  3.  pi.  perf.  mid.,  beside  sac-ante  ‘they 
accompany’;  sad-  ‘sit’ :  sid-ati  (=  si-zd-ati ),  3.  sing,  pres.,  sed-ur  (=  sa-zd-ur ), 
3.  pi.  perf.,  beside  d-sad-at  ‘he  sat’;  han-  strike’ : ghn-anti,  3.  pi.  pres.,  beside 
han-ti  3.  sing. 

2.  in  nominal  derivatives:  ghas-  ‘eat’ :  a-g-dhdd-  (TS.)  ‘eating  what  is 
uneaten’  (=  a-ghs-ta-ad-),  sd-g-dhi  (VS.)  ‘joint  meal’  (=  sa-ghs-ti-);  bhas- 
‘chew ' :  d-ps-u-  ‘foodless’;  pad-  ‘walk’ :  upa-bd-a-,  upa-bd-i-  ‘noise’  (lit.  ‘tread’); 
tur-iya-  ‘fourth’  (=  *ktur-iya-)  :  catur-  ‘four’;  napt-i-  ‘granddaughter’  :  ndpat- 
‘grandson’. 

3.  in  suffixes:  -s-  for  -as-  in  bhl-s-d,  inst.  sing. :  bhiy-as-a  ‘through  fear’; 
sir-s-dn- :  sir-as-  ‘head’;  -s  for  -as  in  the  abl.  gen.  sing,  ending  of  stems  in  i  u  0: 
e.  g.  agne-s ,  vlsno-s ,  gd-s. 

B.  Long  grade:  a. —  The  Vrddhi  corresponding  to  the  a  which  represents 
the  Guna  stage  is  a.  It  appears: 

a.  in  the  root: 

1.  in  primary  nominal  derivation:  thus  pdd-  ‘foot’:  pad-,  bd-  ‘walk’;  rdj- 


1  See  Wackernagel  i,  70. 

2  When  a  is  followed  by  n  or  m,  the 
syllables  an  and  am,  if  preceded  by  a  con¬ 
sonant,  usually  lose  the  nasal  before  mutes  ; 
e.  g.  han-  strike’  :  ha-thas  2.  du.  pres.;  gam- 

Indo-arische  Philologie.  I.  4. 


‘go’ :  ga-ta- ;  dyu-mant-,  inst.  sing,  dyu-mat-a ; 
nd-man-,  inst.  pi.  nama-bhis.  The  a  in  such 
low  grade  syllables  is  generally  regarded  as 
historically  representing  the  sonant  nasal  n : 
cp.  Wackernagel  i,  66. 


2 


1 8  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

4 

4 

Also  before  primary  suffixes:  tip- as :  dp- as  ‘work’;  vds-as  ‘garment’ :  vas-,  us- 
‘wear’;  vdh-as  ‘offering’ :  vah-,  uh-  ‘convey’;  vds-tu  ‘abode’  :  vas-,  us-  ‘dwell’. 
Perhaps  also  pdth-as  ‘place’ :  path-  ‘path’  h 

2.  in  secondary  nominal  derivation;  e.  g.  kanvd-  ‘descended  from  Kanva’; 
vapus-d-  ‘marvellous’ :  vdp-us-  ‘marvel’. 

3.  in  the  active  of  the  ^-aorist:  thus  a-cchant-s-ur  \  chand -,  chad-  (=  chad-) 
‘appear’;  a-yam-s-am,  1.  sing,  \yatn-,  ya-  (=  ym-)  ‘stretch’;  sak-s-ama ,  also  mid. 
sak-s-i,  sdk-s-ate  :  sah-  ‘overcome’1  2. 

b.  in  the  suffix  of  nominal  stems: 

1.  in  the  nom.  sing.  masc.  of  stems  in  -?na?it  and  - va?it ,  and  throughout 
the  strong  cases  of  stems  in  -an,  of  mahdt-  ‘great’,  and  of  ndpat-  ‘grandson’: 
thus  dyu-mdn  ‘brilliant’ :  dyu-mdnt-,  dyu-mdt-  (=  - mnt re-vdn  ‘rich’ :  re-vdnt -, 
re-vdt-  (=  vntj  3 4;  rdj-a ,  acc.  rdj-an-am  ‘king’ :  raj-an-,  rdj-h- ,  rdj-a-  (=  raj-n-) ; 
mah-an ,  acc.  mah-dnt-am;  ndpat,  acc.  ndpat-am . 

2.  in  the  nom.  acc.  pi.  neuter  of  stems  in  -an  and  -as  and  of  one  in 
-ant’,  thus  ndma 4  ‘names’ :  ndman,  ndma-  (=  ndmn-);  mdnams-i  ‘minds’ :  man-as; 
sdnt-i :  s-dnt-  ‘being’. 

c.  in  anu-  as  first  member  of  a  compound  in  anu-sak  and  anukam 
‘continuously’ :  otherwise  anu-. 


king’ :  raj-,  rj-  ‘direct’;  vac-  ‘voice’  :  vac-,  uc-  ‘speak’;  ksds ,  nom.,  ksdm,  acc., 
earth’  :  ksarn -,  ksm- ;  ndbh -  ‘well’  :  ndbh-as ,  abh-rd-  (abh-  =  nbhj  ‘cloud’. 


b.  Gradation  of  a. 

26.  Low  grade:  /.  —  The  vowel  a  is  not  always  the  long  grade  vowel: 
in  a  number  of  roots  it  represents  Guna.  The  low  grade  of  this  a  is 
normally  i;  it  sometimes,  however,  appears  as  f,  owing  to  analogy5,  and, 
especially  with  a  secondary  accent,  as  a.  Thus  sthi-td-  :  sthd-s  ‘thou  hast 
stood’;  dhi-td- :  dd-dha-ti  ‘places’;  pu-m-hi \ pu-nd-ti,  from  pu-  ‘purify’;  gdh-a?ia- 
‘depth’,  gdh-vara-  (AV.)  ‘hiding-place’ :  gdh-ate  ‘plunges’. 

a.  The  low  grade  vowel  disappears:  1.  in  roots  ending  in  a  before 
vowel  terminations;  in  the  weak  forms  of  the  reduplicated  present  base  of 
da-  ‘give’  and  dha-  ‘put’,  before  all  terminations;’  and  in  the  weak  form  of 
the  suffix  -na-  in  the  ninth  class  before  vowel  terminations;  thus  in  the  perfi 
of  da- :  dad-dthur ,  dad-atur\  da  d-d,  dad-ur\  da  d-d]  in  the  pres,  of  dha- :  dadh- 
mdsi ;  beside  pu-nd-ti  ‘he  purifies’,  pu-n-dnti  ‘they  purify’.  Similarly  from  ha- 
‘forsake’  occurs,  in  the  opt.  pres.,  the  form  jah-yat  (AV.). 

2.  in  the  final  member  of  compounds  formed  with  the  perf.  part, 
passive  of  da-  ‘give’,  and  da-  ‘cut’,  or  with  a  substantive  in  -ti-  from  da-  ‘give’: 
devd-tta-,  a  name  (‘given  by  the  gods’);  dva-tta-  (VS.)  ‘cut  off’;  pdri-tta-  (VS.) 
‘given  up’;  d-pratl-tta-  (AV.)  ‘not  given  back’;  bhdga-tti-  ‘gift  of  fortune’; 
maghd-tti -  ‘gift  of  presents’;  vdsu-tti-  ‘gift  of  wealth’  (beside  vdsu-dhiti-  ‘bestowal 
of  wealth’ :  dha-).  Also  in  agni-dh -6  ‘fire-placer’,  a  kind  of  priest7. 


1  Cp.  Aufrecht,  BB.  14,  33;  Wacker- 
nagel  1,  72  (p.  79,  bottom). 

2  Op.  cit.  1,  72  b  h  (p.  80). 

3  The  long  vowel  in  these  nominatives 
is  to  be  accounted  for  by  IE.  compensatory 
lengthening  (-man  =  mant-s ,  etc.);  in  the 
following  examples  it  has  spread  from  the 
nominative  to  other  cases. 

4  Such  neuter  plurals  were  in  origin  prob¬ 

ably  feminine  singular  collectives:  cp.  Brug- 

mann,  KG.  481 ;  Wackernagel  i,  73  and  95. 


5  That  is,  under  the  influence  of  T  as 
low  grade  of  ai  which  before  consonants 
appears  as  a,  as  in  gi-ta-  beside  ga-thd-, 
from  gai-  ‘sing’,  pres,  gdy-ati ;  cp.  27  a. 

6  Cp.  agni-dhdna-  ‘fire-place’;  in  VS. 
agnidh-  appears  instead,  as  if  ‘fire-kindler’ 
(from  idh-  ‘kindle’). 

7  For  a  few  other  examples  (which  are 
doubtful)  of  the  loss  of  the  low  grade  vowel 
in  the  final  member  of  compounds,  see 
Wackernagel  i,  p.  82  (mid.). 


I.  Phonology,  a  Series,  ai  and  au  Series. 


19 


IV.  The  ai  and  au  series. 


a.  Gradation  of  ai. 


27.  Low  grade:  7.  —  As  the  final  of  roots  and  in  suffixes  T  is  graded 
with  ai  (as  with  yd1),  which  appears  as  ay-  before  vowels  and  as  a-  before 
consonants2.  The  roots  in  which  this  gradation  is  found  are  stated  by  the 
Indian  grammarians  in  five  different  forms.  They  are: 

a.  1.  roots  given  with  - ai -  (because  their  present  base  appears  as  -dy-a) : 
gai-  ‘sing’ :  gT-td-,  gT-ya-mana-,  beside  gdy-ati  ‘sings’,  -gdy-as  ‘song’,  and  gd-s-i, 

1.  sing.  aor.  mid .,  gd-tha-  ‘song’;  pyai-  ‘swell’  : pT-nd beside  pydy-atc;  srai-  ‘boil’: 
srT-nd-ti,  s'rl-td-,  beside  srdy-ati,  sra-td-.  —  2.  with  -dy- :  cay-  ‘observe’ :  ciki-hi 
(AV.),  beside  cdy-amdna-,  cdy-u-  ‘respectful’.  —  3.  with  -e-\  dhe-  ‘suck ’ :  d/iT-td-, 
beside  dhdy-as  ‘drink’,  dhay-u-  ‘thirsty’,  and  dhd-tave  ‘to  suck’,  dha-ru-  (AV.) 
‘sucking’.  —  4.  with -a-:  pa-  ‘drink’*: pl-ta-,  pX-tl-  ‘drink’,  beside  pay-ay ati,  caus., 
pay-ana-  ‘causing  to  drink’,  and  a-pd-t ,  aor.,  pd-tave\  rd-  ‘give’ :  ra-t'T-thds, 

2.  sing,  injv.,  beside  rdy-d  ‘with  wealth’,  and  rd-sva ,  impv.,  rd-m,  acc.  —  5.  with  -T-: 
m-  ‘lead’ :  ni-ta-,  beside  nay-d-  ‘leader’,  and  -na-tha-  (AV.)  ‘help’;  pi-  ‘revile’: 
pi-yati ,  pT-ya-tnu-  and  pT-y-u-  ‘reviler’,  beside  pay-u-  (VS.)  ‘anus’;  prT-  ‘love’: 
prT-na-ti ,  prT-ta-,  beside  prdy-as-e 3;  /f-4  ‘lie’;  -si-van-  ‘lying’,  beside  a-sdy-ata , 

3.  sing.5 


b.  This  gradation  also  occurs  in  the  final  of  dissyllabic  bases:  thus 
grabhi-sta ,  a-grabhi-t,  grbhl-ta -,  beside  grbhay-dti  ‘seizes’6;  and  in  the  base  of 
the  ninth  class:  grbhm-ta ,  2.  pi.,  beside  grbhnd-ti. 

c.  It  is  also  found  in  the  suffixes  -e, the  -ete  and  -ethdm  -etdm  of  the 
2.  3.  du.  mid.  of  the  ^-conjugation,  which  can  only  be  explained  as  containing 
ithe  Tte  and  Tthdm  Ttdm,  with  weak  grade  1  corresponding  to  the  accented 
a  of  dthe  dte  and  dthdm  dtdm  of  the  non-thematic  conjugation  (and  parallel 
to  the  -T-  of  the  optative  beside  -yd-7). 


b.  Gradation  of  au. 

28.  Low  grade:  0.  —  As  the  final  of  roots  u  is  graded  with  au  (parallel 
with  vd8),  much  in  the  same  way  as  T  with  ai,  appearing  as  dv  before  vowels, 
a  before  consonants9;  but  the  certain  examples  are  few.  Thus  dhu-nd-ti 
‘shakes’,  dhz-ti-  ‘shaker’,  dhii-nid-  ‘smoke’,  beside  dhdv-ati  ‘runs’,  dhd-ra- 
‘stream’;  dhu-ta-  ‘washed’,  beside  dhdv-ati  ‘washes’.  But  here  au  appears 
before  consonants  as  well  as  d;  thus  dhau-tdri-  ‘shaking’,  beside  dhu-  ‘shake’; 
and  dhau-ti-  ‘spring’,  dhau-td-  (SV.),  beside  dhdv-ati  ‘washes’.  Similarly  gd-m 


1  See  above  24. 

2  ai  appears  only  in  the  .r-aor.,  as  nai-s-ta, 
2.  pi.,  rii-  ‘lead’,  owing  to  the  analogy  of 
forms  like  d-jai-s-ma,  from  ji-  ‘conquer’. 

3  Occurs  RV.  IV.  2I7  (Pp .  pra  dyase  (and  is 
explained  by  Bohtlingk  (pw.)  as  =  prayase. 

4  Perhaps  also  in  si-  ‘fall’  :  siyate  (AV.), 
beside  sdta-yati  ‘cuts  off’,  which  may  be  a 
denominative  from  *sa-ta-  ‘fallen’.  Cp. 
Whitney,  Roots,  under  ]/s ’at-  and  ]/i  si-; 
Wackernagel  1,  79  a  $  (p.  88). 

5  In  some  of  the  above  roots  e  appears 
instead  of  d  before  consonants;  e.  g.  ce-ru- 
‘devout’,  beside  cdy-u-;  pe-ru-  ‘causing  to 

drink’,  beside  pdy-ana -;  dhe-nu-  ‘milch  cow’, 

dhe-nd-  id.;  se-se,  beside  a-sdy-ata ;  ne-tr-, 
beside  ndy-d- ;  ste-na-  ‘thief’,  beside  stdy-u- 

(VS.)  id.,  and  stay-ant-  (AV.)  ‘furtive’;  send- 

missile’,  beside  say-aka-.  It  is,  perhaps,  due 


to  this  e  that  ay-  sometimes  appears  instead 
of  dy-  in  some  of  the  above  verbs;  as 
prdy-as-  ‘enjoyment’,  from  \prl- ;  ray-i-  ‘wealth’, 
from  \/ra- ;  say-e,  3.  sing.,  from  si-  ‘lie’. 

6  Cp.  Wackernagel  i,  79  b  (p.  89). 

7  Op.  cit.  1,  79  c  (p.  89). 

8  See  above  24  b. 

9  Similarly  in  the  RV.  the  -au  of  duals  and 
of  astau  ‘eight’  normally  appears  as  dv  before 
vowels  and  a  before  consonants  in  Sandhi. 
The  nominatives  in  a  of  -r  stems  and  -an 
stems,  e.  g.  mala,  svd  ‘dog’,  are  probably 
due  originally  to  the  loss  of  the  final  r  and 
n  before  consonants  in  the  sentence,  then 
becoming  the  regular  form  everywhere. 
Conversely  as/au  has  become  the  only  in¬ 
dependent  form  in  the  AV.,  asta-  appearing 
only  as  first  member  of  a  compound.  Cp. 
Wackernagel  i,  94,  95. 


2* 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


and  gd -s,  acc.,  beside  gdv-as ,  nom.  pi.,  but  gates,  nom.  sing.,  ‘cow’;  and  dya-m , 
acc.  sing.,  beside  dyCiv-as ,  nom.  pi.,  but  dydu-s,  nom.  sing.,  ‘heaven’. 


V.  Secondary  shortening  of  /  u  r. 

29.  Low  grade:  /  u  r. —  Owing  to  the  shift  of  the  accent  from  its 
normal  position  in  a  word  to  its  beginning,  the  low  grade  vowels  1  u  ir  ur  (=/) 
are  often  further  shortened  to  i  u  r  in  compounds  and  reduplicated  forms. 
A  pre-tonic  syllable  thus  acquires  a  post-tonic  position,  where  the  force  of  the 
accent  is  weakest.  It  is  the  same  cause  which  shortens  final  weak  grade  1 
and  u  in  the  vocative  singular;  e.  g.  devi ,  nom.  devi\  svasru,  nom.  svasrfis \ 
This  shortening  often  appears  in: 

a.  compounds1 2: 

1.  those  in  which  the  final  member  is  derived  with  -, ta -  and  -ti-, 
die  accent  being  regularly  thrown  back  on  the  first  member3:  thus  d-ni-si-ta- 
‘restless’,  ni-si-td-  (TS.  B.)  ‘night’,  from  si  ‘lie’;  prd-si-ti- 1  onset’,  beside  sdy-aka- 
‘missile’4;  su-su-ti-  ‘easy  birth’,  beside  sdti-kd-  (AV.)  ‘lying-in  woman’;  d-str-ta- 
‘unconquered’,  d-ni-str-ta-  ‘not  overthrown’,  beside  stlr-nd-,  from  str-  ‘strew’5; 
d-huti-  ‘invocation’,  otherwise  -hu-ti-  in  sd-huti-  ‘joint  invocation’,  devd-huti- 
‘invocation  of  the  gods’,  and  other  compounds. 

2.  those  in  which  the  final  member  is  a  root  in  l6  or  u  with  or 
without  the  suffix  -/;  e.  g.  dhl-ju-  ‘thought  inspiring’,  beside  jii-  ‘hastening’, 
ju-td-  ‘impelled’;  very  often  -, bhu -,  beside  bhu -,  as  in  d-pra-bhu-  ‘powerless’, 
vi-bhu-  ‘mighty’;  ni-yu-t-  ‘team’,  beside  yii-  ‘unite’  (as  in  yu-thd -  ‘herd’). 

3.  those  in  which  the  final  member  is  formed  with  other  suffixes; 
thus  madhydn-di-na-  ‘midday’,  su-dl-na-  ‘bright’,  beside  dl-  ‘shine’;  su-su-mdnt- 
‘very  stimulating’,  beside  su-td-  ‘impelled’;  also  in  tuvi-gr-d-  and  tuvi-gr-i- 
‘much  devouring’,  beside  sam-gir-d-  (AV.)  ‘devouring’,  as  r  here  —  r 7. 

4.  some  Bahuvrlhis  (in  which  the  first  member  is  normally  accented)8; 
thus  brhdd-ri- 9  ‘possessing  much  wealth’  ( rdi -);  try-udh-dn-  ‘having  three  udders’, 
beside  ttdh-an-  ‘udder’. 

b.  reduplicated  forms 10  in  which  accentuation  of  the  reduplicative 
syllable,  especially  in  the  third  class  and  one  form  of  the  aorist,  counteracts 
the  normal  accent  of  the  verb;  thus  from  dl -  ‘shine’,  are  formed  dl-di-hi, 
2.sing.impv.,  di-di-vdms -,  perf.  part.,  di-di-vi-  ‘shining’,  beside  dl-paya-  (causative) 


1  Cp.  23. 

2  The  application  of  this  shortening  pro¬ 
cess  becomes  obscured ,  on  the  one  hand 
because  the  phonetically  shortened  vowel 
has  found  its  way  into  accented  final 
members  of  compounds  as  being  character¬ 
istic  of  the  end  of  a  compound;  while,  on  the 
other  hand,  id  Tr  ur  (=r)  for  the  most  part 
have  remained  unchanged,  even  when  the 
accent  has  shifted,  because  of  the  influence  of 
the  uncompounded  word;  e.  g.  su-suta-  ‘well- 
begotten’,  pra-suta-  ‘impelled’;  ^-/^/-‘inten¬ 
tion’  ;  rta-dhiti -  ‘truly  adored’ ;  prd-lurti- 
‘onset’. 

3  That  this  is  the  cause  of  the  shortening 
is  shown  by  the  fact  that  the  i  of  the  inst. 
sing,  of  derivatives  in  -ti  appears  as  z  only 
when  such  words  are  compounded:  e.  g. 
pra-yukti  ‘with  the  team’.  Cp.  Wackernagel 
I,  84. 

4  Cp.  27,  note  5. 


5  The  secondarily  shortened  form  of  the 
past  part,  str-ta-  is  not  found  as  an  in¬ 
dependent  word  in  the  RV.;  it  first  appears 
in  later  texts. 

6  An  example  of  the  shortening  of  i  is 
perhaps  adhi-ksi-t-  ‘ruler’,  ksi-  being  according 
to  J.  Schmidt,  Pluralbildung  419,  the  original 
weak  form  of  the  root;  cp.  Wackernagel 
1,  83  b. 

7  Cp.  Kretschmer,  KZ.  31,  397;  Wacker¬ 
nagel  1,  83  c. 

8  See  accentuation  of  compounds,  90. 

9  Occurring  only  in  the  dat.  sing,  brhad- 
raye ,  beside  rciy-c,  dat.  of  rdi-  ‘wealth’. 

i°  On  the  shortening  of  the  radical  syllable 
in  some  verbs  of  the  fifth  and  the  ninth 
classes,  ji-no-si ,  beside  ji-ra-  ‘lively’,  du-no-ti 
‘burns’,  beside  du-na-  (AV.);  ju-na-ti ‘impels’, 
beside/?/-/#'-;  pu-na-ti  ‘purifies’,  beside/?/-/#-, 
see  Wackernagel  i,  85,  note  (bottom). 


I.  Phonology.  Secondary  Shortening  of  z  u  r.  Consonants.  2 1 

‘kindle’;  from  dhi-  ‘think’,  dl-dhi-ma ,  1.  pi.  perf.,  di-dhi-ti-  ‘devotion’,  beside 
dliT-ti -  ‘thought’;  from  kf-  ‘commemorate’,  cdr-kr-se ,  intv.,  car-kr-ti-  ‘praise’, 
beside  kir-ti-  ‘praise’;  from pf-  fill’,  pi-pr-tdm ,  3.  du.,  beside  pur-na -  and pur-ta 
Such  shortening  often  occurs  in  red.  aor.,  e.  g.  bi-bhis-a-thas ,  2.  sing,  mid., 
beside  vi-bhis-ana-  ‘terrifying’.  It  is  also  found  in  a  few  nouns;  e.  g.  si-si-ra- 
(AV.)  ‘coolness’,  beside  /z-ta'-  ‘cold’;  tu-tu-md -  beside  td-ya-  ‘strong’1. 


The  Consonants. 

30.  Doubling  of  consonants.  —  All  consonants,  except  r  h  /,  Anusvara, 
and  Visarjanlya,  can  be  doubled,  and  the  distinction  between  double  and 
single  consonants  is  known  to  the  Pratisakhyas  as  well  as  to  Panini.  Aspirates 
are,  however,  nearly  always  written  double  by  giving  the  first  in  the  unaspirated 
form.  A  double  consonant2  is  pronounced  by  the  organs  of  speech  dwelling 
longer  on  it  than  on  the  single  sound.  Within  words3  a  double  consonant 
appears: 

x.  as  the  result  of  the  contact  of  the  same  consonants  or  the  assimilation  4 
of  different  ones;  e.  g.  cit-td-  ‘perceived’  (=  cit-taj ;  uc-cd-  ‘high’  (=  nd-ca-) ; 
bhet-tr-  ‘breaker’  (=  bhed-tr-) ;  dn-na -  ‘food’  (=  ad-na -). 

2.  in  a  few  onomatopoetic  words:  akhkhall-krtya  ‘shouting’;  ciccikd -  a  kind 
of  bird;  kukkuta-  (VS.)  ‘cock’;  tittiri-  (VS.)  and  tittiri-  (TS.  B.)  ‘quail’;  pippaka- 
(VS.)  a  kind  of  bird. 

3.  in  the  case  of  the  palatal  aspirate,  which  regularly  appears  as  cch 
between  vowels  (though  often  written  as  ch  in  the  Mss.),  for  it  always 
makes  the  preceding  vowel  long  by  position  and  is  derived  from  an  original 
conjunct  consonant5.  Some  forms  of  khid-  ‘press  down’,  are  doubled  after  a 
vowel  in  the  TS.  ( akkhidat ,  d-kkhidra -;  a-kkhidate \  pari-kkhidate ).  In  the  TS.6 
bh  appears  doubled  in  pari  bbhuja.  In  a  school  of  the  White  Yajurveda 
initial  v  was  regularly  doubled7. 

4.  when  final  n  is  doubled  after  a  short  vowel  if  followed  by  any  vowel 
sound8 *. 

a.  In  the  Mss.,  when  double  consonants  are  preceded  or  followed  by  another  con¬ 
sonant^  one  of  them  is  frequently  dropped,  because  in  such  consonantal  groups  there 
was  no  difference  in  pronunciation  between  single  and  double  consonants.  Hence  the 
VPr.  (vi.  27)  prescribes  a  single  t  in  ksattra-  ‘dominion’  (=  ksad-tra-),  and  in  saitrd- 
‘sacrificial  session’  (=  sad-trad).  Such  shortening  is  further  presupposed  by  the  analysis 
of  the  Pada  texts  in  hr{d)-dyotah  (AV.  1.  221)  and  hr[d)-dyotanah  (AV.  v.  2012)  as  hr-dyotah 
and  hr-dyotanah ;  in  ta(d)dydm  (AV.  iv.  196)  as  tat  yam  (instead  of  tat  dydm);  and  in 
iipasiha-,  which  appears  in  the  RV.  Pada  as  upd-stha-  instead  of  upas-stha -,  if  Grassmann’s 
suggestion  is  right10.  In  some  instances  this  reduction  is  IE.,  as  in  satrd -  (IE.  setlo-p' . 


1  On  variations  in  cognate  forms  between 
i  u  r  and  1  ii  r  in  some  other  words  see 
Wackernagel  i,  86. 

2  .Sometimes  a  single  s  represents  the 

double  sound,  as  in  dsi  ‘thou  art’  (—  as-si) ; 
apasu  (RV.  vm.  4T4),  loc.  pi.  of  apds-  ‘active’; 

amhasu  (AV.),  loc.pl.  of  dmhas-  ‘distress’; 
jo-si  ‘thou  shalt  taste’  (jus-);  probably  also  in 
gho-si  (from  ghus-  ‘sound’j,  in  us- as,  gen  sing., 

acc.  pi.  of  us-,  weak  stem  of  us-as •  ‘dawn’ 

(for  *itss-as),  possibly  in  usr-  ‘dawn’  (for 
*uss-r-).  As  the  single  s  in  such  forms  is 

shown  by  cognate  languages  also,  it  seems 

here  to  be  pre-Vedic,  and  the  double  in 

forms  like  rdjas-su,  loc.  pb,  is  probably  an 

Indian  innovation.  The  change  of  ss  to  ks, 


as  in  aviksat  (AV.)  =  *<r tvis-sat,  aor.  of  dvis- 
‘hate’,  is  also  an  Indian  innovation. 

3  On  double  consonants  in  Sandhi,  see 
below  77. 

4  The  evidence  of  theAvestan  form voroctka- 
shows  that  the  double  consonant  in  vrkka- 
(A V.  VS.)  ‘kidney’  is  due  to  assimilation. 

5  See  below  40;  Wackernagel  i,  12^5. 

6  See  TPr.  xiv.  8. 

7  See  Weber,  Abh.  d.  Berliner  Ak.  d. 
Wiss.  1871,  p.  83  f. 

8  See  below  46;  cp.  Wackernagel  i, 
279  a. 

9  Cp.  Roth  in  ZDMG.  48,  102  f. 

10  See  his  Lexicon,  s.  v.  upastha-. 

“  See  Wackernagel  i,  98  b,  note. 


22  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


Mutes. 


31.  Modes  of  articulation.  —  There  are  20  mutes  (or  22  counting  l  Ih 
among  the  cerebrals),  which  comprise  a  tenuis,  an  aspirate  tenuis,  a  media, 
and  an  aspirate  media  in  each  of  the  five  groups  of  gutturals,  palatals,  cerebrals, 
dentals,  and  labials  (4).  These  four  modes  of  articulation  are  initially  and 
medially  liable  to  but  little  variation  except  when  they  come  into  contact 
with  other  mutes  or  with  following  sibilants. 

1.  The  tenues  regularly  represent  IE.  tenues;  e.  g.  cakrd-  ‘wheel’,  Gk. 
K.'jKho-q\  pitr-  ‘father’,  Gk.  naTijp,  Lat.  pate?'. 

2.  The  mediae  regularly  represent  IE.  mediae;  e.  g.  gdcchati,  Gk.  pccuicst; 
rdj-  ‘king’,  Lat.  reg-;  ?nad-ati  ‘is  drunk’,  Lat.  mad-et.  There  are  a  few 
instances  in  which  a  media  appears  in  place  of  an  older  tenuis:  gidphd-  (AY.): 
kulphd -  ‘ancle’;  drbhaga-  ‘youthful’ :  arbhaJza-  ‘little’;  tuj-  :  tiic tokdi-  ‘offspring’; 
dn-ava-prgna-  ‘undivided’ :  prc-  ‘mix’;  girika-  (MS.)  :  kirikd-  (VS.) 1  a  kind  of 
demon.  These  examples  may  be  due  to  popular  dialects,  in  which  tenues 
largely  became  mediae2.  In  a  few  derivatives  the  media  g  appears  instead 
of  k  before  the  n  m  v  of  suffixes  owing  to  the  influence  of  Sandhi:  e.g.  vag-nu- 
‘sound’,  from  vac-  ‘speak’,  but  rek-nas-  ‘wealth’,  from  ric-;  sag-ma-  ‘helpful’, 
from  sad-,  but  ruk-md-  ‘gold’,  from  rue-  ‘shine’;  vdg-vin-  (AV.)  ‘eloquent’,  from 
vdk  ‘speech’,  but  tak-va-  ‘swift’,  from  tak-  ‘hasten’. 

3.  The  evidence  of  cognate  languages  shows  that  the  Vedic  aspirate 
tenuis  in  a  large  number  of  instances  is  original,  and  it  is  highly  probable 
that  it  is  the  regular  representative  of  IE.  aspirate  tenuis.  The  following  are 
examples  in  which  mutes  of  this  character  are  inherited3: 

a.  kha?i-  ‘dig’;  khd-  ‘spring’;  khdd-ati  ‘chews’;  ?iakhd-  ‘nail’;  makha-  ‘lively’; 
mukha-  ‘mouth’;  sankhd-  (AV.)  ‘shell’;  sdkhi-  ‘companion’. 

b.  ch  =  IE.  skh,  e.g.  in  chid-  ‘split’;  =  IE.  sk  in  inchoative gdcchati  ‘goes’, 
ucchdti  ‘shines’. 


c.  th  =  th  in  sas-thd-  (VS.  AV.)  ‘sixth’;  st/uv-ati  (AV.)  ‘spits’. 

d.  th 4  in  dtha  ‘then’;  a  than-  ‘tip’;  dtharvan-  ‘fire-priest’;  drtha-  ‘use’; 
granth-  ‘knot’;  path-  ‘way’; prth-u-  ‘broad’;  prdth-as  ‘breadth’;  prdthat-  ‘snorting’; 
?nath-  ‘stir’;  mith-  ‘alternate’;  yd-tha  ‘as’;  rdtha-  ‘car’;  vyathate  ‘wavers’;  snath- 
‘pierce’.  Further  in  the  various  suffixes  -tha\  forming  primary  nouns;  e.  g. 
uk-thd-  ‘praise’,  ga-thd-  f.  ga-thd-  ‘song’;  as  -atha  in  svas-dtha-  ‘hissing’; 
forming  ordinals:  catur-thd-  (AV.)  ‘fourth’;  saptd-tha-  ‘seventh’;  forming  2.  sing, 
perf. :  dada-tha  ‘thou  gavest’,  vet-tha  ‘thou  knowest’;  forming  2.  pi.  pres.:  bhava- 
tha  ‘ye  are’;  also  in  -thas  of  2.  sing,  mid.,  e.  g.  a-sthi-thas  ‘thou  hast  stood’. 

e.  ph  in  phala-  ‘fruit’;  p Julia-  ‘ploughshare’;  sphar-  and  sphur-  ‘jerk’; 
spha(y)-  ‘grow  fat’. 

4.  The  aspirate  media,  which  represents  the  same  IE.  sound,  is  a 
media  combined  with  h.  This  is  proved  by  the  express  statements  of  the 
Pratisakhyas 5 ;  by  the  fact  that  Ih  =  dh  is  written  with  the  separate  letters 
/  and  h\  and  by  the  change  of  h  following  a  media  to  an  aspirate  media 
(as  tad  did  for  tad  hi). 

a.  In  two  or  three  words  an  aspirate  media  interchanges  with  an  aspirate  tenuis: 
nddhamana-  ‘praying’,  nadhitd-  ‘distressed’,  beside  nathitd -  ‘distressed’  (where  th  is  probably 
due  to  the  influence  of  -ndtha-  ‘help’);  adha  and  dtha  ‘then’6;  nisahgadhi -  (VS.)  and 
nisahgathi-  (TS.)  ‘scabbard’. 


1  For  some  doubtful  instances  of  media 

representing  IE.  tenuis,  see  AVackernagel 
1,  100  b,  p.  1 1 7,  note.  2  1.  c. 

3  Op.  cit.  101. 

4  A  complete  list  of  Vedic  and  Sanskrit 

words  containing  th  in  his  article  ‘Die  ur- 


sprachliche  tenuis  aspirata  dentalis  im  ari- 
schen,  griechischen  und  lateinischen’  by 
Zubaty  in  IvZ.  31,  I — 9. 

5  RPr.  XIII.  2.  5  ;  TPr.  II.  9. 

6  There  seem  to  have  been  a  few  IE. 
doublets  ofthiskind:  see WACKERNAGEL 1, 1 03. 


I.  Phonology.  Mutes.  Modes  of  Articulation.  Loss  of  Aspiration.  23 


32.  Loss  of  aspiration.  —  Aspiration  is  lost  when  there  is  another 
aspirate  in  the  same  syllable  or  at  the  beginning  of  the  next  in  roots r.  Hence 

a.  initial  aspiration  is  lost:  1.  in  the  reduplicative  syllable:  e.  g.  ja- 
gkdn-a  (Zian-,  ghan-  ‘strike’);  ca-cchand-a  ( cZiatid -  ‘please’);  da-dZui-ti  (d/ia-  ‘put’); 
par-pZiar-at  ( phar -  ‘scatter’?).  But  when  the  reduplication  consists  of  two 
syllables,  the  rule  does  not  apply;  e.  g.  ghdni-ghan-at ,  intv.  part,  of  Zian- 
(beside  jdii-gZin-at),  gZiana-gZian-d-  ‘fond  of  striking’;  bhdri-bhr-cit ,  intv.  part, 
of  bZir-  ‘bear’.  Loss  of  aspiration,  however,  began,  even  in  the  RV.2,  to 
spread  from  monosyllabic  to  dissyllabic  reduplication;  thus  a-pani-pZian-at , 
intv.  part,  of  pZian -  ‘bound’. —  2.  in  the  following  words,  according  to  the 
evidence  of  cognate  languages:  kumbZid-  ‘pot’3;  gadZi-  ‘attach’;  gdbZias-ti-  ‘arm’; 
gnZi-  ‘conceal’;  grdZi-  ‘be  greedy’;  grZid -  ‘house’;  grabZi-  ‘seize’;  jamZias  ‘gait’; 
jdiigZia-  ‘leg’;  jagZiana-  ‘buttock’;  dabZi-  ‘harm’;  daZi -  ‘burn’;  dih-  ‘besmear’; 
duZi -  ‘milk’;  duZiitr-  ‘daughter’;  draZiydt  ‘strongly’;  druZi-  ‘injure’;  bandZi -  ‘bind’; 
babZiru-  ‘brown’;  badZi-  ‘distress’;  baZiu-  ‘arm’;  budZi -  ‘awake’;  budZind-  ‘bottom’; 
brZi-  ‘be  great’.  It  is  probable  also  in  dagZi-  ‘reach’:  bainZi-  ‘be  firm’;  badZiird- 
‘deaf’;  baZiu -,  baZiuld-  ‘much’;  bradZina-  ‘pale  red’;  brdZwian-  ‘devotion’. 

b.  Final  aspiration  is  often  lost4.  1.  When  this  occurs  before  suffixal  y, 
orignal  initial  aspiration  is  lost  in  some  cases;  thus  from  guZi-  ‘hide’,  desid. 
3.  du.  ju-guk-sa-tas ;  grdZi-  ‘be  eager’ :  grtsd-  ‘dexterous’;  dabZi-  ‘harm’ :  desid. 
d'ip-sa-ti ,  dip-su -  ‘intending  to  hurt’;  daZi-  ‘burn’:  impv.  daZz-si ,  aor.  part.  ddZzsat 
ddZzsn-  and  daZzsiis-  ‘flaming’;  duZi-  ‘milk’  :  aor.  a-duZzsat ,  duZzsds ,  etc.,  des.  part. 
duduZzsan 5 ;  bZias-  ‘chew’ :  bap-sati ,  part,  bdps-at- ;  gZias-  ‘eat’ :  jak-siydt ,  perf.  opt.; 
Zias -  ‘laugh’  :  part.  jdZzs-at-)  also  in  the  word  drap-sd-  ‘drop’6 *. 

But  in  some  of  the  above  and  in  analogous  forms  with  s,  the  original 
initial  aspirate  remains;  thus  from  guZi -,  aor.  aghuksat;  daZi-  :  dZidksi ,  part. 
dZidZzsat-}  fut.  part.  dZiaZzsydn ;  duZi-  :  aor.  adZiuZzsat ,  dZiuZzsan ,  etc.  2.  impv. 
dZiuZz-syua ;  badZi-  ‘distress’ :  bi-bhat-su-  ‘loathing’;  budZi-  ‘awake’ :  aor.  a-bZiut-s-i. 

2.  When  the  loss  of  final  radical  aspiration  is  due  to  any  other 
cause  than  suffixal  j-,  the  original  initial  aspirate  regularly  remains;  thus  from 
daZi-,  aor.  a-dZiaZz ;  budZi -  ‘waken’ :  nom.  -bZnit  ‘waking’;  dZia-  ‘put’ :  dZiat1 , 
3.  sing.,  dZiat-tZias ,  d-dZiat-tam ,  etc.;  and  in  the  latter  verb  always  before  s 
also:  dZiat-se ,  dZiat-sva ,  desid.  dZiit-sati. 

c.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  loss  of  aspiration  in  the  root  if  an 
aspirate  follows  which  belongs  to  a  suffix  or  second  member  of  a  compound; 
e.  g.  vibZiu-bZiis  ‘with  the  Vibhus’;  pi'oth-dtha-  ‘snorting’;  dZiestha-  ‘giving  most’ 
( dZia-istZia-)‘,  aZii-han-  ‘serpent-slaying’;  garbZia-dZii-  ‘breeding-place’.  The  only 
exceptions8  are  the  two  imperatives  bo-dZil  ‘be’  {iox*bZio-dZifi  instead  of  *bZiu- 
dZil)  and  ja-Zii  (for  *jZia-Zu)  from  Zian -  ‘strike’ 


IO 


1  Except  when  the  second  aspirate  belongs 
to  a  suffix  or  second  member  of  a  com¬ 
pound,  see  below  c. 

2  Later  this  became  the  rule. 

3  Initial  aspiration  has  perhaps  been  lost 
also  in  sakha -  ‘branch’,  and  in  the  roots 
stigh -  ‘mount’,  and  stambh -  ‘make  firm’. 
Cp.  Wackernagel  1,  105  a. 

4  This  may  also  be  the  case  in  the  roots 
bhnj-  ‘bend’,  chid -  ‘split’,  chad-  ‘cover’,  dhraj- 
‘sweep’:  op.  cit  I,  105  b,  note. 

5  These  forms  from  dah-  and  dtih-  almost 

always  appear  in  the  Pada  text  with  dh , 

doubtless  because  from  the  time  of  the 
Brahmanas  this  initial  aspiration  had  become 

the  rule;  cp.  Benfey,  GGA.  1873,  P- 


6  IE.  dhrebh-  ‘coagulate’. 

7  For  dhadh-t. 

8  Forms  like  bud-dfia-  for  budh-ta  can 
hardly  be  regarded  as  exceptions  since 
the  aspiration  is  assumed  by  the  suffix 
instead  of  reappearing  in  the  initial  of  the 
root. 

9  Here  bho-  is  a  Prakritic  contraction  for 
bhava-. 

10  Also  viddtha-  ‘feast’,  if  correctly  derived 
from  vidh-  ‘worship’;  on  this  word  see  Max 
Muller,  SBE.  32,  350  ;  Foy,  KZ.  34, 
226;  Bloomfield,  JAOS.  19,  2,  12  ff.; 
Geldner,  ZDMG.  52,  730—61;  Wacker¬ 
nagel  1,  108.  A  few  more  uncertain  exam¬ 
ples  might  be  exceptions:  garda-bha -  ‘ass’ 


24  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

d.  There  are  a  few  cognate  words  in  which  an  aspirate  is  found  beside 
the  corresponding  media  or  tenuis:  mdj-man-  ‘greatness’  :  mdh-  ‘great’;  vi- 
spulinga-kd-  ‘scattering  sparks’ :  sphur-dti  ‘darts’1. 

e.  In  a  few  isolated  words  a  media  seems,  according  to  the  evidence 
of  cognate  languages,  to  stand  for  an  IE.  aspirate:  gmd-  ‘earth’,  gen.  gmas; 
jmd-  ‘earth’,  gen .  jmds,  inst .  jmd;  dvdr-,  dur -2  ‘door’;  majjdn -  marrow’. 

33.  Aspirates  in  contact  with  other  mutes. —  Of  two  mutes  in 
juxtaposition  (of  which  both  must  be  voiced  or  both  voiceless 3),  the  second 
only  can  be  aspirated.  In  such  case  either 

1.  the  second  represents  an  original  aspirate,  the  first  an  aspirate  or  not: 
e.  g.  dhat-thds  =  *d/iad/i-t/ids  ( dha -  ‘put’);  ra?i{d)-dhi  =  *randh-dhi  {randh- 
‘make  subject’),  uk-thd-  ‘song’  =  uk-tha-  {vac-  ‘speak’);  vet-tha  =  *ved-tha 
{vid-  ‘know’);  sag-d/ii  ‘help’  =  *sak-dhi  {sak-  ‘be  strong’);  or 

2.  the  first  represents  an  aspirate  media4,  the  second  a  dental  tenuis5 
which  assumes  the  mode  of  articulation  of  the  first;  e.  g.  ddg-dhr-  ‘one  who 
burns’  (acc.)  =  *ddg/i-tr-  {dak-  ‘burn’);  -vid-d/ia-  ‘pierced’  =  *vidh-ta-  ( vyad/i -); 
-lab-dha-  ‘taken’  =  * labh-ta -  ( labh -).  An  intervening  sibilant  (2  =  s)  did  not 
prevent  the  same  result:  jag-dhd-,  jag-dhvdya ,  jag-dhvd  (AV.),  a-g-dha  (TS.) 
from  ghas -  ‘eat’,  gdh  representing  gzd/i-  for  gzh-t-  from  gh{a)s-t~. 

a.  When  the  first  is  h  representing  an  old  palatal  aspirate  (=  zh ,  IE.  gh) 6, 
it  disappears  after  cerebralizing  the  dental  and  lengthening  the  preceding  vowel; 
e.  g.  udhd-  =  *uz-dhd-  for  uzh-td-  from  va/i-tdi- 1 . 

b.  In  a  few  instances  the  t  does  not  become  dh  owing  to  the  influence 
of  cognate  forms:  thus  dhaktam  (instead  of  *dagdham  =  *dhagh-tdm )  according 
to  2.  3.  sing,  dhak  (=  *dhagh-t)  from  dagh-  ‘reach’;  dhat-tdm  etc.  (instead  of 
*dad-dham  for  *dhadh-tam )  according  to  3.  sing,  d/iat  (=  *dhadh-t ),  2.  sing.  mid. 
dhdt-se ,  etc.  (=  *dZiddh-se) s. 

The  Five  Classes  of  Mutes. 

34.  The  gutturals.  —  These  mutes,  by  the  Indian  phoneticians  called 
kanthya  (‘produced  from  the  throat’),  are  minutely  described  in  the  Pratisakhyas 
as  formed  at  the  ‘root  of  the  tongue’  ( jihvd-mula)  and  at  the  ‘root  of  the 
jaw’  ( hanu-mula )9.  They  are  therefore  velar10  sounds  and,  as  the  evidence 


(if  from  grdh-  ‘be  greedy’),  bdrjaha-  ‘udder’ 
(if  from  brh -  ‘be  great’),  sabar-dugha-,  sabar- 
dhu -,  sabar-dhuk ,  epithet  of  cows  (if  sabar- 
—  Gk.  d(f)ap :  Bartholomae,  BB.  15,  18): 
cp.  Wackernagel  i,  108,  note,  217  b;  ZDMG. 
43,  667  f. ;  46,  292  (bdrjaha-)  . 

1  A  few  doubtful  examples  discussed  by 
Wackernagel  1,  p.  129  bottom. 

2  Op.  cit.  I,  109,  note  (mid.);  according  to 
Bloomfield,  Album  Kern,  p.193  f.,  the  media  is 
due  to  the  influence  of  the  numeral  dva-  ‘two’. 

3  This  was  often  due  to  assimilation,  the 
mode  of  the  articulation  of  the  second 
generally  prevailing;  e.  g.  dt-ti  =  *ad-ti  (ad- 
‘eat’);  vet-tha  —  *ved-tha ;  sag-dhi  —  *sak- 
dhi ;  the  articulation  of  the  first  prevails 
in  33,  2. 

4  An  aspirate  tenuis  loses  its  aspiration 
in  these  circumstances;  thus  grnatti  (AV.) 
for  *grnath-ti,  if  this  form  is  derived  from 
grath-  ‘tie’. 


5  There  seems  to  be  no  example  of  any 
other  tenuis  in  contact  with  a  preceding 
aspirate  media  within  a  word,  but  the  result 
would  probably  have  been  the  same.  There 
is  no  example  of  th  becoming  voiced  in 
this  combination;  it  remains  in  dhat-thds 
(=  *dadh-thds). 

6  See  below  58. 

7  According  to  this  rule  us-tra-  ‘buffalo’, 
could  not  fie  derived  from  vah-  ‘carry’  (as 
in  that  case  it  would  have  become  udhra -): 
cp.  Wackernagel  i,  mb,  note. 

8  Before  sibilants,  all  aspirates  as  well  as 
mediae  become  tenues;  but  according  to 
TPr.  xiv.  12,  APr.  II.  6  (cp.  RPr.  VI.  15) 
a  tenuis  in  such  a  position  may  be  pro¬ 
nounced  as  an  aspirate;  see  Wackernagel 

1,  11 3- 

9  See  APr.  I.  20  and  Whitney’s  note. 

10  That  is,  pronounced  with  the  velum  or 
soft  palate. 


I.  Phonology.  The  five  Classes  of  Mutes.  Gutturals.  Palatals.  25 


of  cognate  languages  shows,  derived  from  IE.  velars1.  Gutturals  are  found 
interchanging  to  some  extent  with  sounds  of  the  four  other  classes. 

1.  Under  certain  conditions  they  interchange  with  the  new  palatals 
(c  j  k)  which  are  derived  from  them2;  with  the  old  palatal  /3  (also  old  j  and  Ji) 
only  when  followed  by  s  (which  then  becomes  s )4 5 6.  Between  this  ks  =  s-s 
and  ks  =  k-s  it  is  possible  to  distinguish  by  the  aid  of  Iranian,  where  the  two 
are  represented  by  different  sounds  5;  and  the  original  value  of  the  k  can 
thus  be  determined  even  in  words  in  which  no  form  without  the  sibilant 
occurs.  This  evidence  shows  that,  in  the  following  words,  ks  represents0. 

a.  s-s:  dksi-  ‘eye’;  rksa-  Tear’;  kdksa-  ‘armpit’;  kuksi-  ‘belly’;  ksi-  ‘dwell’; 
ksiidh-  ‘hunger’;  caks-  ‘see’;  taks-  ‘fashion’;  daksina-  ‘right’;  pdksman-  (VS.) 
‘eyelash’;  maksU  ‘quickly’;  raks-  (AV.)  ‘injure’;  rdks-as-  ‘injury’; 

b.  k-s:  ksatrd-  ‘dominion’;  ksap-  ‘night’;  ksi-  ‘rule’;  ksip-  ‘throw’;  ksfrd- 
‘milk’;  ksud-  ‘shake’,  ksod-as-  ‘rush  of  water’,  ksudrd-  ‘small’  (VS.),  n.  ‘minute 
particle’;  ksubh-  ‘swift  motion’;  tvaks-  ‘be  strong’;  vrksd-  ‘tree’. 

2.  In  a  few  instances  k  stands  for  a  medial  t:  in  vrkkdu  (AV.)  ‘kidneys’, 
for  *vrtkau 7;  prksu  (SV.)  =  prtsu  ‘in  battles’.  In  these  two  forms  the  sub¬ 
stitution  is  due  to  Prakritic  influence;  this  is  probably  also  the  case  in  skambh- 
beside  stambh-  ‘prop’8.  The  guttural  only  seems  to  stand  for  a  dental  in 
asikm-  beside  dsita-  ‘black’,  pdlikni-  beside  palitd-  ‘grey’,  and  hariknika-  (AV.) 
beside  hdrita-  ‘yellow’,  as  there  is  no  etymological  connexion  between  -kni- 
and  -fo-9 * *. 


3.  In  a  few  words  a  guttural  interchanges  with  a  labial  medially: 
kakdrdu-  beside  kaparda-  ‘braid  of  hair’;  kulika  (VS.)  :  pulzka  (MS.)  a  kind 
of  bird;  kulikdya-  (TS.)  : pulikdya-  (MS.),  kullpdya-  (VS.)  : purlkdya 10  (AV.) 
a  kind  of  aquatic  animal;  nicunkuna-  (TS.)  :  nicumpund-  ‘flood’;  and 
in  the  TS.  (B.)  tristiigbhis  and  atiustugb/iyas  occur  beside  tristub-bhis  and 
anustubbhyas Ir. 

4.  In  a  few  verbal  forms  from  three  roots  k  stands  for  s  before  suffixal  s12, 
though  this  k  never  made  its  way  into  the  loc.  pi.  (where  only  -s-su-  or  -k-su, 
-t-su  occur).  The  only  example  in  the  RV.  is  pinak  (for  pinak-s )  2.  sing, 
impf.  of  pinas-ti  ( pis-  ‘crush’).  In  the  AV.  occur  dvik-s-at ,  dvik-s-ata ,  aor. 
of  dvis-  ‘hate’;  sisliksate,  - sisliksu -,  desid.  of  slis-  ‘embrace’.  Other  possible 
examples  from  the  RV.  are  -rksard-  ‘thorn’  (if  from  rs-  ‘prick’);  ririksa-ti 
and  ririksu-,  desid.  (if  from  ris-  ‘injure’);  viveksi  (if  from  vis-  ‘work’)13. 

35.  The  palatals.  —  These  are  pronounced  in  India  at  the  present 
day  as  a  close  combination  of  a  /-sound  followed  by  a  palatal  spirant  /. 
The  evidence  of  the  Greek  reproduction  of  Indian  words 14  points  in  the  same 


1  That  is,  the  y-sounas;  some,  however, 

are  derived  from  IE.  labio-velars  or  ^"-sounds ; 
see  Brugmann,  KG.  1,  244  and  254;; 

Wackernagel  1,  1 15. 

2  See  Brugmann,  op.  cit.  244. 

3  Op.  cit.  233. 

4  See  below  56. 

5  That  is,  s-s  by  s  and  k-s  by  hs\  thus 
vaksi ,  from  vas-  =  vasi;  vaksya-mi ,  from 
vak-  (for  vac-)  =  vahsyd. 

6  The  two  components  of  ks  cannot  yet 

have  coalesced  when  s  dropped  out  between 

two  mutes  in  abhakta ,  for  abhak-s-ta  (aor.  of 

bhaj-),  and  atasta  for  atak-s-ta -  from  taks- 

(Av.  task)  ‘fashion’;  otherwise  the  two  differ¬ 

ent  original  sounds  could  not  have  been 

kept  apart  in  these  two  forms. 


7  See  above  30,  note  4. 

8  Cp.  Wackernagel  i,  p.  136,  note  (top). 

9  Cp.  J.  Schmidt,  Pluralbildung  398. 

10  See  ZDMG.  33,  193. 

n  See  Weber,  IS.  8,  40.  54;  13,  109. 

12  This  probably  started  from  the  paralle¬ 
lism  of  the  3.  sing,  of  roots  in  s  and  s : 
thus  dves-ti  from  ] /dvis-,  and  vas-ii  from  \vas- ; 
then  the  2.  sing,  dvek-si  for  dves-si,  followed 
vak-si. 

The  relation  of  the  k  in  dadhrk  ‘firmly’, 
to  dadhrsd-,  dadhrs-vani-  ‘bold’,  is  uncertain. 
Cp.  Wackernagel  i,  118,  note  (end). 

T4  Thus  rC av^avov  =  candana-  ‘sandal¬ 
wood’;  Tta!7rav4£  =  casfana -,  N. ;  II a'Cakai  — 
pancdla-,  N.  of  a  people;  'Lcx.'jopoKvmoq  = 
candragitpta N. ;  ’O'Cryyj  =  ujjayim-  (Prakrit 


2  6 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


direction.  It  is  therefore  likely  that  they  were  thus  pronounced  in  Vedic 
times1.  Prosodically,  however,  they  have  the  value  of  a  single  consonant 
(excepting  eh2).  They  date  from  the  Indo-Iranian  period  only;  but  in  order 
to  understand  their  place  in  the  Vedic  language,  especially  in  relation  to  the 
gutturals,  we  must  go  back  to  their  ultimate  origin.  The  evidence  of  com¬ 
parative  grammar  shows  that  two  distinct  series  of  palatals,  the  later  and 
the  earlier,  must  be  distinguished.  This  evidence  alone  can  explain  how 
the  same  Vedic  palatal  sound  (j  or  h)  is,  under  certain  conditions,  treated 
differently. 

36.  The  new  palatals  (e,  j,  h)  are  derived  from  gutturals  (velars),  being 
interchangeable,  in  most  roots  and  formatives,  with  gutturals,  and  being  in 
most  cognate  languages  represented  by  the  same  sounds  as  represent  original 
gutturals.  Thus  from  the  root  sue-  ‘shine’  come  verbal  forms  such  as  socati , 
beside  the  nominal  derivatives  sofza -,  sukvan -,  sukra-,  sukld-  (AV.);  from  yuj- 
‘yoke’,  yuje  1.  sing,  mid.,  etc.,  beside  yugd-,  yoga-,  yukta-,  yugvan-',  from  druh- 
‘injure’,  dud r 6 ha,  3.  sing,  perf.,  etc.,  beside  druhyu -,  a  name,  and  drogha- 
‘deceitful’. 

The  (Indo-Iranian)  change  from  gutturals  to  palatals  was  regularly 
produced  before  the  palatal  sounds  i  i  y3;  e.  g.  cittd-  ‘noticed’,  beside  keta- 
‘will’,  from  cit-  ‘perceive’;  ojlyas-  ‘stronger’,  beside  ugrd-  ‘strong’;  druhyu- 
beside  drogha-.  This  change  invariably  takes  place  in  Iranian,  while  the 
exceptions  in  Vedic  appear  only  before  vowels  which  were  not  originally 
palatal. 

a.  Gutturals  thus  appear  instead  of  palatals  before  ir  ( il )  and  Jr 
(=  IE.  rr-  and  y~)4,  which  were  not  yet  pronounced  with  an  /-sound  in  the 
Indo-Iranian  period5:  thus  dhgiras -,  a  name;  gir/-6  ‘mountain’;  kirdti ,  3.  sing., 
kirana-  ‘dust’,  from  hr-  ‘scatter’;  carkirdma ,  carkiran,  klrti-  ‘fame’,  from  kf- 
‘commemorate’;  gir-  ‘lauding’,  from  gf-  ‘praise’;  girdti  (AV.),  3.  sing.,  -gila-  (AV.) 
‘devouring’,  from  gf-  ‘swallow’.  Before  /  (—  IE.  p)7  k  appears  in  ok-i-vdms -, 
part,  from  uc-  ‘be  pleased’,  and  g  in  tigitd- 8  ‘sharp’,  beside  tejate,  tejas- 
‘ brilliance’,  and  other  derivatives,  from  tij-  ‘be  sharp’. 

Otherwise  a  guttural  followed  by  a  palatal  vowel  is  due  to  the  influence 
of  cognate  forms.  This  is  the  case 

1.  in  the  initial  of  roots  a)  in  gl-,  the  weak  stem  of  gai-  ‘sing’,  beside 
gay-,  gd-;  /?)  in  reduplicated  forms  with  cik -,  jig-,  due  to  forms  like  cikdya , 
jigdya -  (where  the  guttural  is  in  accordance  with  phonetic  law)  and  to  the 
frequency  of  palatal  reduplication  of  guttural  initial;  thus  perf.  ciky-ur ,  part. 
eiky-at-,  desid.  ciklsate ,  impv.  cikihi  (AV.),  from  ci-  ‘perceive’;  intv.  cekit -,  cikit -, 
desid.  cikits -,  from  cit-  ‘perceive’;  perf.  jigy-ur,  desid.  jigTsate,  jigyu-  ‘victorious’, 


ujjent),  N.  of  a  city;  A icc/tovva  =  yamuna-, 
N.  of  a  river.  Cp.  Wackernagel  i,  119. 

1  Cp.  Whitney  on  APr.  1.  21. 

2  Cp.  above  30,  3;  31,  3  b;  and  below  40. 

3  The  sphere  of  the  palatals  has  been 
extended  by  analogy  at  the  expense  of  the 
gutturals  and  vice  versa.  The  aspirate  guttural 
kh  appears  where  the  other  gutturals  are 
replaced  by  palatals;  thus  before  the  y  in 
khya-  ‘see’  (but  jya-)  ‘overpower’;  before 
the  thematic  a  of  the  present:  rikhati 
‘sits’  (but  dahati );  before  the  -ay ad  of  the 
Causative:  mkhayati  ‘swings’  (but  aredyati ); 
and  notably  in  sdkhi-  ‘friend’:  dat.  sdkhye, 
pi.  sakhibyas  (Hr.  sachi cp.  Wackernagel 


I,  121  (p.  140,  top).  The  palatal  aspirate 
in  fact  never  represents  a  guttural  aspirate, 
but  only  an  IE.  palatal,  or  sibilant  and 
palatal. 

4  Cp.  Wackernagel  i,  24.  25. 

5  Cp.  Wackernagel  i,  123  a  a. 

6  In  Av.  gairi-. 

1  This  sound  had  probably  not  yet  become 
a  pure  palatal  in  Hr. 

a  Otherwise  the  palatal  regularly  appears 
before  this  i  in  perfect  forms;  e.  g.  sascire 
[sac-  ‘accompany’);  bhejire  (bkai-  ‘divide’); 
uvocitha ,  iicise  [uc-  ‘be  pleased’);  dudohitha 
( dith -  ‘milk’). 


I.  Phonology.  Palatals. 


27 


from  ji-  ‘conquer’;  7)  in  the  pronominal  forms  k/s,  klm ,  klm ,  kiyat,  klvant 
kldrs-,  beside  the  enclitic  cid,  because  owing  to  the  influence  of  the  frequent 
forms  /AAr,  etc.,  <£  appeared  to  be  characteristic  of  the  interrogative 

pronoun1. 

2.  in  the  final  of  roots  in  which  guttural  forms  predominate,  before 
the  y  of  the  optative  and  the  gerund;  thus  dagh-yas,  from  dagh-  ‘reach’; 
sak-ydm ,  from  sak-  ‘be  able’;  sagh-yasam  (TS.),  from  sagh-  ‘be  equal  to’.  It 
also  appears  very  often  before  the  suffixes  -i,  -l,  -in,  -ya  forming  derivatives 
from  nouns  the  last  consonant  of  which  is  a  guttural:  e.  g.  pldyogi-  ‘descendant 
of  Playoga’;  vrk-z-  ‘she-wolf’  ( vrka -);  sak-in-  ‘powerful’  (. sakd -);  srhg-in-  ‘horned’ 
( srhga-);  upa-vdk-ya-  ‘to  be  praised’  (beside  upavdcya-)  from  upavdkd-  ‘praise’. 
Similarly  drdgh-iyas-  ‘longer’,  drdgh-istha-  ‘longest’  (beside  dir g ha -  ‘long’, 


dragh-mdn-  ‘length’);  sphig-i-  ‘buttock’,  with  g  from  the  nom.  sphik  of  sphij-, 
which  occurs  in  the  post-Vedic  language  only. 

3.  in  a  certain  number  of  abnormal  words,  almost  invariably  at  the 
beginning: 

a)  words  which  may  be  suspected  of  foreign  origin  owing  to  meaning 
or  phonetic  form:  kimsukd -,  kiydmbu -  plant  names;  kimldin-,  kzkata-,  kirata- 
(VS.),  sva-kiskin-  (AY.)  names  of  foreigners  or  demons;  kzja-  a  kind  of 
utensil;  kilbisa-  ‘guilt’  (contains  the  rare  letter  b),  kistd-  ‘singer’  ( st  instead 
of  st);  /?)  onomatopoetic  words:  kikidlvi-  ‘blue  jay’;  kikird-kr-  ‘tear  to  tatters’; 
kikkitd  (TS.)  an  interjection;  7)  some  words  of  doubtful  origin:  kzkasd- 
‘vertebra’;  klndra-  ‘ploughman’  (?);  kinds  a-  ‘ploughman’;  kzldla-  ‘sweet  draught’; 
kirmird-  (VS.)  ‘variegated’;  kisord-  (AV.)  ‘foal’;  kismila-  (AV.  Paipp.)  a  kind 
of  disease. 

37.  New  palatals  as  radical  initials.  —  a.  Before  a ,  a,  and  diphthongs, 
both  palatals  and  gutturals  are  very  frequent  in  Vedic  and  Iranian.  Comparative 
grammar  shows  that  the  palatals  occur  before  a  vowel  or  diphthong 
representing  IE.  e  e  or  a  diphthong  beginning  with  e  e2;  but  gutturals  before 
IE.  a  0  or  sonant  nasal.  According  to  this  evidence  the  palatal  has  come 
into  being  in  the  following  words:  ca  ‘and’;  cakrd -  ‘wheel’;  catvdras  ‘four’; 
caramd-  ‘last’;  card-  ‘pot’;  cdru-  ‘agreeable’;  pdhca  ‘five’;  jathara-  ‘belly’; 
jam-,  -jdni-  ‘woman’;  jdml-  ‘akin’;  haras-  ‘flame’. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  original  guttural  has  remained  in  kakud-  ‘peak’; 
kdksa-  ‘armpit’;  hard-  ‘poet’;  kcta-  ‘will’;  gdus  ‘cow’;  gharmd-  ‘hot’;  ghord- 
‘terrible’;  and  in  the  roots  has-  (AV.)  ‘cough’;  gadh-  ‘clasp’;  gd-  ‘go’;  gdh- 
‘plunge’;  gai-  ‘sing’  3. 

b.  Among  the  roots  with  u  r  /  as  low  grade  vowels,  the  only  one  in 
which  the  regular  phonetic  interchange  of  palatal  and  guttural  takes  place, 
is  jar-  :gr-  ‘call’;  g  appearing  before  r  ir  ar  (=  IE.  dr),  j  before  ar  (=  IE.  dr) 
preceding  the  thematic  -a-  of  the  present  or  the  suffix  -tr-;  thus  gr-ndti,  gir-, 
-gard-  (VS.),  beside  jarate,  jarddhyai,  jaritr-.  In  other  roots  either  the  guttural 
or  the  palatal  appears  throughout;  mostly  the  guttural,  because  the  forms 


with  u  r  l  and  0  ar  al  (=  IE.  du  dr  ol ),  which  required  the  guttural,  were 
more  numerous  than  those  with  0  ar  al  (=  IE.  du  dr  el);  thus  from  kr-  ‘do’, 
akar  aor.  ‘has  done’,  kartr-  ‘agent’,  kdrman-  ‘action’,  retain  the  guttural,  though 
the  palatal  would  be  phonetic  (as  ar  here  =  IE.  er),  through  the  influence 
of  forms  with  kr-  and  of  kdrana-  ‘deed’  (where  ar  —  IE.  or). 


1  Cp.  Wackernagel  I,  128  a  (p.  150,  3  In  the  IE.  vowel  gradation  of  these 

bottom).  roots  only  a  and  0  appear.  In  other  roots 

2  Cp.  Italian  and  the  Balto-Slavic  languages  in  the  IE.  vowel  gradation  of  which  e  is 

which  palatalize  before  e  as  well  as  i.  found,  an  initial  palatal  would  be  expected 


28  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


On  the  other  hand,  the  palatal  appears  in  cud -1,  codati  ‘impel’;  sad-, 
scotati  ‘drip’,  because  here  forms  with  u,  which  required  a  guttural,  were  rare; 
in  car-,  carati  ‘move’,  where  the  palatal  is  almost  invariably  phonetic  in  RV. 
(but  AV.  has  cacdra) ;  in  crt-  ‘bind’,  the  palatal  has  fixed  itself  in  spite  of 
many  forms  with  r;  while  beside  Ziarsate  ‘rejoices’,  hdrsant-,  part.,  both 
h  and  gh  occur  in  weak  forms:  hrsita-,  gZirsu-  ‘lively’,  gZifsvi-  ‘gladdening’. 

c.  Among  roots  in  -an  and  am,  survivals  of  the  regular  interchange  are 
found  in  kan-  ‘be  pleased’,  and  ha?i-  ‘strike’.  The  former  has  the  palatal 
(=  IE.  Jzc~)  in  the  aor.  canistam ,  in  the  superb  cdnistha-,  and  in  cdnas-  ‘favour’, 
but  otherwise  the  guttural.  In  han -,  h  appears  before  an  (—  IE.  en)  and, 
by  analogy,  also  before  an  =  nn  and  a  =  n;  but  gh  before  n  and  a  =  IE.  d; 
thus  hdn-ti ,  inf.  hdn-tave;  han-mas ,  Zian-ydma\  Zia-thas ,  - ha-td ,  and  with  j  in 
impv.  jahi  (=  *jhahi),  but  perf.  jaghdna ,  and  ghand-  ‘striker’,  ghanaghand- 
‘found  of  striking’.  In  the  intv.  jangZian-,  gZi  stands  for  Zi  before  a  =  IE.  e 
owing  to  the  influence  of  the  weak  stem  jahghn-.  In  gam-  ‘go’ ,  ga-  =  gm- 
(e.  g.  in  gdccZiati,  ga-td-)  has  led  to  the  use  of  gam-  =  *jam-,  as  in 
gam-anti 2. 

d.  In  the  remaining  verbs,  that  is,  those  with  a  (25)  or  e  (22)  as 
high  grade  vowel,  there  appears  chiefly  the  palatal  throughout;  thus  caks- : 
cacdksa  (for  *cakdksa).  The  phonetic  guttural  is,  however,  preserved  in  some 
forms  of  the  three  verbs  ci-  ‘observe’  (perf.  cikdya) ;  cit-  ‘observe’  (perf.  ciketa\ 
ke'ta-  ‘will’;  Zzetii -3  ‘appearance’);  and  ji-  ‘conquer’  (perf.  jigdya ;  gay  a-  ‘house¬ 
hold’).  A  guttural  not  phonetically  justified  appears  before  a  (=  IE.  e) 
only  in  gZias -  ‘eat’  (aor.  dghas ,  subj.  gZias-a-t )  and  in  gal-  ‘drop’  (gal- 
gallti  VS.). 

e.  in  reduplicative  syllables  containing  a  of  roots  having  initial 
guttural  or  palatal,  the  palatal  always  appears  in  the  perfect,  pluperfect,  or 
reduplicated  aorist;  thus  kr-  ‘make’  :  cakdra ;  kZiad-  ‘chew’  :  caZzhdda;  gam- 
‘go’  :  jagdma ;  gZias-  ‘eat’  :  jaghdsa;  caks-  ‘see’  :  cacdksa ;  pluperf.  of  kr- :  acaZzrat ; 
red.  aor.  of  jas-  ‘be  exhausted’  :  jajas-tam.  The  palatal  is  here  historically 
phonetic,  as  the  IE.  reduplicative  vowel  was  e. 

In  the  intensive,  however,  the  palatal  is  invariable  only  when  the 
reduplication  is  monosyllabic4;  e.  g.  kram-  ‘stride’ :  cah-kramata\  gr-  \jd-gr- 
‘awake’;  han-  ‘strike’ :  jah-ghanti .  But  when  the  reduplication  is  dissyllabic, 
the  guttural5  predominates;  thus  Zzr-,  p art. kdri-kr-at- ;  fzrand-  ‘roar’ :  kd?ii-Zzra{n)d--, 
gam-  ‘go’ :  gani-gan-,  gani-gm-;  Zia?i-  ‘strike’ :  gZiani-gZin-  (cp.  gZia?idgZiand-) ;  skand- 
‘leap’  :  both  kdni-skand-  and  cani-skadat  subj. 

38.  New  palatals  as  radical  finals,  a.  Verbal  forms. —  Before  the 
thematic  verbal  endings  (including  those  of  the  ^-aorist  and  the  reduplicated 
aorist)  the  final  of  roots  regularly  appears  as  a  palatal  which,  though  phonetic0 
only  in  about  the  same  degree  as  the  guttural,  has  prevailed.  Gutturals  are 


in  certain  forms;  but  few  traces  of  this  remain, 
as  the  forms  of  each  verb  have  been  nor¬ 
malized. 

1  If  klitsa-  N.  is  derived  from  cud-,  and 
carsani-  ‘active’,  from  kr-,  the  initial  conso¬ 
nant  has  not  been  affected  by  the  norma¬ 
lizing  influence  of  the  roots,  because  these 
words  have  been  isolated. 

2  The  correct  phonetic  interchange  appears 
in  jdhgahe  ‘kicks’,  and  jamhas-  ‘course’,  if 
these  forms  are  connected,  as  BR.  think. 
Whitney,  Roots,  however,  considers  the 
former  an  intensive  of  gdh-  ‘plunge’. 


3  Beside  cent-  ‘devout’,  kern-  appears  in 
j  the  compound  mdhi-keru-  ‘very  devout’;  cp. 

Wackernagel  21,  p.  10 1  (43  b). 

4  In  the  post-Vedic  language,  the  palatal 
is  invariable  even  in  dissyllabic  redupli¬ 
cation. 

5  But  if  the  initial  of  the  root  is  a  palatal, 
the  reduplicative  consonant  is  of  course  al¬ 
ways  a  palatal;  thus  ccuid-  ‘shine’  :  cdniscad- ; 
car-  ‘move’  :  car  dear  a- ;  cal-  ‘move’  :  caldcala- 
‘ever  moving’.  Cp.  32  a. 

6  Phonetically  we  should  have  *pakami 
\  (IE.  o),  pac-asi  and  pac-ati  (IE.  <?). 


I.  Phonology.  Palatals. 


29 


rare  at  the  end  of  the  root,  appearing  only1  in  sab-  ‘be  able’;  2.  sing,  sak-as ; 
sagh-  ‘be  equal  to’:  3.  sing,  sagh-at ;  dag/i-  ‘reach’ :  dagh-at  (TS.);  in  these  roots 
the  guttural  prevails  throughout  owing  to  the  influence  of  the  present  stem 
sak-nu -,  sagh-tiu-2.  Even  in  the  non-thematic  presents  and  in  the  perfect 
the  palatal  carried  the  day,  though  phonetic  in  still  fewer  forms;  thus  the 
guttural  alone  would  be  historically  justified  in  the  forms  yundja ,  yuhje\  yuyoja 3. 
The  palatal  further  regularly  appears  before  the  causative4  suffix  -ay a-,  where 
it  is  phonetic  (=  IE.  die) ;  e.  g.  arc-dya-ti  from  arc-  ‘praise’5. 

b.  As  shown  by  the  appearance,  in  cognate  forms,  of  a  guttural  before 
other  consonants  than  s,  the  final  of  the  following  verbs  is  a  new  palatal: 
ahj-  ‘anoint’;  ej-  ‘stir’;  tij-  ‘sharpen’;  tuj-  ‘beat’;  tyaj-  ‘forsake’;  nij-  ‘wash’; 
bhaj-  ‘divide’;  bhahj-  ‘break’;  bhuj-  ‘bend’;  yuj-  ‘yoke’;  ranj-  ‘colour’;  ruj- 
‘break’;  vij-  ‘shoot  up’;  vrj-  ‘turn’;  sin/-1  sound’;  sanj-  ‘attach’;  svahj-  ‘embrace’; 
also  in  the  noun  sraj-  ‘garland’. 

c.  Apart  from  being  the  result  of  the  Sandhi  of  d  +  /,  jj  is  shown  by 
the  evidence  of  cognate  languages  to  be  derived  from  a  sibilant  +  guttural 
(=  IE.  zg)  and  thus  to  belong  to  the  series  of  new  palatals  in  majjdn-  ‘marrow’ ; 
rdjju-  ‘rope’;  bhrjjdti  ‘roasts’;  majjati  ‘dives’,  from  which  is  derived  madgit- 
(VS.)  ‘diver’  (a  bird). 

d.  Nominal  derivatives.  1.  Before  the  suffix  - a ,  the  final  of  the  root 
is  mostly  guttural,  because  the  a  in  nearly  all  the  cases  of  the  noun  represents 
IE.  0.  The  rule  in  the  RV.  is  that  the  guttural  appears  before  both  unaccented 
-a  and  accented  - d ,  but  the  palatal  before  accented  -d  only6 *;  e.  g.  abhi- 
droh-d-,  druh-Ci-  ‘injury’ :  drdgh-a-  ‘injuring’;  bhoj-a -  ‘liberal’ :  b/idg-a-  ‘enjoyment’; 
a-yuj-d-  ‘companionless’;  ydg-a-  ‘yoking’;  rnj-a-  ‘breaking’:  rdg-a-  (AY.)  ‘disease’; 
vevij-a-  ‘swift’ :  veg-a-  (AV.)  ‘speed’;  snc-d-  ‘bright’ :  sdk-a-  ‘flame’;  ruc-d-  (VS.) 
and  roc-a-  (AV.)  ‘shining’ :  rdk-a-  and  rok-a-  ‘light’  ?. 

2.  Before  the  suffix  -as,  the  palatal  generally  appears,  as  it  is  for  the 
most  part  phonetically  required;  e.  g.  oj-as-  ‘force’  :  ug-ra-  ‘mighty’.  The 
guttural,  however,  prevailed  in  ank-as-  ‘bend’;  dg-as-  ‘offence’;  -ny-ogh-as- 
‘streaming’;  bharg-as-  ‘brilliance’;  as  there  were  no  corresponding  verbs  with 
palatal  beside  these  words;  it  also  prevailed  in  dk-as-  ‘ease’  and  ny-okas- 
‘comfortable’,  as  well  as  -sok-as-  ‘flaming’,  though  there  are  such  verbs  ( uc - 
‘be  pleased’,  and  sue-  ‘shine’). 

3.  Before  other  suffixes  beginning  with  a ,  the  final  of  the  root  is  generally 
palatal;  thus  before  -ana  (=  IE.  - eno -),  vac-ana-  ‘speaking’;  tej-ana-  ‘act  of 
sharpening’;  mamh-dna-  ‘gift’8;  before  -ant,  -ana  (under  the  influence  of 


1  Apart  from  roots  ending  in  kh,  see35,  note  3. 

2  In  ni-megha-mana -  ‘drenching  oneself’, 
the  gh  seems  to  be  phonetic  (as  -amana  — 
-amend).  In  vdlgate  (AV.)  ‘springs’,  the  guttural 
is  perhaps  due  to  the  preceding  /,  as  neither 
Ij  nor  Ic  is  ever  found  to  occur. 

3  This  normalization  of  the  palatal  is 
probably  Indo-Iranian,  see  J.  Schmidt,  KZ. 
25,  104. 

4  The  denominatives  in  -ayd-  (IE.  eie  and 
oie)  follow  the  noun  from  which  they  are 
derived;  e.  g.  from  aghd-  ‘evil’,  aghaydti 
‘wishes  to  injure’. 

5  The  causative  ihgdyati  of  ejati  ‘stirs’  is 
probably  due  to  an  old  present  base  *inag 

ihg-  formed  according  to  the  7th  class ;  the 

phonetic  form  -ihjayati  is  found  in  the  BAU. 

vi.  4,  23. 


6  The  fluctuation  of  words  in  -a-  probably 
arose  from  some  cases  in  oxytones  having 
had  IE.  e,  others  o;  hence  in  some  words 
the  palatal  prevailed  throughout,  in  others 
the  guttural.  The  agent-nouns,  being  mostly 
oxytone,  show  a  preference  for  the  palatal, 
which  originally  appeared  in  oxytones  only. 
Cp.  Wackernagel  1,  1 28  a  (p.  150,  note, 
end). 

7  A  palatal  before  an  unaccented  -a 
first  appears  in  doh-a-  (RV.  x.  122),  other¬ 
wise  ddgha-  ‘milking’;  mdh-a-  (AV.)  ‘delusion’, 
beside  mogh-a-  ‘vain’;  kruhe-a-  (VS.)  ‘cur¬ 
lew’,  is  probably  only  an  extension  of  kruhe- 
(VS.) 

8  The  gh  of  jaghana-  ‘buttock’,  is  phonetic 
(Gk.  K0XUV7]). 


:o 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


verbal  forms),  e.  g.  duh-ana -  and  duduh-ana 1 ;  before  -ata  (=  IE.  -<?/<?),  e.  g. 
pac-ata-  ‘cooked’2 3;  before  -an  in  majj-dn-  ‘marrow’ 3. 

4.  Nouns  formed  without  suffix  (including  infinitives  and  gerunds)  have 
the  palatal  of  the  corresponding  verb;  e.  g.  prc-as,  nom.  pi.  ‘food’;  d-prc-as 
and  d-prc-e  ‘to  satisfy’;  tuj-dye  ‘to  procreate’.  A  guttural  of  course  appears 
where  the  verb  has  a  guttural  only;  e.  g.  pra-tank-am  (AY.)  ‘gliding’  {tak-  run’). 

5.  The  suffix  -ka  is  treated  analogously  to  the  final  guttural  of  roots4. 
The  guttural  regularly  appears  except  when  the  suffix,  being  attached  to 
unaccented  prepositions,  is  itself  accented;  thus  asmd-ka-  ‘our’ ;  yustnd-ka-  ‘your’; 
dpa-ka-  ‘coming  from  afar’;  abhi-ka -  ‘collision’;  and  even  with  the  suffix 
accented  in  locatives  such  as  upa-ke,  upa-kdyos  ‘in  the  vicinity’  and  in  the  abl. 
para-kdt  ‘from  a  distance’;  but  uc-cd  and  uc-cdis  ‘above’;  para-cais  ‘aside’; 
pas-cd  and  pas-cdt  ‘behind’;  pra-cais  ‘forwards’. 

39.  Irregular  palatalization.  —  Before  u  r  and  consonants  (except  y), 
the  gutturals  were  not  originally  palatalized.  Hence  roots  which  regularly  have 
palatals  before  a  and  diphthongs,  usually  retain  the  guttural  before  u  r  and 
consonants.  Thus  from  ric-  ‘leave’,  are  formed,  rek-u-  ‘empty’,  rek-n-as-  ‘property’, 
perf.  part,  ririk-vdms -;  3.  sing.  pres,  rinak-ti,  2.  sing.  perf.  mid.  ririk-se  (but  opt. 
riric-yat) ;  ug-rd-  ‘mighty’,  beside  dj-as-  ‘strength’;  ghn-  beside  han-  ‘strike’). 
Nevertheless  palatals  appear  by  analogy  before  u,  r,  n,  m,  r,  v: 

a.  initially:  1.  in  the  roots  scut-  ‘drip’,  crt-  ‘bind’,  hrs-  ‘rejoice’,  in  which 
the  unphonetic  palatal  before  the  low  grade  vowel5 *  is  due  to  the  phonetic 
palatal  before  the  high  grade  vowels  0  (=  IE.  eu)  and  ar  (=  IE.  er). 

2.  in  the  reduplicative  syllables  cu-(>  and  ju-  of  the  perfect  and  aorist 
(in  RV.  occurring  only  in  cyu-  ‘shake’,  gup-  ‘guard’,  gur-  ‘praise’)  for  older 
*ca-  *ja-  ( a  =  <?,  the  IE.  reduplicative  vowel). 

b.  finally:  1.  in  verbal  inflexion,  the  palatal  which  appears  before  a 
and  diphthongs  always  appears  also  before  u ,  and  nearly  always  before  m 
and  r  (instead  of  the  phonetic  guttural);  thus  sisic-ur  beside  sisic-atur ,  sisic-e , 
from  sic-  ‘pour’;  bubhuj-mdhe  beside  bhunaj-dmahe ,  from  bhuj-  ‘enjoy’;  anj-mas 
beside  ahj-dnti ,  andj-an  from  ahj-  ‘anoint’;  riric-re  beside  riric-e \  from  ric- 
‘leave’;  d-yuj-ran ,  yuyuj-rd  beside  yuyuj-e \  from  yuj-  ‘yoke’;  duh-re \  duh-rate. 
duduh-re \  duh-rdm  and  duh-ratam  (AV.j  beside  duh-e,  from  duh-  ‘milk’. 

The  guttural,  however,  regularly  remains  before  the  -nu  of  the  5th  class: 
sak-nu-  ‘be  able’,  sagh-nu-  ‘be  equal  to’,  spreading  thence  to  other  forms7. 
Phonetic  k  remains  before  m  in  vlvak-7?ii  from  vac-  ‘speak’;  and  before  r  in 
vavak-re  beside  vac-ydte ,  vdnc-ati  (AY.  VS.)  from  vatic-  ‘move  crookedly’. 

2.  in  nominal  derivation  the  guttural  as  a  rule  remains8:  e.  g.  rug-nd- 
‘broken’,  from  ruj-  ‘break’;  ruk-md-  ‘brilliant’,  from  rue-  ‘shine’;  suk-ra -,  suk-ld- 
(AV.)  ‘bright’,  from  sue-  ‘shine’;  pak-vd-  ‘ripe’,  from  pac-  ‘cook’.  The  perf. 
part,  for  the  most  part  follows  this  rule:  e.  g.  ru-ruk-vdms -,  from  rue-  ‘shine’; 


1  Strictly  phonetic  (but  rarer)  is  dugh- 
dna-  ‘milking’;  also  vagh-at-  (IE.  -nt-)  ‘insti- 
tutor  of  a  sacrifice’. 

2  The  k  in  s'lk-atd -  (AV.  VS.)  ‘sand’,  is 
phonetic  (IE.  -nta-\ 

3  Beside yak-rt  (AV.)  ‘liver’,  and  sak-rt  ‘dung’, 
the  k  is  found  in  the  stems yak-an-,  tak- an-, 
but  only  in  weak  forms  before  n  or  a 
(=  y) :  yak-nas,  yak-na  (VS.);  tak-na  (VS.); 
sak-nas  (AV.);  saka-bhis  (TS.) 

4  See  above  38  d,  1 ;  Wackernagel  i,  129. 

5  The  phonetic  guttural,  however,  appears 

in  ghrs-u-  ‘lively’,  ghrsvi-  ‘gladdening’;  while 


on  the  other  hand  the  palatal  appears  un- 
phonetically  before  u  in  the  intv.  part,  car- 
curya-mana-  from  car-  ‘move’. 

6  Otherwise  cu-  occurs  only  in  the  ono- 
matopoetic  ni-enmpund-  ‘swell’  —  and  in  a 
few  words  suggestive  of  foreign  origin : 
cumuri-,  N.  of  a  demon;  cu-pumka-,  N.  of  a 
krttika,  (TS.). 

7  Also  dagh-nu-  ‘reach’,  in  a  Brahmana 
passage  of  the  Kathaka,  and  stigh-nu- 
‘mount’,  in  a  similar  one  of  the  TS. 

8  Collitz,  BB.  3,  230  f. ;  J.  Schmidt, 
KZ.  25,  70  f. 


I.  Phonology.  Palatals. 


o 


i 


vi-vik-vdms-,  from  vie-  ‘divide’;  ok-i-v&ms -  (36  a),  from  uc-  ‘find  pleasure’  (but 
dat.  sing,  uc-us-e). 

The  following  are,  however,  exceptions:  oj-man-  ‘might’1;  bhuj-man- 
‘fruitfuP;  muh-ur  ‘suddenly’;  druh-u-  (AV.)  ‘injured;  yac-hyd-  (AV.)  ‘request’. 

40.  The  old  palatals  (ch,  j ,  s,  h).  — -  The  aspirate  ch.  This  sound 
is,  in  pronunciation,  the  aspirate  of  c2 3  and  is  therefore  represented  in 
reduplication  by  c.  But  in  origin  ch  has  nothing  to  do  with  c.  The  fact 
that  after  a  mute  it  takes  the  place  of  s'  in  Sandhi  shows  that  it  is  allied 
to  s'.  In  fact,  unlike  j  and  /z,  it  belongs  exclusively  to  the  old  series  of 
palatals;  for  it  does  not  interchange  with  a  guttural  kh\  In  the  Avesta  ch 
is  regularly  represented  by  x  and  in  cognate  European  languages  by  a  conjunct 
consonant  beginning  with  s  and  standing  for  IE.  skh  (that  is,  x  +  palatal  mute 
aspirate);  e.  g.  chid-  ‘cut  off’,  Gk.  (syjd-.  This  in  Indo-Iranian  probably  became 
s's'h,  which  differentiated  into  Avestic  x  and  Vedic  ch.  In  the  inchoative  suffix 
-cha  ( gacchati ,  Gk.  this  palatal  aspirate  seems  to  represent  IE.  sk, 

a  conclusion  which  is  supported  by  the  old  inchoative  verb  rapsate  ‘is  full’ 
=  rap(s)s'ate,  where  after  the  j  has  been  dropped  between  two  consonants4, 
s'  =  IE.  k  remained.  Thus  ch  represents  a  double  sound  and  metrically  lengthens 
a  preceding  short  vowel.  Hence  the  RPr.  (vi.  1)  prescribes  the  doubling 
of  ch  (that  is  c-ch)  between  vowels.  Though  the  V edic  Mss.  almost  invariably 
write  ch5  and  Aufrecht’s  edition  of  the  RV.  and  v.  Schroeder’s  edition 
of  the  MS.6  follow  this  practice,  the  spelling  cch  is  to  be  preferred. 

a.  In  sdkkd -  ‘branch’,  the  initial  s  probably  stands  for  ch  owing  to  the  law  by 
which  two  aspirates  in  the  same  syllable  are  avoided ". 

b.  In  a  few  instances  ch  is  a  Prakritic  representative  of  ks  and  ps :  - rcchard -  (AV.) 
beside  rksald-  (VS.)8,  part  of  an  animal’s  leg;  krcchra -  ‘distress’,  perhaps  for  *krpsra-,  and 
allied  to  krpate  ‘laments’,  and  krpana -  ‘misery’ 9. 


41.  The  old  palatal  j.  —  This  j  is  the  media  of  s'  (while  as  a  new 
palatal  it  is  the  media  of  c).  It  is  recognizable  as  an  old  palatal  by  the 
following  indications : 

1.  when  there  are  parallel  forms  with  x  before  /,  th ,  or  a  cerebral  appears 
either  as  final  or  before  mutes;  e.  g.  beside  ydj-ati  ‘sacrifices’,  yds-tr-  ‘sacrificed, 
is-ta-  ‘sacrificed’,  a-yat  ‘has  sacrificed’;  similarly  in  the  roots  bhrdj-  ‘shine’; 
mrj-  ‘wipe  off’;  raj-  ‘rule’;  rej-  ‘tremble’ (?);  vraj-  ‘wander’;  srj-  ‘send  forth’; 
possibly  also  in  bhrajj-  ‘roast’10. 

2.  when  in  the  form  in  question  or  in  cognate  forms,  sounds  follow 
which  do  not  palatalize  gutturals11,  that  is,  u  r  71  m  r  v;  such  are:  dj-ra- 
‘plain’;  dj-ma{n)-  ‘course’;  drjuna-  ‘white’,  rj-rd-  ‘reddish’;  rj-u-  ‘straight’,  rj-iyas- 


1  Under  the  influence  of  dj-Jyas-  ‘stronger’ 
and  6j-istha-  ‘strongest’,  such  nouns  in  -man- 
being  often  closely  connected  with  compara¬ 
tives  and  superlatives. 

2  In  the  Kathaka  ch  is  spelt  sch,  which  is 
probably  only  a  provincial  assibilation,  and 
not  the  survival  of  an  older  sound;  cp. 
J.  Schmidt,  KZ.  27,  332. 

3  murkha-  ‘dull’,  occurring  in  a  B.  passage 
of  the  TS.,  is  probably  a  new  formation 
analogous  to  soka-  (AV.)  from  soca'i.  Some 
scholars  hold  that  there  is  an  etymological 
connection  between  chand-  ‘appear’,  chand-cis- 
‘song’,  and  skandali  ‘leaps’;  between  chid- 
‘cut  off’  and  khid-  ‘press’ ;  between  chd-  (AV.) 
‘cut  off’  and  khd-  (hkan-)  ‘dig’.  Cp.  YVacker- 
nagel  1,  131,  note,  bottom. 

4  Cp.  above  p.  25  note  6 ;  cp.  here  cch  =  i-\-s 


in  Sandhi  and  ducchund -  for  * dus-stmd-  ‘mis¬ 
fortune’. 

5  Except  those  of  the  Kathaka,  which 
write  sch  (cp.  note  2). 

6  Also  Roth’s  ed.  of  the  Nirukta  and 
Macdonell’s  ed.  of  the  Brhaddevata;  cp. 
Aufrecht,  RV2,  p.  vi. 

7  Cp,  32. 

8  On  AV.  Ms.  spelling  ch  for  ks  in  two 
or  three  words,  see  Whitney,  JAOS.  12, 
92.  1 75- 

9  On  the  origin  of  ch,  cp.  Brugmann,  KG. 
240;  on  the  sound  as  a  whole,  Wacker- 
NAGEL  I,  133  f. 

i°  But  cp.  38  c,  and  Wackernagel  i,  139. 

11  Apart  of  course  from  the  exceptions 
due  to  analogy :  see  39. 


32 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


‘straighter’,  rdj-istha-  ‘straightest’;  jdnu-  ‘knee’  beside  jnu -;  jrmbh -  ‘yawn’1; 
jha-  ‘know’;  jmd -,  gen .jm-as  ‘earth’;  jri-  ‘go’;  -jvara-  ‘suffering’;  paj-rd-  ‘fat’; 
maj-mdn-  ‘greatness’;  vdj-ra-  ‘thunderbolt’;  jurdti ,  jdryati ,  jujur-vdms -,  jur-nd -, 
from  jr-  ‘grow  old’. 

3.  when  in  inflexional  forms,  in  which  roots  with  a  new  palatal  show 
a  guttural,  the  j  remains;  e.  g.  jajdna  from  jan-  ‘beget’;  jajasa  (AV.)  from 
ykr-  ‘be  exhausted’;  jujosa  from  jus-  ‘like’;  jujur-vdms -,  jajdra  (AY.),  from 
jr-  ‘grow  old’2. 

4.  when  j  is  the  reduplication  of  an  old  palatal  j  or  h ;  e.  g.  jajdna , 
jajdra  (AV.),  juhdti . 

5.  when  it  is  shown  to  be  an  old  palatal  by  the  evidence  of  the 
cognate  languages;  thus  in  ajd-  ‘he-goat’,  ajd-  ‘goat’;  ajina-  (AV.)  ‘skin’;  drj- 
‘nourishment’;  jdmhas-  ‘course’;  jdhgha- ‘leg’ ;  jambh-  ‘chew  up’;  jdmatr-  ‘son- 
in-law’;  dhraj-  ‘sweep’;  bhisaj-  ‘heal’;  rajatd-  ‘silvery’;  vdja-  ‘swiftness’;  rjipyd- 
‘going  straight’. 

a.  It  is  uncertain  whether  j  represents  an  old  or  a  new  palatal  in  the 
following  words: 

1.  because  the  comparative  evidence  is  conflicting:  vi-jdman-  ‘related’; 
ju-  ‘hasten’;  jya-,  jindti  ‘overpower’3. 

2.  because  the  Vedic  and  comparative  evidence  is  insufficient:  ubj- ‘coerce’; 
kuj-  (AV.)  ‘hum’;  jdnjat-T -,  pres,  part.,  of  uncertain  meaning  (a.  X.);  jdrate 
‘approaches’;  jchamdna-  ‘panting’;  jihma-  ‘transverse’;  dhvaj -,  dhvajdi-  ‘banner’; 
paj-  ‘be  rigid’  (in  dpa  ...pdpaje  ‘started  back’);  -pujana-  ‘honouring’;  bajd-  a  kind 
of  plant;  bija-  ‘seed’;  munja-  ‘sedge’. 

b.  Irregular  j.  —  1.  As  the  two  kinds  of  j  were  indistinguishable  in  pro¬ 
nunciation,  a  guttural  sometimes  intruded  among  the  old  palatals  owing 
to  the  analogy  of  the  new  palatals;  thus  from  bhisaj-  ‘heal’,  bhisak-tama -,  spv., 
bhisak-ti ,  3.  sing,  pres.,  a-bhisnak ,  3.  sing,  imp f.  (like  anak-ti  from  anj-  ‘anoint’); 
from  mrj-  ‘wipe’ :  ni-mrg-ra-  ‘attached’,  apa-marga-  (AV.)  a  kind  of  plant, 
vi-mrg-vari-  (AV.)  ‘cleanly’ ;  from  srj-  ‘discharge’,  asrg-ram,  asrgran ,  dsasrgram , 
sasrgmahe  (SV.)  beside  sasrjmdhe\  from  yX-  ‘grow  old’,  jdgara  (AV.)  beside 
iajdra  (AV.). 

2.  The  guttural  beside  the  palatal  may  be  due  to  IE.  dialectic  variety 
in  gnd-  ‘woman’  beside  jan-  ‘beget’;  gm-ds  beside  jm-ds  ‘of  the  earth’;  bhdrgas- 
‘splendour’,  bhrgu-  a  name,  beside  bhrdj-  ‘shine’. 

3.  In  jyotis-  ‘light’,  jy  seems,  by  an  old  Prakritism,  to  represent  dy,  as 
the  word  is  probably  derived  from  dyut-  ‘shine’. 

4.  The  media  aspirate  y7/4  occurs  only  in  one  form,  jdjhjhat-l-  (RV.1), 
a  pres.  part,  probably  meaning  ‘laughing’  as  an  epithet  of  lightning  (a  metaphor 
connected  with  lightning  elsewhere  also  in  the  RV.);  it  appears  to  be  derived, 
by  an  old  Prakritism,  from  has-  ‘laugh’ :  jhjh  probably  for  jjh 5  here  =  IE.  gzh, 
which  otherwise  would  become  ks-,  as  in  jahs-at-,  part.,  ‘laughing’. 

42.  The  cerebrals. — The  designation  given  to  these  sounds  by  the 
native  phoneticians6,  murdhanya  ‘produced  in  the  head’,  indicates  that  they 
were  pronounced  at  the  highest  point  in  the  mouth  nearest  the  (upper  part 


1  In  which  only  forms  with  r  occur; 
cp.,  however,  Hubschmann,  KZ.  23,  393. 

2  The  only  instance  of  a  new  palatal 
(c  j  h  —  k  g  gjj)  before  dr  (=  IE.  r)  is 
carcitry a -man a-  (RV.  x).  For  some  more  or 
less  doubtful  examples  of  old  palatal  y,  see 
Wackernagel  1,  137  b  note. 

3  Op.  cit.  1,  137  e,  note. 


4  The  other  two  old  palatals  s  and  h  will 
be  dealt  with  below  in  their  alphabetical 
order:  54,  58. 

5  The  Kashmir  Ms.  of  the  RV.  reads 
jcijjhatir  for  jdjhjhatlr  (v.  526):  Schefte- 
lowitz,  WZKM.  21,  86. 

6  See  RPr.  1.  19;  APr.  I.  32;  TPr. 
II.  37- 


I.  Phonology.  Cerebrals.  33 


of  the)  head.  They  are  described  by  the  Pratisakhyas  as  pronounced  by 
turning  the  tip  of  the  tongue  up  to  the  roof  of  the  mouth  and  bending  it 
backwards.  They  were  therefore  pronounced  farther  back  in  the  mouth 
than  the  palatals.  This  is  also  their  pronunciation  at  the  present  day  in 
India.  An  indication  that  it  was  such  even  in  Vedic  times  is  the  fact  that 
d  is  sometimes  found  in  the  later  Samhitas  interchanging,  between  vowels, 
with  l 1  (which  itself  interchanges  with  r),  and  that  in  the  RV.  itself  cl  dh 
become  /  Ih  between  vowels.  It  is  also  to  be  noted  that  the  Greeks  reproduced 
d  not  only  with  but  also  with  p2.  The  cerebrals,  however,  were  a  specifically 
Indian  product,  being  unknown  in  the  Indo-Iranian  period3.  They  are  still 
rare  in  the  RV.,  where  they  occur  medially  and  finally  only.  According  to 
most  scholars,  they  are  due  to  aboriginal,  especially  Dravidian,  influence4. 
As  a  rule,  they  have  arisen  immediately  after  s  or  an  r  sound  from  dentals. 
But  before  consonants  and  finally  they  may  represent  the  old  palatals  j  s'  h. 

a.  The  voiceless  cerebrals  t  th  take  the  t>lace  of  the  dentals  t  th  after  s 

•  •  X  • 

(=  s,  s'  or  j);  e.  g.  vrs-ti-  ‘rain’  (suffix  -ti);  dus-tdra-  ‘invincible’  (=  dus-tdra-) ; 
ndkis  te  (=  ndkis  te);  vds-ti  ‘wishes’  (=  vds-ti) ;  mrs-td-  ‘cleansed’  (=  mrj-td-)5. 
Similarly  the  voiced  cerebrals  d  dh  take  the  place  of  the  dentals  d  dh 
after  *z  (=  s  or  old  palatal  /,  h),  which  has  disappeared6;  e.  g.  nida-  ‘nest’ 
(  =  IE.  nizdd-);  du-dhi-  ‘ill-disposed’  (=  dus-dhij ;  ui-e  ‘I  worship’  (*iz-d-  =  ij-d- 
for  yaj-d-)\  drdhd-  ‘firm’  (=  drh-td-).  The  preceding  voiced  sibilant  *z  (=  / 
and  s)  has  (instead  of  disappearing)  itself  become  d  in  didid-dhi  (from  dis- 
‘show’)  and  vivid-phi  (from  vis-  ‘be  active’)7. 

a.  When  the  dental  here  was  immediately  followed  by  an  r  sound,  the  cerebralization 
seems  originally  to  have  been  stopped.  Hence  drdhra -  (=  drh-tra-),  beside  drdhd - 
(=  drh-ta-)  ‘firm’;  and  though  sir  occurs  several  times  in  the  RV. 8,  the  r  seems  to  have 
been  dropped  in  pronunciation,  as  the  only  stems  ending  in  -stra-  which  show  a  case- 
form  with  n,  do  not  cerebralize  it:  ustrdndm  and  rdsfranam,  as  if  no  r  preceded.  In 
TS.  I.  2.  5*,  r  is  actually  dropped  after  st  in  Ivasfimati-  ‘accompanied  by  Tvastrl’. 

b.  In  several  instances  a  cerebral  appears  by  an  evident  Prakritism, 
in  place  of  a  dental  originally  preceded  by  an  r  (or  /)  sound;  thus  vi-kata- 
‘monstrous’,  beside  kr-td-  ‘made’;  kata-  ‘depth’,  beside  kartd-9  ‘pit’;  avata- 
(S V.  VS.)  ‘pit’,  beside  avdr10  ‘down’11;  and  as  shown  by  comparative  evidence, 
kdtuka-  ‘sharp’;  kudayati  ‘singes’;  kevata-  ‘pit’;  jddhu-  ‘dull’;  kutd-  (AV.TS.)  ‘horn¬ 
less’.  In  the  following  words,  though  cognate  languages  show  /I2,  the  cerebral 
is  similarly  based  on  Indian  r  or  r13  +  dental:  kata-  ‘frontal  bone’;  jathdra- 
‘belly’;  tadit-  ‘contiguous’,  tdda-  (AV.)‘blow’; pinda-  ‘lump’;  kdmia-  (AV.)  ‘piece’14. 

c.  Cerebrals  have  in  some  instances  supplanted  dentals  owing  to  the 


1  Cp.  VPr.  iv.  143;  v.  Beadke,  KZ. 
28,  298. 

2  See  Wackernagel  i,  143,  note. 

3  Op.  cit.  1,  144. 

4  Ibid.,  note. 

5  Cp.  above  41,  1. 

6  Cp.  above  17,  5. 

7  See  Wackernagel  i,  145  a,  note  (end). 
Cp.  42  d  (p.  34)  end. 

8  In  rastra-  ‘dominion’,  ustra -  ‘buffalo’, 

desfri-  ‘Directress’;  damslra-  ‘tooth’;  sfr-  in 
a-ni-sfrta-  ‘not  shaken  off’,  tvastr-mcint- 
‘accompanied  by  Tvastr’ ;  V-4?  in  kundr- 

nad-  ‘house-lizard’ (?). 

9  Wackernagel  i,  146  a. 

Cp.  Bartholomae,  IF.  3,  179. 

11  Perhaps  also  renuka-kdta -  ‘stirring  dust’, 

Indo-arische  Philologie.  I.  4. 


if  from  krt -  ‘cut’;  but  see  Bartholomae, 

|  IF.  3,  180  f. 

I2  IE.  I  by  rhotacism  became  r  in  Ilr. 

x3  MS.  II.  47  has  the  reading  jinva  rdvat 
for  that  of  TS.  II.  4.  71  j invar  dvft  and 
Iv.  XI.  9  jinva  rdvat.  Cp.  below  p.  70,  note  4. 

*4  The  cerebral  could  be  similarly  accounted 
for  in  hita-  (RV1.)  ‘house’ (?),  if  it  is  related 
to  kuia-{pa-')  ‘family’,  and  kidaya -  (AV.)  ‘nest’. 
In  danda-  ‘staff’  if  identical  with  Gk.  levlpov 
(J.  Schmidt,  KZ.  25,  52,  note  *)  we  seem 
to  have  an  instance  of  a  cerebral  for  a 
dental  -p  following  r,  but  such  a  change 
seems  not  to  be  in  accordance  with  the 
phonetic  laws  of  either  Vedic  (cp.  drdhra -, 
above  a,  a)  or  Prakrit.  On  two  other 
examples  of  this  supposed  change,  dnda- 


34  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

analogy  of  similar  words  with  phonetic  cerebral.  In  padbhis  ‘with  feet’,  and 
perhaps  pad-grbhi N.,  it  is  due  to  padbhis ,  inst.  pi.  of  both  pas-  ‘look’,  and 
of  pas-  ‘cord’,  and  to  pddbisa -,  pddvisa  (VS.)  ‘fetter’,  which  is  derived  from 
pas-  ‘cord’1.  Vdsat  and  srdusat ,  sacrificial  calls,  probably  for  vdksat  and 
*s'rosat  (3.  sing.  aor.  subj.  of  vah-  ‘convey’,  and  sru-  ‘hear’),  seem  to  owe  their 
cerebral  to  the  influence  of  the  sacrificial  call  vdt  (VS.),  vdt( TS.),  3.  sing.  aor. 
of  Y vah-.  The  d  of purodds-  ‘sacrificial  cake’  (from  das-  ‘worship’),  is  perhaps 
due  to  d Ft- dds-  ‘impious’  (for  duz-das-)2. 

d.  In  a  few  instances  a  cerebral  i  or  d  appears  in  place  of  the  cerebral 
sibilant  s.  The  phonetic  representative  of  the  latter  before  bh  would  be  d 
(parallel  to  d  for  IE.  z  before  bh)?>,  where  it  appears  in  viprud-bhis  (VS.) 
‘with  drops’.  From  here  the  cerebral  spread  to  the  nom.  sing.,  where  it  appears 
in  vi-prut  (AV.)  ‘drop’,  from  prus-  ‘sprinkle’,  and  in  edhamana-dvit  ‘hating  the 
arrogant’  (from  dvis-  ‘hate’). 

The  cerebral  d  also  appears  before  the  -dhi  of  the  2.  sing.  impv.  for  s  in 
aviddhi  (=  avi-s-dhi )  aor.  of  av-  ‘favour’,  and  in  vividdhi  (—  vivis-dhi ),  red. 
aor.  of  vis-  ‘be  active’.  The  phonetic  form  here  would  be  *Tdh  (=  iz-dh )4, 
instead  of  which  iddh  appears  under  the  influence,  perhaps,  of  the  cognate 
verbal  forms  with  the  short  vowel  ( avistu ,  avistdm  etc.). 

43.  Cerebrals  in  many  instances  represent  the  old  palatals  j  s'  h . 
They  are  found  thus: 

a.  as  final:  1.  in  nom.  sing.  m.  £:  bhrdt  ‘lustre’  ( bhrdj -);  rdt  ‘ruler’  ( rajj; 
vipdt ,  N.  of  a  river  (vipas'j ;  vit  ‘settlement’  (vis-),  spat  ‘spying’  (spas'-);  sdt 
‘overcoming’  (sdh-);  -vdt  ‘conducting’  (-vah-),  pasthavdt  (VS.),  -vdt  (TS.).  The 
guttural  h  would  have  been  phonetic  in  this  case,  as  the  nom.  sing,  originally 
ended  in  s 5,  and  even  the  old  palatals  became  h  before  34  the  cerebral 
must  here  therefore  be  due  to  the  influence  of  forms  in  which  it  was 
phonetic. 

2.  in  nom.  acc.  sat,  from  sds-  ‘six’.  As  k  might  have  been  expected 
(IE.  sveks),  the  cerebral  is  doubtless  due  to  forms  containing  sas-,  as  sasti- 
‘sixty’,  sasthd-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘sixth’. 

3.  in  the  first  member  of  a  compound,  where  the  final  of  the  nom.  sing, 
appears,  in  sat-  ‘six’,  and  pad-  (from  pas-  ‘cord’,  in  pdd-bisa-). 

4.  in  2.  3.  sing.  aor.  for  the  radical  palatal  after  the  endings  have  been 
dropped:  thus  a-bhrdt  (bhrdj-  ‘shine’);  ydt  (yaj-  ‘sacrifice’);  rdt  (raj-  ‘shine’); 
nat,  d-nat  (nas-  ‘reach’) ;  d-prat  (pras-  ‘ask’  in  pras'-na- i question’);  d-vat  (vah- 
‘convey’).  Here  t  is  phonetic  in  the  3.  pers.  only,  standing  for  s-t  (=  IE.  k-t). 
It  has  been  transferred  to  the  2.  sing.,  where  k  would  be  phonetic  (standing 


‘egg’,  and  manduka -  ‘frog’,  see  Wacker- 
nagel  I,  147,  note. 

1  Op.  cit.  I,  148  a  (p.  172,  top). 

2  The  form  vy-civaf  in  MS.  ill.  49  (B.) 
beside  vy-avat ,  AV.  vm.  1 2I,  from  vi-vas- 
‘shine  forth’,  is  probably  due  to  the  influence 
of  a-vat,  aor.  of  | /vah- ;  but  cp.  Bartholomae, 
Studien  1,  24,  note.  On  the  cerebral  in  avata- 
(SV.  VS.),  beside  avata-,  nadd-  ‘reed’,  beside 
nada-,  and  in  klta-  (AV.),  markdia-  (VS.)  cp. 
Wackernagel  1,  148  b,  note. 

3  See  below  44  a,  3. 

4  Cp.  above  17,  5. 

5  This  phonetic  k  for  an  old  palatal  is 
preserved  in  the  nominatives  -dfk  ‘seeing’ 
( drs -),  - spfk  ‘touching’  (sprs-),  spfk  ‘desiring’ 
{sprh-),  an-ak  ‘eyeless’  (- aks •  :  as -  ‘penetrate’); 


rtvik  ‘sacrificer’  (\tyaj-);  urk  (VS.)  ‘nourish¬ 
ment’  ( iirj -);  dik  (AV.)  ‘region’  (dis-\  For 
•dfk,  the  later  Samhitas  have  -dfh  also.  In 
the  n.  nom.  the  m.  f.  form  appears:  -dfk, 
-sprk ;  but  as  there  was  no  s  here,  it 
must  be  assumed  that  the  cerebral  was 
originally  used  in  these  neuter  forms.  In 
bhisaj •  ‘healer’,  the  k  has  spread  from  the 
nom.  to  other  cases,  where  it  is  not  phonetic 
(cp,  Wackernagel  i,  138).  The  original 
value  of  the  palatal  in  usij-  ‘desiring’,  usnih- 
(AV.  VS.),  a  kind  of  metre,  which  have  k 
in  the  nom.  is  uncertain.  The  k  in  the  nom. 
ndk  ‘night’  is  probably  not  based  on  an  old 
palatal  s  (cp.  Wackernagel  i,  149  a  a, 
note). 

J 


I.  Phonology.  Cerebrals.  Dentals. 


35 


for  k-s  =  IE.  ks).  The  reverse  transference  of  k  to  the  3.  sing,  has  taken 
place  in  prd  ncik  beside  d-nat  ( has -  ‘reach’)  and  in  d-srak  (from  srj-  ‘discharge’). 

b.  before  consonant  suffixes: 

1.  the  phonetic  cerebral  appears  before  case-endings  beginning  with  bh 
in  pad-bhis,  from  pas-  ‘look’  and  ‘cord’;  vid-bhis  from  vis-  ‘settlement’;  sarad- 
bhyas  ‘for  the  bees’  (probably  from  *sardh -);  sad-bhis1.  In  anadud-bhyas  (AV.), 
from  anad-vdh-  ‘bull’,  d  appears  for  d  by  dissimilation;  while  the  guttural  of 
the  nom.  instead  of  the  phonetic  d  appears  in  susamdrg-b/iis  (from  drs-  ‘see’) 
‘fair  to  see’  and  in  dig-bhyds  (AV.)  from  dis-  ‘region’. 

2.  before  the  -su  of  the  loc.  pi.  k  is  phonetic,  and  appears  in  vik-su, 
from  vis-,  in  spite  of  the  unphonetic  t  of  the  nom.  vit.  But  owing  to  the 
influence  of  the  other  cases  the  unphonetic  cerebral  (in  the  form  of  t 
dissimilated  for  /)  appears  in  anadut-su. 

3.  before  the  dhi  of  the  2.  sing.  impv.  the  cerebral  is  phonetic  in  dididdhi , 
from  dis'-2;  also  in  z  (=  s),  which  after  cerebralizing  the  dh  is  dropped, 
leaving  a  compensating  length,  in  tadhi  from  taks-  ‘hew’  (=  IE.  tegzdhi );  also 
in  so-dhd  ‘sixfold’  (for  sas-dha  :  as-,  like  as-,  becoming  0  before  a  voiced  mute)3. 

c.  The  cerebrals  in  the  following  words  have  not  been  satisfactorily 
explained:  aghati-  and  a-ghatd-  (AV.)  ‘striker’,  beside  -d-ghdta-  (VS.);  andd- 
‘egg’;  itdnt-  (x.  17 11)  ‘wandering’ (?) ,  kuta -  ‘house’ (?);  kttta-  ‘frontal  bone’; 
krpita-  ‘fuel’(?);  manddka-  ‘frog’;  it  a-  (AV.)  ‘reed’;  rardta-  (VS.),  laldta-  (AV.) 
‘forehead’.  Some  others,  mostly  containing  b,  may  be  suspected  of  non-Aryan 
origin:  bat,  badd,  interjections;  baturin-  ‘broad’ (?),  birita-  ‘troop’ (?);  bekandta- 
‘usurer’;  adambara-  (VS),  ‘drum’;  khadgd-  (VS.  MS.)  ‘rhinoceros’;  canddld-  (VS.) 
‘outcast’;  markata-  (VS.)  ‘ape’. 

44.  The  dentals.  —  The  dentals  are  at  the  present  day  pronounced  as 
interdentals  in  India,  but  according  to  the  Pratisakhyas4  they  were  post-dental, 
being  produced  at  the  root  of  the  teeth  (, dantamula ).  They  represent  IE. 
dentals,  corresponding  to  similar  sounds  in  the  cognate  languages.  When 
two  IE.  dentals  met,  there  seems  to  have  been  a  tendency  to  change  the 
first  to  a  sibilant5.  A  survival  of  this  appears  in  some  Vedic  combinations 
of  d  or  dh  with  dh,  which  point  to  an  earlier  zdh,  viz.  in  de-hi,  beside  dad- 
dhi  ‘give’;  dhe-hi  (for  * dhadh-dhi )  ‘put’;  kiye-dhd  ‘containing  much’,  in  all  of 
which  examples  e  is  based  on  Hr.  az6. 

a.  Change  of  5  to  i.  The  dental  sibilant  as  the  final  of  roots  or  nominal 
stems  becomes  t7 : 

1.  before  the  s  of  verbal  suffixes  (future,  aorist,  desiderative)  in  the  three 
verbs  vas-  ‘dwell’,  vas-  ‘shine’,  and  ghas-  ‘eat’8:  thus  avatsTs  (AV.)  ‘thou  hast 
dwelt’;  vdt-syati  (MS.)  ‘will  shine’;  jighat-sati  (AV.)  ‘desires  to  eat’,  and 
jighat-su-  (AV.)  ‘hungry’. 


1  From  this  phonetic  change  of  s  to  d 
before  bh  is  to  be  explained  the  stem  id- 
‘refreshment’,  beside  is-  (which  occurs  before 
vowel  endings  only):  id-bhis  etc.  would  have 
led  to  the  formation  of  id-a,  etc.  (in'st.  sing.), 
which  then  gave  rise  to  id-a-  as  an  extension 
of  id-;  cp.  also  idayata  (RV.  I.  19 1 6  MM., 
ilayata,  Aufrecht)  :  ildyati  (AV.)  ‘be  quiet’. 

2  It  is  not  phonetic  in  aviddhi  and  vividdhi 
(see  above,  42  d).  Cp.  Wackernagel  i,  149  c 
(end). 

3  The  cerebral  which  in  this  paragraph 

represents  (except  before  j)  the  old  pala¬ 

tals,  is  based  on  an  Hr.  sh-  sound  /  z  (as 

shown  by  the  Avesta  having  s  z  in  the 


corresponding  forms).  This  sibilant,  Indiana, 
first  became  the  cerebral  mute  d  before  the 
^-suffixes  (as  dental  s  became  dental  d)  when 
it  first  spread  to  the  nom.,  and  lastly  to  the 
loc.  pi. 

4  See  RPr.  I.  19;  TPr.  II.  38. 

5  For  example,  Gk.  poiaba,  Av.  voista , 
beside  vet-tha  ‘thou  knowest’.  Cp.  Wacker¬ 
nagel  1,  152  b. 

6  Loc.  cit.,  also  note. 

7  See  discussion  of  attempted  explanations 
in  Wackernagel  i,  153,  note. 

8  All  the  other  roots  in  s  add  the  suffix 
with  connecting  vowel  i. 


3* 


36  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

2.  before  the  t  of  the  3.  sing,  of  a  past  tense:  thus  vy-avat  (A V.)  ‘has 
shone  forth’,  from  vi-vas-.  This  is,  however,  probably  not  a  phonetic  change, 
but  is  rather  due  to  the  influence  of  the  3.  sing,  of  other  preterites  with  -/; 
*a-vas-t  having  thus,  instead  of  *d-vas,  become  d-vat1. 

3.  before  case-terminations  beginning  with  bh,  and  when  final  (in  nom. 
acc.  sing,  neut.),  in  the  p erf.  part,  and  in  four  other  words:  thus  jagr-vdd-bhis , 
inst.  ph,  ‘having  awakened’,  tatan-vdt ,  acc.  n.,  ‘having  stretched’;  usdd-bhis , 
from  usds-  ‘dawn’;  mad-bhis ,  mad-bhyas  (A V.),  from  mds-  ‘month’;  sva-tavad- 
bhyas  (VS.),  from  svd-tavas-  ‘self-strong’.  The  change  of  s  to  /  began  before 
the  bh  endings  (like  that  of  s  to  t  or  d) 2  and  was  extended  to  the  nom.  acc. 
sing.  neut.  in  the  RV.,  but  not  till  later  before  the  -su  of  the  loc.  pi.3 4 5 

a.  Allied  to  the  change  of  final  s  of  roots  and  stems  to  t,  is  the  apparent 
change  of  the  medial  dental  sibilant  to  d  in  madgu-  (VS.)  ‘diver’,  from  majj -  ‘dive’ 
Kjj  —  IE.  zg)  4. 

jS.  The  substitution  of  dentals  for  other  mutes  is  extremely  rare.  In  consequence 
of  dissimilation,  a  dental  replaces  a  cerebral  in  anadutsu  and  anadudbhyas  (AV.),  from 
anadvah -  ‘bull’;  in  drdhrd -  ‘firm’,  beside  drdhd-  5;  in  pasthavcit  (TS.)  ‘four  year  old  bull’, 
beside  pasthavcit  (VS.). 

A  dental  seems  to  take  the  place  of  a  labial  in  ad-bhis ,  ad-bhyds ,  beside  ap- 
‘water’:  but  this  is  probably  due  to  the  analogy  of  * nadbhis,  nadbhyds,  beside  nbpdl- 
‘grandson’ 6. 

45.  The  labials.  —  These  sounds  as  a  rule  represent  IE.  labials;  e.  g. 
pitr -,  Gk.  ncurjp ;  bhdra  ‘bear’,  Gk.  (peps.  But  owing  to  the  great  rarity  of  IE.  b, 
there  are  very  few  Vedic  examples  of  inherited  b;  e.  g.  ratnbate  ‘hangs  down’, 
Lat.  labi  ‘glide’7. 

a.  The  number  of  words  containing  b  has  been  greatly  increased  by 
new  formations.  1.  Thus  b  replaces  p  or  bh  before  other  voiced  mutes: 
e.  g.  pi-bd-and-  ‘firm’,  beside  pad-d-  ‘place’;  rab-dhd -,  beside  rabhatite  ‘they 
take’.  —  2.  It  is  the  regular  substitute  for  bh  in  reduplicative  syllables  or  when 
initial  aspiration  is  lost  owing  to  a  following  aspirate;  e.  g.  ba-bhhva  from 
bhu-  ‘be’,  bahu -  ‘arm’,  bandh-  ‘bind’8. —  3.  In  a  few  examples  it  takes  the 
place  of  or  interchanges  with  v9;  thus  paclbisa-  (RV.),  beside  padvisa-  (VS.); 
band-  beside  vana-  ‘arrow’;  -balsa-  (AV.)  beside  -valsa-  ‘twig’;  band-  (AV.) 
‘music’  beside  vana--,  -blma-  (AV.)  ‘crushed’,  beside  vlTna-  (B.)10.  —  4.  It  further 
occurs  in  some  new  onomatopoetic  words;  budbudd-  ‘bubble’;  bdl  (AV.)  interj. 
‘dash!’;  bata  interj.  ‘alas!’  and  bald-  ‘weakling’. —  5.  In  one  instance  b  seems 
to  stand  for  m  before  r,  in  bru-  ‘speak’,  for  *mru-xli  originally  appearing  most 
likely  after  a  pause  or  after  a  final  consonant12. 

b.  In  many  words  the  origin  of  b  is  obscure.  Most  of  these  probably 
come  from  a  foreign  source:  1.  owing  to  their  meaning:  arbudd-  and  drbuda -, 
balbutha -,  sdmbara -,  sfbinda -,  names  of  foes  of  Indra  and  of  the  Aryans;  brbu-, 
a  proper  name;  bajd-  (AV.),  bdlbaja-  (AV.),  bilvd-  (AV.),  names  of  plants; 
bdkura-  and  bakurd-,  a  musical  instrument.  —  2.  owing  to  their  phonetic 
form:  kilbisa-  ‘sin’;  bis  a-  ‘root-fibre’;  busd-  ‘vapour’;  bat  and  badd ,  interjections; 


1  Cp.  Wackernagel  1,  154. 

2  See  42  d  (p.  34). 

3  Cp.  Wackernagel  i,  155  a,  note. 

4  Op.  cit.  I,  155  b,  note. 

5  See  42  a  a  (p.  33). 

6  The  name  tn-d-ra  and  ndnan-dr-  ‘hus¬ 
band’s  sister’,  are  explained  by  some  scho¬ 
lars  as  containing  a  Prakritic  d.  See  Wacker¬ 
nagel  I,  157,  note. 

7  On  some  words  ( sabar bata-,  bata-,  bal- 

butkd-)  in  which  b  is  regarded  as  IE.  by 


different  scholars,  see  Wackernagel  i,  15S  b, 
note. 

8  See  above  32  a,  I,  2. 

9  There  is  some  confusion  between  forms 
of  brh-  ‘be  great’,  and  vrh-  ‘tear’. 

i°  On  some  doubtful  or  wrong  explanations 
of  b  for  v  ( ni-brh -  ‘crush’,  bata-,  bdlbaja-,  bat, 
sabala samba-),  seeWACKERNAGEL  1,  i6i,note. 

11  Cp.  Gk.  pporo;  for  *npoTo <;. 

12  See  Wackernagel  i,  159. 


I.  Phonology.  Labials.  Nasals. 


37 


bandd-  (AV.)  ‘crippled’;  barsva-  (VS.)  ‘socket’;  baskaya-  ‘yearling’;  baskiha-  (VS.) 
‘decrepit’;  bila-  ‘cave’,  bilma-  ‘chip’;  birita-  ‘troop’  (?);  bekandta-  ‘usurer’.  —  3.  for 
both  reasons:  illblsa-  and  brsaya -,  names  of  demons;  aldbu-  (AY.)  ‘bottle 
gourd’.  —  4.  Other  words  which  if  not  of  foreign  origin,  are  as  yet  insufficiently 
explained:  bdrjaha-  ‘udder’;  bastd-  ‘he-goat’;  basri  ‘quickly’;  -bara-  ‘aperture’; 
bija-  ‘seed’;  bnndd-  ‘arrow’;  brbdd-uktha -,  an  epithet  of  Indra;  chubuka-  ‘chin’; 
sabdla-  ‘brindled’;  samba-,  a  weapon  of  Indra;  balctsa-  (VS.  AV.),  a  disease; 
bleska-  (K.)  ‘noose’.1 

46.  The  nasals.  —  There  are  five  nasals  corresponding,  in  regard 
to  place  of  articulation,  to  the  five  classes  of  mutes.  Each  of  them  can 
only  appear  before  a  mute  of  its  own  class2.  Before  sibilants  and  h  the 
nasals  do  not  appear3;  before  /  only  m  is  found;  n  does  not  appear  finally 
any  more  than  the  palatal  mutes. 

a.  The  guttural  nasal  n  regularly  appears  before  gutturals:  e.  g.  ahka- 
‘hook’;  ahkhdya-  ‘embrace’;  dhga-  ‘limb’;  jdhgha-  ‘leg’.  Before  other  consonants 
or  as  a  final,  it  appears  only  when  a  following  k  or  g  has  been  dropped, 
as  in  stems  ending  with  -he-  or  -hj-  and  in  those  compounded  with  -dr s'- ; 
e.  g. pratyah,  nom.  sing,  of  pratydhc-  ‘facing’;  yundhi  (= yuhj-dhi),  2.  sing,  imp v. 
of  yuj-  ‘join’;  kl-dfn,  nom.  sing,  of  kl-drs-  ‘of  what  kind?’. 

b.  The  palatal  nasal  n  is  found  only  before  and  after  c  or  j\  and 
before  dr,  e.  g.  vancati  (AV.)  ‘wavers’;  yajhd-  ‘sacrifice’;  vdnchantu  ‘let  them 
desire’. 

c.  The  labial  nasal  m  as  a  rule  represents  IE.  m ;  e.  g.  maty-  ‘mother’, 
Lat.  mater]  ndma?i-  ‘name’,  Lat.  nomen .  It  is  by  far  the  most  common  labial 
sound4,  its  frequency  being  greater  than  that  of  the  four  labial  mutes  taken 
together5.  By  some  scholars  m  is  regarded  as  representing  an  original  n  or  v 
in  certain  instances6. 

d.  The  dental  nasal  n  as  a  rule  represents  IE.  n]  e.  g.  nd  ‘not’,  Lat.  - ne ; 
mdnas-  ‘mind’,  Gk.  / isvog .  It  is  the  commonest  of  the  nasals,  being  more 
frequent  than  m,  and  about  three  times  as  frequent  as  the  other  three  taken 
together7.  The  dental  nasal  also  appears  instead  of  dental  mutes  and  of 
the  labial  nasal. 

a.  It  appears  in  place  of  d  before  the  nominal  suffix  - na ,  and  of  t, 
as  well  as  d,  before  the  m  of  secondary  suffixes;  e.  g.  dn-na-  ‘food’  (ad-  ‘eat’); 
chin-nd-  ‘cut  off’  (chid-)]  vidyun-m ant-  ‘gleaming’  (vidyut-  ‘lightning’) ;  ?nfn-?naya- 
‘earthen’  (mfd-  VS.  ‘earth’).  This  substitution  is  in  imitation  of  Sandhi,  as 
dn  tm  dm  otherwise  occur  within  words;  e.  g.  udnd  (from  uddn-  ‘water’), 
atmdn-  ‘breath’,  vid-md  ‘we  know’. 

dental  n  regularly  appears  in  place  of  m :  1.  before  /;  e.  g.  from  yam- 
‘restrain’ :  yan-tur-  and  yan-tf-  ‘guide’,  yan-trd-  ‘rein’;  from  sram-  ‘exert  oneself’ : 
srantd-  ‘wearied’;  2.  before  suffixal  m  or  v;  e.  g.  from  gam-  ‘go’ :  d-gan-ma , 
gan-vahij  jagan-vdms- 8 ;  3.  when  radically  final,  originally  followed  by  suffixal 
s  or  /;  e.  g.  from  gam-  ‘go’,  d-gan ,  2.  3.  sing.  aor.  (=  d-gam-s,  d-gam-t );  from 
yam-  ‘restrain’,  a-yan ,  3.sing.|aor.  (=  a-yam-s-t );  from  dam-  ‘house’,  gen. (patir)  dan 9 


1  Op.  cit.  1,  162. 

2  Excepting  in  a  few  instances  when  a 
mute  has  been  dropped,  as  in  yundhi  = 
yuhgdhi  (see  a). 

3  Excepting  in  a  few  instances  h  or  n 
before  the  ~su  of  the  loc.  pi. 

4  Excluding  the  semivowel  v. 

5  Cp.  Whitney  50  and  75. 

6  Cp.  Wackernagel  1,  177,  note. 

7  Whitney  75. 


8  This  change  of  m  to  n  may  be  due 
to  the  influence  of  the  cognate  forms  in 
which  in  phonetically  becomes  n  when  final 
(below  3). 

9  On  this  explanation  of  dan  (denied 
by  Pischel,  VS.  2,  307  ff.)  see  especially 
Bartholomae,  IF.  8,  in  ‘Arica’  229—249; 
also  Richter,  KZ.  36,  ill  — 123,  on  dcim- 

pati-. 


38  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

‘of  the  house’  (=  dams).  Here  the  change  of  m  to  n  was  evidently  due 
(as  in  1)  to  the  dental  Y  or  t  which  originally  followed1. 

47.  The  cerebral  n.  —  This  nasal,  like  the  cerebral  mutes,  is  an 
Indian  innovation.  It  is  for  the  most  part  the  result  of  a  regular  phonetic 
development,  but  is  also  in  a  number  of  words  due  to  Prakritic  influence. 

A.  Besides  regularly  appearing  before  cerebral  mutes,  e.  g.  in  danda- 
‘staff’,  the  cerebral  n  phonetically  takes  the  place  of  dental  n  after  r  r  s2, 
either  immediately  preceding,  e.  g.  nrridm  ‘of  men’,  varna-  ‘colour’,  usnd- 
‘hot’;  or  when  only  vowels3,  guttural  or  labial  mutes4  or  nasals,  y  v  or  h, 
intervene;  e.  g.  Zzrpdna-  ‘misery’;  Zzrdmana-  ‘step’;  ZzsdbZiana-  ‘exciting’.  This 
rule  is  followed  throughout  within  a  word  even  when  a  s  which  it  contains 
is  produced  by  Sandhi3;  thus  not  only  trpndti  ( trp -  ‘be  satisfied’)  and grbZindti 
{grbZi-  ‘seize’),  but  also  u  suvandZi  (for  suvana/i,  ix.  1078).  In  su-sumnd- 
‘very  gracious’  (where  the  s  is  produced  by  internal  Sandhi),  the  dental  n 
remains  probably  owing  to  the  influence  of  the  simple  word  sumna-. 

a.  The  cerebralization  of  dental  n  takes  place  almost  as  regularly 
in  verbs  compounded  with  the  prepositions  prd  ‘before’,  para  ‘away’,  pari 
‘round’,  nir  (for  nis)  ‘out’;  as  well  as  in  nominal  derivatives  of  these  com¬ 
binations.  But  the  r  does  not  cerebralize  n  when  there  is  tmesis  or  any  other 
preposition  but  a  intervenes0.  The  cerebralization  takes  place: 

1.  in  the  initial  of  roots;  e.  g.  prdnaZz  ( nas -  ‘reach’);  paranude  ( nud '- 
‘thrust);  pra-netr-  ‘guide’  {ni-  ‘lead’).  But  n  remains  if  r  or  Zzs  follows;  hence 
prdnrtyat  (AV.)  from  nrt-  ‘dance’,  and  pari  naksati  ‘encompasses’  ( naZzs -  ‘reach’). 
The  cerebralization  is  also  absent,  without  this  dissimulating  cause7,  in  abZil 
prd  norm-  (SV.)  beside  abZii prd  nonu-  ‘shout  towards’,  and  in  pra-nabZi- 8  (AY.) 
‘burst’. 

2.  medially  or  finally  in  the  roots  Zinu-  ‘hide’,  an-  ‘breathe’,  Zian- 
‘strike’  (though  not  in  forms  with  gZin) ;  thus  pdri-Zinuta  (AY.)  ‘denied’;  prdniti 
‘breathes’;  nir  Zianyat  (AV.),  but  abZii-pra-gZindnti. 

3.  in  suffixal  n  the  cerebralization  fluctuates:  it  always  takes  place  in  the 
n  of  the  1.  sing,  subj.,  e.  g.  nir  gamani ;  not  always  in  the  pres,  base  of  Zii- 
‘impel’;  e.  g.  prd  Ziinomi ,  etc.,  but  pari-Ziinomi 9;  never  in  that  of  mindti 
‘diminishes’  or  of  mindti  ‘establishes’;  it  is  also  absent  in  ydju  sZzanndm 
(x.  1813)10;  but  -trnna-  (VS.),  from  trd-  ‘pierce’. 

b.  In  nominal  compounds  cerebralization  takes  place  less  regularly 
when  there  is  r  r  or  s  in  the  first  member,  and  n  in  the  second: 

1.  an  initial  n  is  here  nearly  always  cerebralized  in  the  RV.:  e.  g. 
dur-ndman-  ‘ill-named’;  prd-napcit-  ‘great-grandson’;  also  dur-ndsa-  (AV.)  ‘un- 


1  The  dental  «  may  stand  for  /  in  carma- 
mna -  ‘tanner’  (cp.  cdrmani  mldtdni)\  BR. 
According  to  Benfey,  it  is  used  to  fill  the 
hiatus  in  declension,  e.  g.  kavi-n-a\  and  in 
the  perf.  red.  syllable  an e.  g.  in  anrcur ; 
cp.  Wackernagel  1,  175  c,  note. 

2  The  cerebral  mutes  and  nasal  not  only 
do  not  cerebralize  a  n  separated  from  them 
by  a  vowel,  but  even  stop  the  influence  of 
a  preceding  r  r  s;  thus  in  reduplication 
only  the  first  n  is  cerebralized;  e.  g.  pra- 
mnaya  [in-  ‘lead’);  cp.  manind  inst.  of  inani- 
‘pearl’(B.b.).  This  arises  from  a  disinclination 
to  pronounce  cerebral  mutes  and  nasals  in 
successive  syllables. 

3  On  the  absence  of  cerebralization  in 

ustranam  and  rdstranam ,  see  above  42  a,  a. 


4  In  some  instances  where  the  mute 
immediately  precedes  the  n,  the  cerebrali¬ 
zation  does  not  take  place;  e.  g.  vytra-ghne ; 
ksepim-  ‘springing’. 

5  In  one  curious  instance,  sam  . . .  pinak 
(beside  piuasti,  from  pis-  ‘crush’),  the  cerebral 
lost  at  the  end  of  a  syllable  has  transferred 
its  cerebral  character  to  the  beginning  of 
the  syllable. 

6  The  preposition  ni  following  another 
containing  r  is  mostly  cerebralized. 

7  Cp.  above  42  a,  a. 

8  Cp.  tri-nabhi-  ‘three-naved’,  and  z>f sa¬ 
nd  b  hi-  ‘strong-naved’. 

9  Cp.  VPr.  in.  87;  APr.  in.  88;  iv.  95;  TPr. 
xnr.  12. 

10  Cp.  Wackernagel  i,  167  b  s. 


I.  Phonology.  The  cerebral  n.  39 

attainable’,  dur-nihita -  (AV.)  ‘ill-preserved’;  but  (because  a  r  r  or  s  follows)  not 
in  -nrmna-  ‘manhood’,  -?iisth&-  ‘eminent’;  nissidh -  ‘gift’;  -nirnij-  ‘adornment’;  nor 
(owing  to  the  intervening  gh  and  m)  in  dlrghd-nitha -,  N.,  yusmfi-mta-  ‘led  by 
you’.  The  cerebralization  is  further  absent,  without  any  preventing  cause,  in 
aksa-ndh-  ‘tied  to  the  axle’  (beside  parT-nah -  ‘enclosure’);  tri-nakd-  ‘third 
heaven’;  tri-ndbhi-  ‘three-naved’,  and  vrsa-nabhi-  ‘great-naved’;  punaraiava- 
‘renewing  itself’  (but  AV.  pdnar-nava-) ;  dur-niydntu-  ‘hard  to  restrain’. 

2.  it  is  less  frequent  medially;  e.  g. pUrvahnd-  forenoon’;  aparahnd-  (AV.) 
‘afternoon’;  nr-vdhana-  ‘conveying  men’; pra-vdhana-(y S.)  ‘carrying  off’;  purisa- 
vahana-  (VS.)  beside  purTsa-vdhana-  (TS.  Iv.)  ‘removing  rubbish’;  nr-mdnas- 
‘kind  to  men’,  vrsa-manas-  ‘manly-spirited’,  but  fsi-manas-  ‘of  far-seeing  mind’; 
dru-ghand-  ‘wooden  club’,  but  vrtra-ghne \  dat.,  ‘Vrtra-slaying’;  su-sumnd- 1  ‘very 
gracious’;  su-pra-pand-  ‘good  drinking  place’;  nr-pdna-  ‘giving  drink  to  men’; 
but  pari-pdna-  ‘drink’,  pari-pdna-  (AV.)  ‘protection’;  pary-uhyamana -  (VS.) 
beside  pary-uhyama?ia-{  \f  vah-). 

c.  Even  in  a  closely  connected  following  word  cerebralization  may 
take  place  after  r  r  f  in  the  preceding  one. 

1.  This  is  frequently  the  case  with  initial  n,  most  usually  in  nas  ‘us’, 
rarely  in  other  monosyllables  such  as  nu  ‘now’,  nd  ‘like’2;  e.  g.  saho  su  nah 
(viii.  732).  Initial  n  occasionally  appears  thus  in  other  words  also;  e.  g. 
pari  netd  .  .  vis  at  (ix.  1034);  srhga-vrso  nap  at  (SV.,  nap  lit  ^  RV.) ;  asthuri  nau 
(VS.,  no  RV.  TS.);  ( gdmad )  u  su  nasatya  (VS.)  prd  ndmani  (TS.);  punar 
nayamasi  (AV.);  suhdr  nah  (MS.)  =  suhard  nah ;  vdr  ndma  (TS.  v.  6. 13). 

2.  Medial  n  also  occurs  thus,  most  often  in  the  enclitic  pronoun  ena- 
‘this’;  e.  g.  indra  enarn.  It  occasionally  appears  in  accented  words  also  after 
final  r:  gdr  ohena  (1.  i8o5);  nir  enasah  (AV.);  nrbhir  yemandh  (SV.,  yemandh , 
RV.);  panibhir  viyamanah  (TS.)3.  A  final  ?i  is  treated  as  medial  and  cere- 
bralized  thus  in  tfn  itndn  (MS.)  and  aksdn  dva  (MS.). 

B.  In  a  number  of  words  n  has  a  Prakritic  origin. 

a.  It  is  due  to  a  preceding  r  or  r  which  has  been  replaced  by  a  i  ic 
or  has  disappeared  through  assimilation.  This  is  indicated  to  be  the  case 
by  the  appearance  beside  them  of  cognate  words  containing  r  or  l  sounds: 
1.  in  Vedic  itself:  thus  and -  ‘pin  of  the  axle’;  hand-  ‘one-eyed’,  beside  karnd- 4 
‘crop-eared’  (MS.);  kdna-  (AV.)  ‘particle’ :  kald-  ‘small  part’;  janjana-bhavan 
‘glittering’  \jurni-  ‘glow’  (- jan -  probably  =  jrn-  from  old  pres.  *jrnati) ;  punya- 
‘auspicious’  : pr-  ‘fill’;  phan-  ‘bound’  (==  *phrn- ,  * pharn -)  cp .  parpharat  ‘may 
he  scatter’;  dhdnika-  ‘cunnus’ :  dhdraka-  (VS.),  id. — 2.  in  allied  languages: 
gana-  ‘crowd’;  pan-  (VS.)  ‘purchase’;  vanij-  ‘merchant’5;  dnu-  ‘minute’;  kunaru- 
‘having  a  withered  arm’;  pant-  ‘hand’;  sthanu-  ‘stump’6. 

b.  Owing  to  the  predilection  for  cerebrals  in  Prakrit,  which  substituted 
n  for  n  throughout  between  vowels,  even  without  the  influence  of  neigh¬ 
bouring  cerebrals,  one  or  two  words  with  such  n  seem  to  have  made  their 
way  into  Vedic:  mani-  ‘pearl’  (Lat.  monile) ;  amnah  (MS.)  ‘at  once’ :  atnnah 
(AV.),  id.  h 

c.  The  exact  explanation  of  the  n  in  the  following  words  (some  of 
which  may  be  of  foreign  origin)  is  uncertain:  kanva -,  N.;  kalydna-  ‘fair’; 


1  See  above  47  A  (end). 

2  Cp.  Benfey,  Gottinger  Abhandlungen 

20,  14. 

3  agncr  avena  (1.  1285),  Pp.  agneh  |  avena, 

is  probably  wrong  for  agneh  |  ravena.  On 

the  other  hand,  for  ma.no  ruhand  (1.  32^), 

Pp.  mdnah  |  ruhdndh ,  the  reading  should  per¬ 


haps  be  manor  uhana.  Cp.  Lanman,  Sanskrit 
Reader,  note  on  this  passage. 

4  See  Wackernagel  i,  172  a  (p.  192,  mid.). 

5  See  Frohde,  BB.  16,  209. 

6  Cp.  Wackernagel  i,  1 72  d,  note,  1 73,  note. 

7  On  a  few  doubtful  instances,  op.  cit.  I, 
173,  note. 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


kanuka of  doubtful  meaning;  nicumpund -,  of  doubtful  meaning;  ninik  ‘secretly’, 
niiiya- 1  ‘inner’;  pani a  kind  of  demon;  band-  ‘arrow’;  vana-  ‘udder’,  ‘arrow’, 
‘music’;  vdm-  ‘music’;  vdmcl a  kind  of  musical  instrument;  .swz#-  ‘red’;  bgana- 
(SV.  VS.),  of  doubtful  meaning;  kunapa-  (AV.)  ‘corpse’;  gund-  ‘division’  (AV.); 
cupunika-  (TS.),  N.;  nicahkuna-  (TS.)  and  nicwikund-  (TS.),  of  doubtful  meaning; 
vend-  {AN.)  ‘reed’;  sanu-  {AN.)  ‘hemp’1 2. 

48.  The  semivowels. — The  semivowels  y ,  r,  /,  v  have  the  peculiarity 
that  each  has  a  vowel  corresponding  to  it,  viz.  i  r  l  u  respectively.  They 
are  called  anta{Zi)stha  in  the  Pratisakhyas 3 4,  the  term  doubtless  meaning 
‘intermediate’,  that  is,  standing  midway  between  vowels  and  consonants. 

a.  /  and  v  regularly  represent  the  final  i  and  u  of  diphthongs  before 
vowels,  e  and  ai  becoming  ay  and  ay,  0  and  an  av  and  av.  But  while  y  and  v 
are  regularly  written  for  i  and  u  before  vowels,  they  were  often  pronounced 
as  iy  and  uv.  This  is  shown  by  the  fact  that: 

1.  iy  and  uv  are  frequently  written,  beside  y  and  v,  in  the  inflexion  of 

1-  and  z7-stems.  Thus  from  did-  ‘thought’,  there  are  several  compounds,  in 

some  of  which  the  stem  is  written  with  iy  before  vowels,  as  itthddhiy-  ‘very 

devout’,  in  others  with  y,  as  adhy-  ‘longing’.  Similarly  -ju-  ‘hastening’,  regularly 
appears  as  -juv- ;  but  -pu-  ‘purifying’,  -su-  ‘swelling’,  -su-  ‘bringing  forth’,  always 
as  -pv-,  -sv-,  -sv-*.  In  the  same  way,  the  suffix  -ya  is  often  written  -iya; 
e.  g.  dgr-iya-  ‘first’,  beside  dgr-ya-  (VS.);  rtv-iya-  and  rtv-ya-  ‘regular’;  urv-iyd 
and  urv-yd  (VS.  TS.)  ‘widely’.  This  spelling  is  characteristic  of  the  TS.  Here 
iy  is  generally  written  where  more  than  one  consonant  precede,  almost 
invariably  so  in  the  inflexion  of  stems  in  i  and  I;  e.  g.  indragniy-os  ‘of  Indra 
and  Agni’,  laksmiyd  ‘by  Laksmi’;  very  often  also  in  the  suffix  -ya;  e.  g.  ds'v- 
iya-  beside  dsv-ya-  (RV.)  ‘relating  to  horses’5.  Similarly  uv  appears  here  for 
v  in  siivar-  and  suvargd-  ‘heaven’,  beside  svcir  (RV.)  and  svarga-  (RV.);  in 
the  inflexion  of  tantt-  ‘body’,  in  some  forms  of  vdyu-  ‘wind’,  bahu-  ‘arm’,  uru- 
‘thigh’6.  In  the  SV.  and  MS.7  there  are  two  or  three  other  examples  of  iy 
and  uv  for  y  and  v8. 

2.  according  to  metrical  evidence,  y  and  v  (though  written  as  pronounced 
in  classical  Sanskrit)  have  a  syllabic  value  in  a  large  number  of  examples  in 
the  Vedic  hymns9.  This  was  recognized  to  be  the  case  by  the  Pratisakhyas10. 

3.  r  appears  instead  of  r  before  the  suffix  -ya;  e.  g.  in pitr-ya-  ‘paternal’, 
from  pitr-  ‘father’. 

4.  ay  dy  ey  appear  before  the  suffix  -ya11;  e.  g.  saha-sey-ydya ,  dat.,  ‘for 
lying  together’.  Here  yy  is  always  to  be  read  as  y-iy  in  the  RV.  (except  in 
Book  x  and  daksdyya-  in  1.  1292)12. 


1  Perhaps  from  *nirnaya see  Benfey, 

GGA.  1858,  p.  1627. 

2  On  these  words  see  Wackernagel  i, 
174  b  and  173  d,  note. 

3  RPr.  I.  2;  VPr.  IV.  101;  also  Nirukta 
11.  2.  Cp.  Whitney  on  APr.  1.  30. 

4  Cp.  Wackernagel  i,  1S1  a,  note. 

5  Several  other  examples,  loc.  cit. 

6  Cp.  Whitney  on  TPr.  11.  25. 

7  See  Wackernagel  i,  181  a,  note  (p.  201, 
mid.). 

8  On  the  other  hand  there  are  some  iso¬ 
lated  instances  of  y  and  v  in  the  Vedas  as 
compared  with  iy  and  uv  in  classical  Sans¬ 
krit;  see  Wackernagel  i,  p.  201,  bottom. 

9  In  certain  words  and  formativesji'  and  v 

are  regularly  consonantal:  in  the  relative ya-\ 


the  present  suffix  -yam,  the  comp,  suffix  -yas; 
the  gen.  ending  -sya,  and  the  fut.  suffix  -sya; 
the  initial  v  of  suffixes  ;  the  nv-  of  the  5  th  class ; 
in  dA^-‘horse’  and tvcistr-,^.  Onthe  otherhand 
the  syllabic  pronunciation  is  sometimes  used 
artificially  by  the  poets,  as  is  apparent  from 
the  isolation  of  such  occurrences.  In  some 
individual  words  the  written  iy  and  uv  have 
to  be  pronounced  as  consonantal  y  and  v : 
always  in  suvana-.  pres.  part,  of  su-  ‘press’ ; 
occasionally  in  bhiycis-  ‘fear’,  hiyana-  ‘im¬ 
pelled’.  Cp.  Wackernagel  i,  181  b,  note, 
bottom. 

10  RPr.  viil.  22;  XVII.  14. 

11  See  Grassmann,  Wb.  1711,  columns 
4  and  5. 

12  Wackernagel  i,  181  c  7. 


I.  Phonology.  Semivowels.  41 

That  this  syllabic  pronunciation  was  not  simply  i  and  u  (with  hiatus), 
but  iy  and  uv,  is  rendered  probable  not  only  by  the  spelling  iy  uv  besides  v , 
but  by  the  consideration  that  y  and  v  are  respectively  the  natural  transition 
from  i  and  u  to  a  following  dissimilar  vowel. 

b.  In  the  RV.  y  and  v  are  pronounced  with  a  syllabic  value  under 
the  following  conditions: 

1.  almost  invariably  after  a  group  of  consonants  and  generally  after  a 
single  consonant  if  preceded  by  a  long  vowel.  Thus  the  ending  -bhyas  and 
the  suffix  -tya  are  regularly  pronounced  as  dissyllables  after  a  long  vowel, 
but  as  monosyllables  after  a  short  vowel.  Hence,  too,  v  is  pronounced  as 
well  as  written  in  the  forms  davidhv-dt ,  susv-ati ,  susv-and -,  juhv-e \  juhv-ati h 

2.  after  a  single  initial  consonant  at  the  beginning  of  a  verse,  or,  within 
a  verse,  if  the  preceding  syllable  is  heavy,  in  some  half  dozen  words.  Thus 
tya-  ‘that’,  and  tvdm  ‘thou’  are  nearly  always  pronounced  as  they  are  written 
after  a  short  vowel,  but  tiyd-  and  tuvdm  at  the  beginning  of  a  Pada  or  after 
a  long  vowel.  The  y  is  pronounced  as  iy  in  jyd-  and  jyakd-  ‘bowstring’ 
only  at  the  beginning  of  a  verse  or  after  a  long  vowel,  in  jydyas- 
‘mightier’  only  after  a  long  vowel.  Finally  tva-  ‘many’,  must  generally  be 
read  as  tuva-  after  a  long  vowel,  but  almost  invariably  tva-  after  a  short 
vowel. 

3.  in  the  inflexion  of  the  nouns  in  T  (nom.  sing.  -T-s)  and  z71 2,  where  the 
stem  has  (with  only  six  exceptions)  to  be  pronounced  with  iy  and  uv. 3 

Thus  the  transition  from  iy  and  uv  to  y  and  v  began  in  the  RV.,  the 
traditional  text  writing  for  the  iy  and  uv  which  was  pronounced  by  the  poets 
of  that  Veda,  sometimes  iy  and  uv,  sometimes  y  and  v. 

49.  The  semivowel  y.  —  This  semivowel,  when  not  derived  from  i 
before  other  vowels  (48  a)  within  Vedic  itself,  is  based  either  on  IE.  i  (=  Gk. 
spiritus  asper)  or  voiced  palatal  spirant  (=  Gk.  £)4;  e-  g*  yds  ‘who’  (o-$) ; 
yaj-  ‘sacrifice’  ( ay-10 $);  yudh -  ‘fight’  (va-fit'vyj);  but  ydva-  ‘corn’  (£s/a);  yas- 
‘boil’  (£sco);  yuj-  ‘yoke’  (tuy-);  yusan-  ‘broth’  (Qb-yyj).  It  is  probably  due  to 
this  difference  of  origin  that  yas-  ‘boil’  and  yam-  ‘restrain’,  reduplicate  with 
ya-  in  the  perfect,  but  yaj-  ‘sacrifice’,  with  i-. 

a.  This  semivowel  sometimes  appears  without  etymological  justi¬ 
fication:  1.  after  roots  in  -a  before  vowel  suffixes;  e.  g.  da-y-i ,  3.  sing.  aor. 
{da-  ‘give’),  d-dha-y-i  (dha-  ‘put’),  ajiia-y-i  ( jiia -  ‘know’);  upa-sthd-y-am ,  abs. 
‘approaching’;  rsabha-da-y-in-  (AV.)  ‘bestowing  bulls’.  This  is  probably  due 
to  the  influence  of  roots  in  -ai  (27  a),  which  have  a-  before  consonants,  but 
ay-  before  vowels;  e.  g.  pai-  ‘drink’  \pti-tave,  a-pay-i,  pay-ana-. —  2.  owing  to 
the  influence  of  closely  allied  words  or  formations,  in:  yu-y-am  ‘you’  (for 
*yiisam,  Av.  yuzem ,  cp.  yus-?nd~,  stem  of  other  cases)5  because  of  vay-dm 
‘we’;  bhn-y-istha-  ‘most’  because  of  bhtt-yas-  ‘more’;  bhave-y-am ,  1.  sing.  opt. 
(for  *bhdvayani)  because  of  bhdves ,  bhdvet ,  etc. 

b.  very  rarely  in  the  later  Samhitas  after  palatals:  tirascye  (AV.  xv.  3s) 
var.  lect.  for  tirasce \  dat.,  ‘transverse’;  snydptra-  (TS.  1.  2.  133)  :  snaptra-  (VS.) 
‘corner  of  the  mouth’. 

c.  interchanging  (after  the  manner  of  Prakrit)  occasionally  with  v6  in 


1  On  vyurnv-an,  vy-urnv-ati-  beside  ctpornuv - 
antas,  see  Wackernagel  I,  182  a  a,  note. 

2  See  below  375,  382  a. 

3  For  various  explanations  of  this  see 
Wackernagel  i.  182  a  7,  note  (p.  205). 

4  See  Brugmann,  KG.  1,  302. 

5  Cp.  Wackernagel  1,  86  c;  187,  note. 


6  In  khya-  ‘tell’,  y  seems  at  first  sight  to 
be  interchanged  with  the  s  of  ksa-,  which 
occurs  in  the  K.  and  the  MS.  (cp.  v.  Schroe- 
der’s  ed.,  i,  p.  xliii,  7);  but  the  two  verbs, 
though  synonymous,  have  probably  a  different 
origin.  Cp.  Wackernagel  1,  188  c,  note. 


42  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


the  Samhitas  of  the  YV.;  e.  g.  atatayin-  (VS.)  beside  atatavin-  (TS.)  ‘having 
one’s  bow  drawn’1. 

50.  The  semivowel  v. —  This  sound  was,  at  the  time  of  the  Prati- 
sakhyas2,  a  voiced  labio-dental  spirant  like  the  English  v  or  the  German  w. 
Within  Vedic  it  is  very  frequently  derived  from  zz3.  It  seems  otherwise 
always  to  be  based  on  IE.  zz;  there  is  no  evidence  that  it  is  ever  derived 
from  an  IE.  spirant  v  which  was  not  interchangeable  with  zz4 5. 

a.  This  semivowel  is  sometimes  found  interchanging  with  b  5,  with  y6, 
and  according  to  some  scholars,  with  z/z7. 

b.  In  two  roots  in  which  v  is  followed  by  r,  an  interchange  of  sonantal 
and  consonantal  pronunciation,  together  with  metathesis  takes  place,  vr 
becoming  ru\  hence  from  dhvr -  ‘bend’  are  derived  both  -dhvr-t-  and  - dhru -, 

dhru-t -,  dkru-ti-)  from  hvr-  ‘go  crooked’,  -hvr-t-,  - hvr-ta -hvr-ti-  and  hru- 
nd-ti,  3.  sing.,  hru-t -,  -hru-ta-.  The  root  rudh-  ‘grow’,  may  be  a  similar  variation 
of  vrdh-  ‘grow’8. 

51.  The  semivowel  r.  ■ — The  liquid  sound  r  must  originally  have 
been  a  cerebral,  as  is  shown  by  its  phonetic  effect  on  a  following  dental  zz 
(47  A).  By  the  time  of  the  Pratisakhyas9,  it  was,  however,  pronounced  in 
other  phonetic  positions  also.  Being  the  consonantal  sound  corresponding  to 
r  before  vowels  (like  y  v  to  i  zz),  it  is  in  that  position  correspondingly 
graded  with  ar\  e.  g.  a-kr-an ,  a-kr-ata ,  beside  a-kr-thds :  d-kar-am ,  aor.  of 
hr-  ‘do’;  dr-u- :  ddr-u-  ‘wood’. 

a.  r  generally  corresponds  to  r  in  the  cognate  languages,  but  not 
infrequently  to  /  also;  and  where  these  languages  agree  in  having  /,  the  latter 
may  in  these  instances  be  assumed  to  be  the  original  sound.  As  old  Iranian 
here  invariably  has  there  seems  to  have  been  a  tendency  to  rhotacism  in 
the  Indo-Iranian  period10.  Words  in  which  Vedic  r  thus  represents  IE.  / 
are  the  following: 

1.  initially:  raks-  ‘protect’;  ragh-u-  ‘swift’;  z -a inhate  ‘speeds’;  rabh-  ‘grasp’; 
ramb-  ‘hang  down’;  ra~  ‘bark’;  ric-  ‘leave’,  rip-  ‘smear’;  rih-  ‘lick’;  rue-  ‘shine’, 
ruj-  ‘break’;  rudh-  and  ruh-  ‘grow’. 

2.  medially:  ahgara-  ‘coal’;  ajird-  ‘agile’;  aratni-  ‘elbow’;  arh-  ‘be 
worthy’;  iyarti  ‘sets  in  motion’;  Tr-  ‘set  in  motion’;  tirna-  ‘wool’;  urmi-  ‘wave’; 
garutmant -,  a  celestial  bird;  gardabhd-  ‘ass’;  gdrbha-  ‘womb’;  cakrd- 
‘wheel’;  ca?'-  ‘move’;  caramd-  ‘last’;  cird-  ‘long’;  chardis-  ‘protection’;  dharu- 
(AV.)  ‘sucking’;  paras  u-  ‘axe’;  piparti  ‘fills’;  pur-  ‘fort’;  pur  it-  ‘much’;  prath- 
‘spread  out’;  -pru-t-  ‘swimming’,  -pruta-  part,  ‘floating’,  pravate  ‘waves’; 
mdrdhati  ‘neglects’;  -marsana-  (AV.)  ‘touching’;  murdhan -  ‘head’;  vard- 
‘suitor’,  and  various  forms  of  vr-  ‘choose’;  vdreas-  ‘light’;  sarand-  ‘pro¬ 
tecting’;  sdrman-  ‘protection’;  sarkara-  ‘gravel’;  si  sir  a-  (AV.)  ‘cold  season’; 
sri-  ‘lean’;  sru-  ‘hear’;  srdni-  ‘buttock’;  sar-  in  forms  of  sr-  ‘run’,  and 
sanrd-  (VS.)  ‘flood’;  sarpis-  ‘clarified  butter’;  sahdsra-  ‘thousand’;  svar- 
‘heaven’;  surya-  ‘sun’;  har'it-  and  hdrita-  ‘yellow’;  hiranya-  ‘gold’;  hraduni- 
‘hail’11.  ‘ 


1  Cp.  Benfey,  GGA.  1852,  1 1 4 f . ;  Weber,  j 
IS.  2,  28;  Wackernagel  1,  188  c. 

2  See  Whitney  on  APr.  1.  26. 

3  See  above  48  a. 

4  Cp.  Wackernagel  i,  196;  Brugmann,  ! 
KG.  1,  1 48  and  155. 

5  See  45  a,  3. 

6  49  c.  7  46  c. 

8  For  some  other  possible  instances  see  ( 

Wackernagel  1,  18  [.  b,  note. 


9  See  Whitney  on  APr.  1.  20,  28. 

10  It  seems  as  if  the  Vedic  relation  of  r 
to  l  could  only  be  accounted  for  by  assum¬ 
ing  a  mixture  of  dialects;  one  dialect 
having  preserved  the  IE.  distinction  of  r 
and  /;  in  another  IE.  I  becoming  r  (the 
Vedic  dialect);  in  a  third  r  becoming  / 
throughout  (the  later  Magadht).  See  Brug¬ 
mann,  KG.  I,  175,  note. 

See  Wackernagel  i,  189. 


I.  Phonology.  Semivowels.  43 


b.  r  appears  in  place  of  phonetic  cj  (=  2,  Hr.  i)1  as  final  of  stems 
in  -is  and  -us,  before  endings  which  begin  with  bh-\  e.  g.  havir-bhis  and 
vdpur-bhis.  This  substitution  is  due  to  the  influence  of  Sandhi,  where  is,  us 
would  become  ir,  ur.  r  also  takes  the  place  of  d  in  ira-  beside  Ida-  ‘refreshing 
draught’.  In  urubja-  ‘wide  open’  r  apparently  takes  the  place  of  dental  d 
(=  *ud-ubja~),  perhaps  under  the  influence  of  the  numerous  compounds 
beginning  with  uru-  ‘wide’,  e.  g.  uru-jrl-  'wide-striding’ 2. 

c.  Metathesis  of  r  takes  place  when  dr  would  be  followed  by  s  or 
h  +  consonant.  Under  these  conditions  it  appears  to  be  phonetic,  being 
due  to  the  Svarabhakti  after  r  being  twice  as  great  before  h  and  sibilants 
as  before  other  consonants3:  when  a  vowel  followed  the  sibilant  or  h  (e.  g. 
darsatd -)4,  the  Svarabhakti  was  pronounced;  but  if  a  consonant  followed, 
rd  took  the  place  of  dr  -f  double  Svarabhakti.  This  metathesis  appears  in 
forms  of  dr  s'-  ‘see’  and  srj-  ‘send  forth’:  drdstum  (AY.),  drastr-  (AV.)  ‘one 
who  sees’;  sdm-srastr-  ‘one  who  engages  in  battle’,  2.  sing.  aor.  srds  (=  *srak) 5; 
also  in pras-ti-  ‘side-horse’,  beside  pdrs-u-  and prsti-  ‘rib’;  moreover  in  brahmdn- 
‘priest’,  brahman-  ‘devotion’,  beside  barhts -  ‘sacrificial  litter’  (from  brh-  or 
bark-  ‘make  big’);  perhaps  also  drahydi  ‘strongly’  (drh-  ‘be  firm’).  The 
same  metathesis  occurs,  being,  however,  very  rare  and  fluctuating,  before  zb- : 
thus  tuvi-mraksa-  ‘injuring  greatly’,  mraksa-krtvan-  ‘rubbing  to  pieces’  (from 
mrj-  ‘wipe’,  or  mrs-  ‘stroke’),  but  tdrksya -,  N.6. 

52.  The  semivowel  /.  —  The  liquid  sound  /  is  the  semivowel  corre¬ 
sponding  to  the  vowel  /  (which  however  occurs  only  in  some  half  dozen 
perfect  and  aorist  forms  of  the  root  kip-  ‘be  adapted’).  It  is  pronounced  at 
the  present  day  in  India  as  an  interdental;  but  it  must  have  had  a  post¬ 
dental  sound  at  the  time  of  the  Pratisakhyas 7,  by  which  it  is  described  as 
being  pronounced  in  the  same  position  as  the  dentals8 *. 

a.  It  represents  IE.  / 9  and,  in  a  few  instances,  IE.  r.  It  is  rarer  in 
Yedic  than  in  any  cognate  language  except  old  Iranian  (where  it  does  not 
occur  at  all)10.  It  is  much  rarer  than  r,  which  is  seven  times  as  frequent11. 
The  gradual  increase  of  l,  chiefly  at  the  cost  of  r,  but  partly  also  owing 
to  the  appearance  of  new  words,  is  unmistakable.  Thus  in  the  tenth  Book 
of  the  RV.  appear  the  verbs  mine-  and  labh -,  and  the  nouns  Ionian -,  lohita-, 
but  in  the  earlier  books  only  mruc-  ‘sink’,  rabh-  ‘seize’,  roman-  ‘hair’,  rohitd- 
‘red’;  similarly  dasahguld-  ‘length  of  ten  fingers’,  hlddaka-  and  hlddika-vant- 
‘refreshing’,  beside  sv-ahgurl-  ‘fair-fingered’,  hradd-  ‘pond’.  Moreover,  while 
in  the  oldest  parts  of  the  RV.  /  occurs12  in  a  few  words  only,  it  is  eight 
times  as  common  in  the  latest  parts.  Again,  in  the  AV.  it  is  seven  times 
as  common  as  in  the  RV. I3;  thus  for  rap-  ‘chatter’,  rikh-  ‘scratch’,  a-srird- 
‘ugly’,  appear  in  the  AV.  lap-,  likh-  (also  VS.),  aslTla-.  The  various  texts 


1  Cp.  above  p.  35,  note  3. 

2  On  a  supposed  parasitic  r  in  chardts- 
‘fence’,  ydjatra-  ‘adorable’,  vibhrtra -  ‘to  be 
borne  hither  and  thither’,  see  Wackernagel 
I,  189,  note  7. 

3  According  to  the  APr.  I.  joi. 

4  Cp.  above  21  a. 

5  Cp.  v.  Negelein,  Zur  Sprachgeschichte 
des  Veda  83,  note  7. 

6  On  the  interchange  of  rd  and  ar  in 

raj-  ‘colour’,  rajata-  ‘silvery’,  raj-  ‘shine’,  and 

cirjuna-  ‘bright’ ;  bhrdj-  ‘shine’,  and  bhdrgas- 

‘brilliance’;  bhratr-  ‘brother’,  and  bhdrlr-  ‘hus¬ 

band’;  see  Wackernagel  i,  190  e,  note 

(end).  In  vrajd-  ‘fold’,  vratd -  ‘ordinance’, 


sraj-  ‘wreath’,  ra-  does  not  stand  for  ar , 
Wackernagel  i,  190  d,  note. 

7  Cp.  PlSCHEL,  BB.  3,  264.  An  indication 
that  it  was  not  a  cerebral  is  the  fact  that 
Is  never  occurs  (while  rs  is  common). 

8  .See  44. 

9  Which,  however,  is  largely  represented 
by  r  also  :  cp.  5 1  a. 

10  Loc.  cit. 

See  Whitney,  JAOS.  ii,  p.  XLff. 

12  See  Arnold,  ‘L  in  the  Rigveda’,  in 
Festgruss  an  Rudolf  von  Roth,  1893,  p.  145 
— 148;  Historical  Vedic  Grammar,  JAOS. 
18,  2,  p.  258  f. ;  Vedic  Metre  p.  37,  3. 

13  Cp.  Wackernagel  1,  191  c. 


44 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Yedic  Grammar. 


of  the  YV.  also  show  an  increased  number  of  words  with  /  as  compared 
with  the  RV.;  thus  babhlusd-  (VS.)  ‘brownish’  beside  babhru -  ‘brown’;  kulala- 
(VS.)  ‘potter’  beside  earn-  ‘pot’.  The  MS.  has  a  special  predilection  for  l1; 
thus  pulTtat  ‘pericardium’  beside  puritat  (AV.  VS.).  The  SV.  has  pamsuld- 
‘dusty’,  for  pamsurd-  in  the  corresponding  passage  of  the  RV. 

In  a  certain  number  of  words  r  interchanges  with  /  in  the  same 
period:  thus  puru-  and  pulu-  ‘much’;  misra-  and  -misla-  ‘mixed’;  jargur-  and 
jalgul L,  intv.  of  gf-  ‘swallow’;  in  the  AV.:  -gird-  and  -gild-  ‘swallowing’,  ksudrd- 
and  ksullakd-  (=  *ksudla-ka )  ‘small’,  tiryd-  and  tild-  ‘sesamum’. 

The  above  considerations  render  it  probable  that  the  Vedic  dialect  was 
descended  from  an  IndoTranian  one  in  which  rhotacism  had  removed  every  /. 
But  since  the  oldest  parts  of  the  RV.  contain  some  words  with  IE.  /,  and 
in  its  later  parts  as  well  as  in  the  other  Samhitas  /  predominantly  inter¬ 
changes  with  r  representing  IE.  /,  there  must  have  been  another  Vedic 
dialect  in  which  IE.  r  and  l  were  kept  distinct;  from  the  latter  /  must  have 
found  its  way  into  the  literary  language  to  an  increasing  extent2. 

b.  In  the  oldest  parts  of  the  RV.  there  are  no  verbal  forms  which 
preserve  IE.  /,  and  only  a  few  nouns,  viz.  ( u)lokd -  ‘free  space’,  sldka-  ‘call’, 
and  -misla-  ‘mixed’.  A  few  other  words  containing  /  have  no  IE.  cognates 
and  may  therefore  be  of  foreign  origin:  nila-  ‘dark-coloured’,  jdlasa-  ‘healing’, 
iilvila-  ‘fertile’,  and  the  denominative  tilvilaydte. 

In  the  latest  parts  of  the  RV.  /  represents  IE.  /  in:  1.  verbal  forms 
and  primary  derivatives:  lebhire ,  lebhand -,  labdha -,  from  labh-  ‘grasp’,  layantam , 
from  It-  ‘cling’;  alipsata,  aor.  of  lip-  ‘anoint’;  lobhayantT-  part,  from  lubh-  ‘desire’; 
c ala- c aid -,  -cacali-  ‘swaying’  (also pums-calz-  ‘whore’,  AV.  VS.),  from  cal-  ‘move’; 
plavate ,  plavd-  ‘boat’,  from  plu-  ‘swim’. 

2.  the  following  nouns:  logd-  ‘clod’;  uluka-  ‘owl’;  ulkd-  ‘meteor’;  ulba- 
‘membrane’;  kaldsa-  ‘jar’;  kald-  ‘small  portion’;  kdla-  ‘time’;  kalydna-  ‘fair’;  kiila- 
‘family’;  galda-  ‘trickling’  (VS.  gal-  ‘drop’);  palita-  ‘grey’;  pulu-  (in  compounds) 
‘much’;  phalgva-  ‘weakly’;  bdla-  ‘strength’3;  ball-  ‘tax’;  mala-  ‘dirty  garment’; 
salild-  ‘surging’;  hlddaka-  and  hlddikavant-  ‘refreshing’;  also  words  with  the  suffix 
-/<24,  especially  with  diminutive  sense;  e.g.  vrsa-ld-  ‘little  man’,  sisd-la-  ‘little  child’5. 

a.  In  the  later  Samhitas  /  represents  IE.  /  in  the  following  words: 
-kulva-  (VS.)  ‘bald’;  kloman-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘lung’;  gldhana-  (AV.)  ‘dicing’;  gldu- 
(AV.  VS.)  ‘excrescence’;  tuld-  (VS.)  ‘balance’;  paldva-  (AV.)  ‘chaff’;  pula-stl- 
(VS.)  ‘smooth-haired’;  plihan-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘spleen’;  phalgu-  (VS.)  ‘reddish’; 
laghu-  (AV.)  ‘light’;  lap-  (AV.)  ‘prate’  (=  rap-  RV.). 

c.  On  the  other  hand,  /  to  some  extent  represents  IE.  r  also6. 

1.  In  the  RV.  this  value  of  /  is  rare  and  occurs  only  in  the  neigh¬ 
bourhood  of  labial  sounds  (u,  0,  p,  m,  v)\  ulttkhala-  ‘mortar’  beside  uru- 
‘broad’;  jalgul-,  intv.  of  gf-  ‘swallow’;  plii si-,  a  kind  of  insect,  beside  prus- 
‘squirt’;  klosa-  ‘call’  beside  krosant-  ‘calling’,  krosand-  ‘crying’;  -lohitd-  ‘red’, 
lodha-,  a  kind  of  red  animal,  beside  rohit-,  rohitd-  ‘red’;  lopasd-  ‘jackal’, 
lup-  (AV.)  ‘break’,  beside  rup-  ‘break’;  up  ala-  ‘upper  millstone’  beside  upari 
‘above’;  jdlpi-  ‘muttering’;  plppala-  ‘berry’;  mla-  ‘fade’  beside  mr-  ‘die’;  vald- 
‘cave’  beside  vdrate  ‘encloses’. 

2.  In  the  later  Samhitas  the  use  of  this  /  =  IE.  r  extends  further  than 
in  the  RV.;  thus  dlam  (AV.)  ‘enough’ :  dram ;  Its-  (VS.)  ‘tear’ :  ris-;  -luned-  (VS.) 


1  L.  v.  Schroeder,  ZDMG.  33,  196. 

2  See  Wackernagel  i,  192  b,  and  cp. 
above  p.  42,  note  I0. 

3  Cp.  above  p.  36,  note  10 . 


4  See  Arnold,  Festgruss  an  Roth  147. 

5  See  Wackernagel  1,  p.  21 8. 

6  Cp.  above  51  a. 


I.  Phonology.  Semivowels.  Sibilants. 


45 


‘tearing  out’;  babhlusd-  (VS.)  ‘brownish’  :  babhru-  ‘brown’;  sthula-  (AV.  VS.) 
‘gross’  :  sthura-  \ 

3.  In  a  few  instances  l  represents  IE.  r  by  dissimilation;  thus  dlarsi 
dlarti ,  intv.  of  r-  ‘go’  (=  arar-);  prd  tilami  (VS.)  =  prd  tirami  ‘I  promote’2. 

d.  In  the  later  Samhitas  /  occasionally  appears  in  place  of  phonetic  dp 
between  vowels;  and  that  this  change  could  easily  arise,  is  shown  by  the 
fact  that  l  regularly  appears  instead  of  d  between  vowels4.  This  substitution 
is  regularly  found  in  the  Kanva  recension  of  the  VS.;  e.  g.  lie  —  ide  (RV.  lie) ; 
dsalha  =  dsadha  (RV.  dsalha).  Other  instances  are  ildyati  (AV.)  ‘stands 
still’,  for  *iddyati  (RV.  ilayati) 5  from  id-  ‘refreshment’;  ila-  (MS.)  ‘refreshment’, 
byform  of  ida-  (RV.  ila-);  mil-  (AV.)  ‘close  the  eyes’6,  connected  with  mis- 
‘wink’. 

In  the  later  Samhitas  /  is  also  found  for  d  between  vowels  when  the 
final  of  a  word  (like  /  in  RV.):  thus  turdsal  dyuktasah  (VS.)  for  turdsat  ‘over¬ 
powering  quickly’;  phdl  iti  (AV.)  for  phdt  (AV.);  probably  also  in  sal  iti  (AV.) 
and  bdl  iti  (AV.  TS.),  cp.  RV.  bal  itthd . 

e.  In  at  least  one  word  /  stands  for  dental  d:  ksulla-kd-  (AV.)  ‘small’, 
for  *ksndld -,  byform  of  ksudrd-  (VS.)  ‘small’. 

f.  Sometimes  /  has  an  independent  Indian  origin  in  onomatopoetic  words; 
thus  alala-bhdva?it-  ‘sounding  cheerfully’. 

g.  On  the  other  hand  there  are  many  words  in  which  a  foreign  origin 
may  be  suspected;  such  are,  besides  those  already  mentioned  in  45  b,  the 
following:  kaulitard -,  N.;  alma-  and  bhalands -,  names  of  tribes;  libuja-  ‘creeper’; 
lav  and-  (AV.)  ‘salt’. 

53.  The  sibilants.  —  The  three  sibilants,  the  palatal  s,  the  cerebral  s, 
and  the  dental  3,  are  all  voiceless.  Even  apart  from  the  regular  phonetic 
change  of  /  or  s  to  s,  and  of  3-  to  /,  both  the  palatal  and  the  dental  are 
further  liable,  in  many  words  and  forms,  to  be  substituted  for  each  of  the 
other  two. 

a.  Assimilation  of  j  is  liable  to  occur 

1.  initially,  when  /  or  j  appear  at  the  end  of  the  same  or  the  beginning 
of  the  next  syllable.  This  is  the  case  in  svdsura-  ‘father-in-law’;  svasnl- 
‘mother-in-law’;  smdsru-  and  -smasaru-  ‘beard’;  sdsvant-  ‘ever-recurring’;  in 
sds-  ‘six’  (Lat.  sex),  and  its  various  derivatives,  sas-ti-  ‘sixty’,  sodhd  (=  *saz- 
dha)  ‘sixfold’,  and  others  7. 

2.  initially  s  in  the  RV.  almost  invariably  becomes  s  in  sah- 
‘overcoming’,  when  the  final  h  (=  Hr.  i),  with  or  without  a  following  dental, 
becomes  cerebral:  nom.  sing,  sdt  ‘victorious’,  and  the  compounds  jana-sdt ,  tura- 
sdt,  pura-sdt,  prtana-sdt,  vlra-sdt,  vrtha-sdt ,  rta-sdt  (VS.),  visva-sat  (TS.  AV.); 
also  a-sadha-  ‘invincible’.  The  only  exceptions  are  sddha,  nom.  sing,  of  sddhr- 
‘conqueror’,  and  the  perf.  part.  pass,  sadhd-  (AV.)8.  The  s  of  the  nom.  has 
been  transferred  to  forms  with  -sdh-,  when  compounded  with  prtand -,  though 


1  In  B.  passages  of  the  TS.  and  MS.  are 
found  intv.  forms  of  It  ‘sway’:  dlelayat,  pf. 
lelaya ,  also  the  adv.  lelayd  ‘quiveringly’.  In 
similar  passages  the  prepositions  prd  and 
para  are  affected  :  plehkhd -  (TS.)  =  prehkhd- 
swing’;  plaksarayan  (MS.  III.  IO2)  ‘they  caused 
to  flow’  (| / ksar-)y pald-y-ata  (TS.)  ‘fled’  ( para-i -). 
Some  uncertain  or  wrong  explanations  of 
alatrna -  ‘miserly’,  uloka -  ‘wide  space’,  gal- 
‘drop’,  with  l  —  IE.  r,  are  discussed  by 
Wackernagel  1,  p.  221,  top. 


2  See  Wackernagel  i,  193  b,  note. 

3  See  above  51  b. 

4  See  above  p.  5,  note  5. 

5  According  to  BoHTLlNGK,  ildyati  is 
wrong  for  ildyati.  Cp.  above  p.  35,  note  1. 

6  A  form  with  the  original  d  is  found  in 
mtdam  (K.)  ‘in  a  low  tone’. 

7  Cp.  Wackernagel  i,  197  a,  note. 

8  A  B.  passage  of  the  MS.  has  sadhydi 
(1.  83). 


46 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


there  is  no  phonetic  justification  for  the  cerebral  (as  the  s  is  preceded  by  a): 
thus  prta na-sdh a m ,  gen.  prtana-sdhas,  prtana-sdhya-  ‘victory  in  battle’,  but 
prtana-sdham  (SV.).  When  compounded  with  dyumna -,  dhanva -,  rat  ha-,  vibhvd -, 
sada-,  the  phonetic  form  -sdh-  remains1. 

3.  Medial  s  has  been  assimilated  to  initial  s  in  sasa-  ‘hare’  (IE.  kaso- 2). 

b.  Without  assimilation3 4,  s  or  s  has  been  changed  to  s,  mostly 
under  the  influence  of  allied  words,  in  the  following:  ke'sa-  ‘hair’ :  kesara- 
(AV.  VS.);  sdkrt 4  ‘excrement’;  s'ubh-  ‘adorn’  (probably  owing  to  sudh-  ‘purify’); 
suska-  ‘dry’  (Hr.  suska-),  susyati  ‘dries’;  sru-  ‘flow’,  sravas-  ‘stream’ :  sru sravas- ; 
s'vas-,  s'us- ‘breathe’;  s'vdtra-,  svdtrya-  ‘dainty’ :  svad-  ‘taste’5;  pyasistmahi  (AV.)  : 
pyasistmahi  (VS.),  aor.  (534)  of pya-  ‘swell’;  osistha-hdn-  (VS.  TS.)  ‘striking  very 
swiftly’  beside  osistha-ddvan-  (TS.)  ‘giving  very  rapidly’  (from  os  dm  ‘quickly’, 
lit.  ‘burningly’),  owing  to  dsistha-  ‘very  swift’;  kosa-  ‘receptacle’  (in  the  later 
language  often  also  kosa-);  kusmd-  (VS.)  beside  kusmd-  (MS.),  a  kind  of 
demon;  rusati-  (AV.)  ‘angry’,  beside  rus-  ‘be  angry’,  probably  owing  to 
r  us  ant-  ‘shining’. 


‘ruddy  like  young  grass’,  owing  to  sasa-  ‘grass’,  for  sas-pihj ara-  (VS.  MS.)  =  sas[pa]- 

pinjara- 6. 

54.  The  palatal  s.  —  This  sibilant  is  a  palatal  both  in  origin  (=  Hr.  /), 
as  indicated  by  cognate  languages,  and  in  employment,  as  its  combination 
with  other  consonants  shows.  Thus  it  represents  an  old  palatal  in  satdm 
‘a  hundred’,  diva-  ‘horse’,  svan-  ‘dog’,  sru-  ‘hear’7.  In  external  Sandhi  it 
regularly  appears  before  voiceless  palatal  mutes,  e.  g.  indras  ca.  At  the  present 
day  the  pronunciation  of  s'  in  India  varies  between  a  sh  sound  (not  always 
distinguished  from  s)  and  a  s  sound  followed  by  y.  It  is  to  some  extent 
confused  with  the  other  two  sibilants  even  in  the  Samhitas,  but  it  is  to  be 
noted  that  here  it  interchanges  much  oftener  with  s  than  with  s8. 

The  aspirate  of  /  is  ch 9;  its  media  is  represented  by  j  and  when  aspirated 
by  h .  These  four  form  the  old  palatals  (Ilr.  s',  s'/i ,  z,  zb),  representing 
IE.  k  kh  g  gh.  The  exact  phonetic  character  of  the  latter  is  doubtful,  but 
it  is  probable  that  they  were  dialectically  pronounced  in  two  ways,  either  as 
mutes  (guttural10  or  palatal)  or  as  spirants,  the  centum  languages  later  following 
the  former,  the  satem  languages  the  latter11. 

a.  In  external  Sandhi  s  regularly  appears  for  5  before  the  palatals 
c,  ch,  s'12.  It  also  stands  for  s  internally  in  pascdt  and  pascdtat  ‘behind’ 13 ,  and 
in  vrscdti  ‘hews’  beside  -vraskd-  ‘lopping’, 

b.  Before  s  the  palatal  sibilant  when  medial  is  regularly  replaced 
by  k,  and  sometimes  also  when  final;  e.  g.  drk-sase  and  - drk ,  from  drs-  ‘see’. 
Otherwise  s'  very  rarely  interchanges  with  k  or  c;  thus  rusant-  ‘brilliant’,  beside 
rue-  ‘shine’;  perhaps  kdrna-  ‘ear’ :  sru-  ‘hear’14.  There  are  also  a  few  words 


1  Wackernagel  i,  197  b. 

2  See,  however,  op.  cit.  I,  197  c,  note. 

3  For  s  and  s  are  strictly  distinguished  in 
the  RV. ;  cp.  op.  cit.  I,  197  d  a,  note  (end). 

4  Cp.,  however,  op.  cit.  I,  197  d  a. 

5  Op.  cit.  p.  226,  top. 

6  See  op.  cit.,  p.  226  (3;  and  below  64,  I  a. 

7  On  the  relation  of  s  to  the  corresponding 
sounds  in  cognate  languages,  see  Wacker¬ 
nagel  1,  200  a;  Brugmann,  KG.  i,  233. 

8  See  above  53,  3. 


9  Cp.  above  40. 

10  The  fact  that  s  before  j  regularly  be¬ 
comes  k  and  sometimes  also  when  final, 
seems  to  favour  the  assumption  of  the 
guttural  pronunciation. 

11  Cp.  Wackernagel  i,  200  b. 

12  See  below,  Sandhi,  78. 

13  Cp.  Av.  paskdt  and  pasca. 

14  For  some  words  in  which  such  an 
assumption  is  doubtful  or  wrong,  see  Wacker¬ 
nagel  1,  20  l  a. 


I.  Phonology.  Palatal  s'.  Dental  s.  Cerebral  s. 


47 


with  /  to  which  k  corresponds  in  the  satem  languages;  such  are  krus-  ‘cry’; 
asman-  ‘stone’ z. 

55.  The  dental  s. —  This  sound  as  a  rule  represents  IE.  dental  s; 
e.  g.  sa  ‘he’,  Gothic  sa;  dsva-s  ‘horse’,  Lat.  equo-s;  dsti ,  Gk.  sari.  In  the 
combinations  ts  and  ps,  when  they  stand  for  etymological  d/is  and  bZis ,  the  t 
represents  IE.  zZi ;  as  in  grtsa-  ‘adroit’  (from  grdZi-  ‘be  eager’)  and  dips  a -, 
‘wish  to  injure’  (from  dabh-  ‘injure’),  where  the  final  aspirate  of  the  root 
would  have  been  thrown  forward  on  the  suffix,  as  in  bud-dZia-  from  ybudZi 
and  - rcib-dha -,  from  y rabZi-1  2. 

The  dental  j-  is  in  Sandhi  frequently  changed  to  the  palatal  s'3,  and  still 
more  frequently  to  the  cerebral  y4. 

56.  The  cerebral  s.  —  The  cerebral  sibilant  is  altogether  of  a 
secondary  nature,  since  it  always  represents  either  an  original  palatal  or  an 
original  dental  sibilant. 

The  cerebral  y  stands  for  a  palatal  before  cerebral  tenues  (themselves 
produced  by  this  y  from  dental  tenues)  in  the  following  two  ways: 

a.  for  the  palatal  s'  (—  Hr.  s')  and  j  (=  Hr.  z);  e.  g.  nas-ta-,  from  nas- 
‘be  lost’;  mrs-ta ,  3. sing. mid.,  from  mrp-  ‘wipe’;  prs-td-  ‘asked’,  prds-tum  ‘to  ask’, 
from  pras-  ‘ask’  in  pras-nd -  ‘question’  (present  stem  prccZid- 5  with  inchoative 
suffix  -chd).  In  some  instances  it  is  shown  by  the  evidence  of  cognate  words 
to  represent  s';  thus  astdu  ‘eight’  beside  a  sit l-  ‘eighty’;  prsti-  ‘rib’,  prdsti- 
‘side-horse’,  beside  pdrsn -  ‘rib’;  dstra-  ‘goad’,  beside  asdni-  ‘thunderbolt’; 
possibly  also  apastZia -6  ‘barb’,  beside  asman -  ‘bolt’. 

b.  for  the  combination  ks,  which  in  origin  is  /  +  7 ;  e.  g.  cds-fe,  a-casta , 
from  caks- 8  ‘see’;  a-tas-ta ,  tas-ta-,  tas-ir -9,  beside  taks-  ‘hew’;  nir-as-ta- 
‘emasculated’  beside  nir-aks-nu-hi  (AY.)  ‘emasculate’;  also  aorist  forms  like 
d-yas-ta,  3.  sing.  mid.  from  yap-  ‘sacrifice’,  beside  3.  sing.  subj.  ydks-at;  d-srs-ta, 
3.  sing,  mid.,  beside  d-srks-ata,  3.  pi.  mid.  from  sip-  ‘emit’.  As  in  all  these 
instances  ks  =  /+  s  or p  (—  z)  +  ^I0,  loss  of  t  before  t  must  here  be  assumed, 
the  remaining  /  or  p  combining  with  the  following  t  as  usual  to  st11.  A  similar 
origin  of  s  is  indicated  by  the  evidence  of  cognate  languages  in  sas-tZid-  (A V.) 
‘sixth’,  where  the  final  ^  has  been  dropped  (as  in  Gk.  SK-rog ),  while  retained 
in  Lat.  sex-tus;  also  in  sas-ti-  ‘sixty’,  sodha  ‘sixfold’,  sodas'd-  (AV.)  ‘sixteenth’. 
It  has  possibly  the  same  origin  in  asthivdnt -  ‘knee’ I2. 

57.  The  cerebral  5  stands  for  dental  5  after  vowels  other  than 
a  or  a,  and  after  the  consonants  k,  r,  s. 

1.  Medially  this  change  regularly13  takes  place,  both  when  the  j  is 
radical  —  e.  g.  ti-st/iati ,  from  stZia-  ‘stand’;  su-sup-ur ;  3.  pi.  perf.  from  svap- 


1  This  seems  to  point  to  fluctuation  in 
the  IE.  pronunciation;  cp.  Wackernagel  I, 
201  b. 

2  See  Wackernagel  t,  210. 

3  Cp.  above  54  a,  and  below  78,  2. 

4  See  below  56. 

5  Cp.  40. 

6  Cp.  Wackernagel  i,  202  b;  and  below 
p.  48,  note  7. 

7  Cp.  op.  cit.  1,  1 16  b. 

8  Cp.  Av.  casman -. 

9  On  the  origin  of  tvdstr -  =  *lvarstr-,  see 
Wackernagel  i,  202  c,  note. 

10  Though  ks  is  regularly  based  on  a 

palatal  or  a  guttural in  the  Vedic  language, 

there  are  some  words  of  IE.  origin  in  which 

the  s  appears  to  represent  not  s  but  a  dental 


spirant  tenuis  (p)  or  media  [dh).  In  a  few 
words,  ksip-,  ksu-,  ksubh ksurd-,  the  sibilant 
comes  first  in  the  cognate  languages:  see 
Wackernagel  i,  209. 

11  Similarly,  when  ks  —  guttural  +  j  is 
followed  by/,  the  ^  disappears  and  the  guttural 
combines  with  the  /;  thus  from  ghas-  ‘eat’, 
•gdha-  (=  g/iz-ta-) ;  from  paks-  ‘eat \  pagdhd- 
(=  p aghz’ta-),  pagdhvdya  (=  paghz-tvayd) ; 
from  bhaj-  ‘share’,  aor.  a-bhak-ta  (= abhap-s-ta ), 
beside  d-bkak-s-i. 

12  Cp.  Bartholomae,  Studien  zur  indo- 
germanischen  Sprachgeschichte  2,  103. 

The  change  does  not  take  place  in 
some  forms  of  the  perfect  of  sic-  ‘pour’  : 
si  sice  [ill.  3  21 5),  sisicur  (11.  244),  beside  sisicatur. 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


48 

‘sleep’;  us-ana part.,  from  vas-  ‘wear’;  rsa-bhd-  ‘bull’;  uksan-  ‘ox’;  varsa- 
‘rain’  —  and  when  the  3-  is  suffixal;  as  in  the  superlative  suffix  istha ;  in  the 
loc.  pi.  suffix  -su,  e.  g.  agni-.su,  aktu-su ,  nr-su ,  vik-su ,  gir-su ,  havis-su ;  in  the 
T-suffix  of  the  aorist,  e.  g.  ydk-s-at ,  from  jr#/-  ‘sacrifice’. 

The  change  is  phonetic  even  when  Anusvara  intervenes  between 
1  11  f  and  s;  e.  g.  pirns  anti  from  pis-  ‘crush’;  havimsi  ‘offerings’  from  havis-; 
cdksumsi  ‘eyes’  from  cdksus-.  The  s,  however,  remains  in  forms  of  hims- 
‘injure’,  nims-  ‘kiss’,  and  pums-  ‘man’,  being  probably  transferred  from  the 
strong  forms  hindsti ,  pumamsam ,  etc. 

a.  The  s,  however,  remains  when  immediately  followed  by  r  or  r,  owing  to  a 
distaste  for  a  succession  of  cerebrals  z;  e.  g.  iisrds,  tisfbhis ,  tisfndm,  f.  of  tri-  ‘three’; 
usras  gen,  usri  and  usrdm,  loc.  (beside  usar,  voc.),  usra-  ‘matutinal’;  usra-  ‘bull’;  sarisrpa- 
‘creeping’.  Owing  to  the  influence  of  forms  with  sr,  the  s  further  remains  in  the  syllable 
sar,  instead  of  sar,  as  in  sisarsi,  sisarti  (beside  sisrate,  sis  rat-,  sarsre  etc.).  In  kesara-  (A  V. 
VS.)  ‘hair’,  the  retention  may  be  due  to  the  r  having  originally  followed  the  s  imme¬ 
diately2.  The  s  also  remains  unchanged  in  the  combinations  stir,  stur,  spar,  spr,  sphUr; 
e.  g.  tistire,  from  str-  ‘strew’;  pisprsas,  from  sprs-  ‘touch’ 3.  It  remains  in  the  second  of 
three  successive  syllables  in  which  s-s-s  would  be  expected;  thus  yasisTs/kas,  beside 
ayasisam,  from  yd-  ‘go’;  sisaksi,  beside  sisakti,  from  sac-  ‘follow’. 

(3.  Words  in  which  s  otherwise  follows  r  or  any  vowel  but  a,  must  be  of  foreign 
origin;  such  as  btsa -  ‘root  fibre’;  bus  a-  ‘vapour’;  bfsaya-,  a  demon;  rbisa-  ‘cleft’;  kJsta- 
‘praiser’;  bdrsvd-  (VS.)  ‘socket’;  kusula-  (A V.),  a  kind  of  demon;  musala-  (AV.)  ‘pestle’ 
(for  musra -?);  stsa-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘lead’ 4. 

y.  The  cerebral  s  is  sometimes  found  even  after  a,  representing  an  early  Prakritic 
change  in  which  as^  is  based  on  rs  and  as  on  ars5.  Instances  of  this  are  kasati  (AV.) 
‘scratches’;  pasthavdh-  (VS.  TS.)  ‘young  bull’  (lit.  ‘carrying  on  the  back’)  and  pasfhauhi- 6 
‘young  cow’,  beside  prstha-  ‘back’;  pdsya-1  ‘stone’;  bhasd-%  (VS.)  ‘barking’ 9.  There  are 
besides  several  unexplained  instances,  doubtless  due  to  foreign  influence  or  origin;  such 
are  asatara-  ‘more  accessible’;  kavdsa- ,  N.;  casa -  ‘blue  jay’;  casala-  ‘knob’;  jaldsa-  ‘remedy’; 
baskaya-  ‘yearling’;  baskiha-  (VS.)  ‘decrepit’;  masa -  ‘bean’  (AV.  VS.);  saspa-  (VS.)  ‘young 
grass’  io. 

2.  Initially11  the  change  regularly  takes  place,  in  the  RV.: 

a.  in  verbal  compounds  after  prepositions  ending  in  i  or  u,  and  in 
nominal  derivatives  from  such  compound  verbs;  also  after  the  preposition 
nis  ‘out’;  e.  g.  ni  sida  (x.  984);  dnu  stuvatiti  (vm.  3s);  ni/i-sahamanafy 

(1.  1273). 

a.  But  (as  when  it  is  medial)  the  S  remains  unchanged  when  followed  by  r 
(even  when  t  ox  p  intervenes)  or  r  (even  though  a  intervene,  with  an  additional  m  or  v 
in  the  roots  smar-  and  svar-) ;  e.  g.  vi  srja  ‘let  flow’,  vi-srspi-  ‘creation’;  vi  strnitdm  ‘let 
him  extend’;  ni-sprse  ‘to  caress’  (but  b-ni-strta-  ‘unchecked’);  pdri-sruta-  ‘flowed  round’; 
vi-sarga-  ‘end’,  vi-sarj ana-  ‘extension’  (owing  to  the  influence  of  the  forms  with  sr  from 
srj-) ;  vi-sarmbn-  ‘dissolving’,  vi-sard-  ‘extent’,  and  even  vi  sasre  (owing  to  the  influence 
of  forms  with  sr  from  sr-  ‘flow’);  prdti  smaretham  ‘may  ye  two  remember’  ( \tsmr-) ; 
abhi-svdranti  ‘praise’,  abhi-svdr-  ‘invocation’,  abhi-svare,  loc.,  ‘behind’,  abhi-svartf-  ‘invoker’. 
But  si  sp  sph  are  changed  according  to  the  general  rule,  when  dr  ir  tir  follow;  e.  g. 
prdti  sphura  ‘repel’.  In  roots  which  contain  no  r,  the  initial  j  rarely  remains;  thus  in 
forms  of  as-  ‘be’:  abhi  santi .  pari  santu,  pari  santi  (beside  pari  santi ),  abhi  syama  (beside 
abhi-sydma);  and  owing  to  dislike  of  repeated  s:  anu-sesidhat  ( sidh -  ‘drive  off’);  dnu-spasta- 
‘noticed’  ( spas -  ‘see’);  pari  sani-svanat  ( svan -  ‘sound’). 


1  Cp.  above  42  a,  a  and  p.  38,  note  2. 

2  See  Wackernagel  i,  50. 

3  The  combination  sr  is  found  only  where 
sr  would  be  quite  isolated  amid  cognate 
forms  with  s;  thus  ajus-ran,  from  jus-  ‘be 
satisfied’,  since  all  the  other  very  numerous 
forms  of  this  verb  have  s. 

4  See  Wackernagel  i,  203  e,  note. 

5  Sometimes  representing  also  IE.  Is  and 
Is;  cp.  Wackernagel  i,  208  b  a. 


6  Cp.  Bartholomae,  KZ.  29,  579; 
WlNDISCH,  KZ.  27,  169. 

7  Cp.  Fortunatov,  BB.  6,217;  ]•  Schmidt, 
KZ.  32,  387. 

8  Fortunatov,  1.  c. 

9  On  doubtful  instances  like  kasthd- 
‘goal’,  asphivantau  ‘knees’,  apdsthd-  ‘barb’,  cp. 
Wackernagel  i,  208  b  a,  note;  b  j8,  note. 

i°  Cp.  Wackernagel  i,  208  b  p. 

11  Finally,  s  stands  for  j  in  the  first 


I.  Phonology.  Cerebral  t. 


49 


S.  In  the  later  Samhitas  initial  is  similaily  changed  to  .r;  but  its  retention  is  in 
some  instances  somewhat  less  restricted;  thus  abhi  spJiiirjati  (AV.)  ‘sounds  towards’; 
adhi  skanda  (AV.)  and  abhi-skdndam l,  beside  pari-skanda -  (AV.,  VS.),  from  skand-  ‘leap’; 
prati-spdsana -  (AV.)  ‘lying  in  wait’,  prati-spasa-  (TS.)  ‘spying’;  ante  sthana  (TS.  v.  6.  i3), 
from  as-  ‘be’ ;  owing  to  the  following  s  also  in  abhi  sisyade  (AV.)  from  syand-  ‘run’. 

y.  The  divergence  between  the  later  Samhitas  and  the  RV.  is  much  greater  when 
the  augment  intervenes  between  a  preposition  ending  in  i  and  the  initial  s  of  a  root. 
In  the  RV.  the  ^  regularly  remains  unchanged  (as  ny-dsTdat,  vy-dsthat,  etc.)  except  in 
pary  asasvajat  ‘embraced’  (under  the  influence  of  pari  sasvaje).  In  the  other  Samhitas, 
however,  the  s  here  regularly  becomes  s;  thus  abhy-asihean  (TS.),  abhy-asicyanta  (AV.) 
from  sic-  ‘sprinkle’;  vy-asahanta  (AV.)2,  from  sa/i-  ‘overcome’;  ddhy-astham  (AV.),  adhy- 
asfhdt  (AV.),  abhy-asthdm  (AV.)  from  sihd-  ‘stand’.  In  the  root  sthiv-  ‘spit’,  which  first 
occurs  in  the  AV.,  the  initial  s  has  been  displaced  by  s  throughout.  The  form  praty 
dsthTvan  indicates  the  transition  which  led  to  the  change. 

Similarly  when  a  reduplicative  syllable  containing  a  intervenes  between  a  preposition 
ending  in  i  and  an  initial  radical  s,  the  latter  always  remains  unchanged  in  the  RV. ; 
thus  pari  sasvaje ;  ni-sasdtthd  (VIII.  489);  ati-tasthciu  (x.  603);  but  the  AV.  has  vi-tasthire, 
vi  tasihe  (owing  to  vi  tisthate ,  vi-sfhita -),  but  also  adhi  tasthur. 

b.  Initially  in  the  second  member  of  other  than  verbal  compounds 
s  is  more  common  than  t  when  preceded  by  vowels  other  than  a.  But 
.r  even  in  the  RV.  the  is  not  infrequently  retained;  not  only  when  r  or  r 
follows  as  in  hrdi-sprs-  ‘touching  the  heart’,  su-sdrtu -,  N.,  rsi-svard-  ‘sung 
by  seers’,  but  also  when  there  is  no  such  cause  to  prevent  the  change; 
thus  gd-sakhi-  beside  go-sak/ii-  ‘possessing  cattle’;  go-sdni-  (AV.  VS.)  beside 
go-sdni -  ‘winning  cattle’;  rayi-sthdna-  beside  rayi-sthdna-  (AV.)  ‘possessing 
wealth’ ;  tri-saptd-  beside  tri-saptd-  (AV.)  ‘twenty-one’;  su-samiddha-  beside 
su-samiddha-  (SV.)  ‘well-kindled’;  apake-stha -  (AV.)  ‘standing  in  the  oven’ 
beside  -stha-  in  other  compounds  after  -e-;  prthivi-sdd-  (VS.)  beside  prthivi- 
sdd-  (AV.)  ‘seated  on  the  earth’;  su-samrddha-  (AV.)  ‘quite  perfect’.  After 
r  the  becomes  s  in  svar-sd -  ‘light- winning’,  svar-sati-  ‘obtainment  of  light’; 
after  k,  probably  only  in  rk-sama-  (TS.)  ‘resembling  a  rc\  beside  fk-sama-  (VS.). 

a.  In  Avyaylbhavas  s  seems  to  appear  in  the  RV.  only;  thus  anu- 
svadhdm  ‘according  to  wish’;  anu-satydm  ‘according  to  truth’;  anu-svdpam 
‘sleepily’. 

(?.  In  some  compounds  s  appears  where  it  is  not  phonetically  justifiable, 
owing  to  the  influence  of  cognate  words;  thus  upa-stut ,  adv.,  ‘at  one’s  call’ 
(because  of  the  frequency  of  -stu-  after  i  and  u),  beside  upa-stut-  ‘invocation’; 
sa-stubh-  (TS.),  a  metre,  owing  to  anu-stubh -,  tri-stubh- ;  savya-sthd-  (AV.),  owing 
to  compounds  in  -e-stha-. 

y.  In  Amredita  compounds,  however,  the  j  regularly  remains  unchanged 
because  of  the  desire  to  leave  the  repeated  word  unaltered;  thus  sute-sute 
and  some-some  ‘at  every  Soma  draught’;  also  in  stuhi  stu/il  ‘praise  on’3. 

3.  Initially  in  external  Sandhi  frequently  becomes  s  after  a  final 
i  and  u  in  the  RV.  This  change  chiefly  takes  place  in  monosyllabic  pronouns 
and  particles,  such  as  sd(s),  sd,  syd{s),  sTm ,  sma,  svid ,  and  particularly  su. 
It  also  appears  in  verbal  forms  like  st/ia  sthas  sthana ,  santu ,  syam ,  sydtna 
(from  as-  ‘be’);  sldati ,  satsat ,  satsi  (from  sad-  ‘sit’);  sihea ,  siheata  (from  sic- 
‘pour’);  stavdma ,  stave,  stuhi  (from  stu-  ‘praise’);  in  participles  like  sdn,  satds 
(from  as-  ‘be’);  sidan  (from  sad  ‘sit’);  suvanas  (su-  ‘press’);  sitdm  (si-  ‘bind’); 
stutds  (stu-  ‘praise’);  skannam  (skand-  ‘leap’).  In  other  words  the  change 


member  of  the  compound  and  often  in  3  This  is  not  treated  as  an  Amredita 
external  Sandhi;  see  below  78.  compound  in  the  Padapatha  (vm.  13°): 

1  Cp.  APr.  II.  104.  stuhi |  stuhi |  z?  j ;  but  pibl-piba  (11.  1 111)  is 

2  Cp.  Whitney’s  Translation  of  the  AV.  analyzed  as  piba-piba\it\. 

I,  p.  lxiv  (mid.). 

Indo-arische  Philologie  I,  4. 


4 


5° 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


rarely  takes  place;  e.  g.  dnu  rajati  sti'tp  (ix.  9618);  trT  sadhastha  (111.  56s); 
nth  sadhdsthat 1  (v.  319);  nil  sthirdm  (1.  6415);  ddhi  snuna  (ix.  97 l6). 

The  s  usually  follows  short  words  such  as  u,  tit ,  nu ,  s/'t,  hi,  and  occurs 
where  there  is  a  close  syntactical  connection  of  two  words;  e.  g.  rajahsu  sidan 
(vii.  3416);  vdmsu  sldati  (ix.  571 2 3);  divi  sdn  (vi.  26);  divi  santu  (v.  210); 
rcchdnti  sma  (x.  1026).  In  no  word,  however,  even  when  these  conditions 
are  fulfilled,  is  the  change  of  initial  t  to  s  invariably  made. 

a.  In  the  later  Samhitas,  apart  from  passages  adopted  from  the  RV.  this 
form  of  external  Sandhi  is  very  rare  except  in  the  combination  ft  sit.  Examples 
are  dd  u  stendm  (AV.  iv.  34);  via  hi  sad  dyumdn  ndmah  (TS.  hi.  2.  82)2. 

58.  The  breathing  h.  —  The  sound  h  is,  at  the  present  day,  pro¬ 
nounced  as  a  breathing  in  India,  and  this  was  its  character  at  the  period 
when  Greek  and  Indian  words  were  interchanged,  as  is  shown  e.  g.  by  co pa 
being  reproduced  by  hora.  It  is  already  recognised  as  a  breathing  by  the 
TPr.  (11.  9),  which  identifies  it  with  the  second  element  of  voiced  aspirates 
(g-h,  d-h ,  b-Zt).  This  is  borne  out  by  the  spelling  l-h  (=  dh)  beside  3d  / 
(=  d).  The  TPr.  further  (11.  47)  assigns  to  it,  on  the  authority  of  some,  the 
same  place  of  articulation  as  the  following  vowel,  this  being  still  characteristic 
of  the  pronunciation  of  h  at  the  present  day  in  India3.  The  breathing  is, 
moreover,  stated  by  the  Pratisakhyas 4  to  have  been  voiced.  This  pronunciation 
is  proved  by  the  evidence  of  the  Samhitas  themselves;  for  h  is  here  often 
derived  from  a  voiced  aspirate,  e.  g.  hitd-  from  dha-  ‘put’;  it  is  occasionally 
replaced  by  a  voiced  aspirate,  e.  g.  jaghdna  from  han-  'strike’;  and  in  Sandhi 
initial  h  after  a  final  mute  regularly  becomes  a  voiced  aspirate,  e.  g.  tad  did 
for  tad  hi.  It  is  in  fact  clear  that  whatever  its  origin  (even  when  —  Ilr.  dh)5, 
h  was  always  pronounced  as  a  voiced  breathing  in  the  Samhitas. 

As  h  cannot  be  final  owing  to  its  phonetic  character6,  it  is  represented 
in  that  position  by  sounds  connected  with  its  origin7.  It  appears  in  combination 
with  voiced  sounds  only;  being  preceded  only  by  vowels,  Anusvara,  or  the 
semivowels  r  and  /8  (in  Sandhi  also  by  the  nasals  h  and  n),  and  followed 
only  by  vowels,  the  nasals  n,  n,  m,  or  the  semivowels  y,  r,  /,  v. 

The  breathing  h  as  a  rule  represents  a  voiced  aspirate,  regularly  a 
palatal  aspirate,  occasionally  the  dental  dh  and  the  labial  bh .  It  usually 
represents  a  new  palatal  (=  llr.jh ,  Av.  ;9),  appearing  beside  gh,  e.  g.  druhyu- : 
drogha-,  as  j  beside  g,  e.  g.  ojiyas :  ugrd-.  But  in  many  words  it  also  stands 
(like  j  for  z)  for  the  old  palatal  zh,  the  voiced  aspirate  of  s',  being  recognizable 
as  such  in  the  same  way  as  jl°. 

1  a.  h  represents  the  palatalization  (=  llr.jh)  of  gh  when,  in  cognate 
forms,  gh  (or  g)  is  found  before  other  sounds  than  s;  e.  g.  hdn-ti  ‘strikes’ : 
ghn-dnti ,  jaghdna ;  arhati  ‘is  worthy’  :  arghd-  ‘price’;  rh-dnt-  ‘weak’  :  ragh-u- 
‘light’;  jdmh-as-  ‘gait’  :  jdhghci-  ‘leg’;  ddhati  ‘burns’  :  dag-dhd -  ‘burnt’;  dohate 
‘milks’ :  dughana-  ‘milking’,  dug-dhd-  ‘milked’;  dudrdha  ‘have  injured’  :  drttg-dhd- 
‘injured’,  drogha-  ‘injurious’;  mamhate  ‘presents’  :  maghd-  ‘gift’;  mih-  ‘mist’ : 


1  ih  and  nh.  produce  the  same  effect  as  ! 
simple  i  and  u,  as  they  were  originally 
pronounced  as  is  and  u§  (cp.  Sandhi,  p.  71, 
e  2);  e.  g.  agni(s )  stave ;  yaju[s )  skanndm. 

2  Cp.  Wackernagel  1.  207  b. 

3  Cp.  Whitney  on  APr.  1.  13  and  TPr. 
11.  47. 

4  See  RPr.  I.  12;  xn.  2;  APr.  1.  13. 

5  See  below  1  b. 

6  See  below,  Sandhi,  66. 

7  Ibid,  b  6,  S. 


8  The  combination  Ih  is  rare;  it  is  found 
in  upa-valh-  (VS.)  ‘test  by  riddles’;  vihdlha- 
(AV.),  of  unknown  meaning;  and  in  the 
Kanva  recension  of  the  VS.  as  represen¬ 
ting  dh. 

9  Cp.  36.  This  h  being  related  to  gh 
as  j  is  to  g,  it  must  represent  IE.  gh.  This 
survives,  with  loss  of  the  aspiration,  in  jahi 
(=  lit.  jha-dhi),  2.  sing.  impv.  of  han-  ‘strike’. 

Cp.  41. 


I.  Phonology.  The  breathing  h. 


5i 


megha-  ‘ cloud’;  muhyati  ‘is  perplexed’ :  mugdha-  ‘gone  astray’,  mogha-  ‘vain’; 
rdnihi-  ‘speed’ :  raghu-  ‘swift’;  haras-  and  gharma-  ‘heat’;  harmye-sthd-  and 
gharmye-stha-  ‘dwelling  in  the  house’;  hrsitd-  ‘glad’ :  ghrsu-  ‘joyful’,  ghrsvi- 
‘gladdening’.  In  a  hi-  ‘serpent’  and  duhitr-  ‘daughter’  the  guttural  origin  of 
h  is  shown  by  cognate  languages l. 

b.  h  represents  the  old  palatal  aspirate  (=  Hr.  zh.) : 
a .  when,  either  as  a  final  or  before  /,  it  is  replaced  by  a  cerebral  (like 
the  old  palatals  s  and  j  —  Hr.  i) ;  e.  g.  vah-  ‘carry’:  a-vat,  3.  sing.  aor. 
guh-  ‘conceal’  \gudhd-2 3  ‘concealed’;  trhati  ‘crushes’ :  trdha-^)  dhnhati  ‘makes; 
firm’,  drhyati  ‘is  firm’  :  drdhd-  ‘firm’;  bahu-  ‘abundant’  :  badhd-  ‘aloud’;  mih- 
‘make  water’ :  medhra-  (AV.)  ‘penis’;  rihati  ‘licks’ :  redhi  ‘licks’,  ridha-  ‘licked’; 
vdhati  ‘carries’  :  vodhum  ‘to  carry’,  fujhd-  ‘carried’;  sdhate  ‘overcomes’ :  sbdhr- 
‘victor’. 

when  it  is  followed  by  sounds  which  do  not  palatalize  gutturals4 5, 
before  which  dh  and  bh  do  not  become  h,  and  before  which  the  other  old 
palatals  s'  and  j  (=  z)  appear;  thus  dmhas-  and  amhati-  ‘distress’  because 
of  amhu-  ‘narrow’;  dhan-  ‘day’,  because  of  dhnam,  g.  pi.,  and  purvahna- 
‘forenoon’  (not  ghn  as  in  ghnanti  from  han-)\  jehamana- 5  ‘panting’,  because 
of  jihma-  ‘oblique’;  bahu-  ‘arm’;  brahman-  n.  ‘devotion’,  brahman-  ‘one  who 
prays’;  rahu-  (AV.),  demon  of  eclipse;  yahva -,  yahvdnt-  ‘ever  young’,  because 
of  yahu -,  id.  This  applies  to  all  words  beginning  with  hu-,  hr-,  hn -,  hr-, 
hr-',  e.  g.  hu-  ‘pour’;  hrd-  and  hr  day  a-  ‘heart’;  -hraya-  ‘ashamed’;  -hva-,  hu- 
‘call’;  hvr-  ‘be  crooked’. 

y.  when  the  ‘satern’  languages  have  a  corresponding  voiced  spirant 
(z  or  i)6;  thus  ahdm  ‘I’;  ehd-  (AV.)  ‘desirous’;  garhate  ‘complains  of’;  dih- 
‘besmear’;  plihdn-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘spleen’;  barhis-  ‘sacrificial  straw’;  mah-  ‘great’; 
varahd-  ‘boar’;  sahdsra-  ‘thousand’;  simha-  ‘lion’;  sprh-  ‘desire’;  hamsa-  ‘goose’; 
harm-  ‘jaw’;  hi-  ‘impel’;  hemdn-  ‘zeal’,  heti-  ‘weapon’;  hay  a-  ‘steed’;  hdri-  and 
hdrita-  ‘tawny’;  hdryati  ‘likes’;  hast  a-  ‘hand’;  ha-  ‘forsake’;  hay  and-  (AV.) 
‘year’;  hi  ‘for’;  himd-  ‘cold’;  hiranya-  ‘gold’;  bird-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘vein’;  kiuis- 
‘injure’;  hesas-  ‘wound’;  hr-  ‘take’;  hyds  ‘yesterday’7. 

d.  h  according  to  the  evidence  of  cognate  languages,  represents  other 
palatals  in  some  words.  Thus  in  hrd-  ‘heart’,  /  =  IE.  k  would  be  expected;  and 
j  =  IE.  g  in  ahdm  ‘I’,  mahdnt-  ‘great’,  hdnu-  ‘jaw’,  hdsta-  ‘hand’,  hva-,  hu- 
‘call’.  These  irregularities  are  probably  due  to  IE.  dialectic  variations8. 

2.  h  also  represents  dh  and  bh  not  infrequently,  and  dh  at  least  once, 
a.  It  takes  the  place  of  dh  in  four  or  five  roots  (with  nominal  derivatives) 
and  in  a  few  nominal  and  verbal  suffixes.  Thus  it  appears  initially  in  hit  a-, 
-hiti-,  beside  -dhita-,  dhiti -,  from  dha-  ‘put’.  Medially  it  is  found  in  gdhate 
‘plunges’  (with  the  derivatives  gahd-  ‘depth’,  gdhana-  ‘deep’,  dur-gdha- 
‘impassable  place’)  beside  gadhd-  ‘ford’;  rbhati  ‘rises’,  ‘grows’  (with  the 
derivatives  ruh-  ‘growth’,  rdZiana-  ‘means  of  ascending’,  rohas-  ‘elevation’) 
beside  rodhati  ‘grows’  (with  the  derivatives  vi-rudh-  ‘creeper’,  -rodha-  ‘growing’, 
rddhas-  ‘bank’,  a-rodhana-  ‘ascent’);  derivatives  of  *rudh-  ‘be  red’  :  rohit -,  rdhita-, 


1  Cp.  Wackernagel  1,  214  b. 

2  That  is  for  * guzdhd  (through  guzh-ta- 
for  gugk-ia-),  the  cerebral  z  disappearing  but 
leaving  the  vowel  long. 

3  Cp.  12  and  17,  5. 

4  See  above  41,  2. 

5  See  Whitney,  Roots,  under  jek;  and 
cp.  41  a,  2. 

6  This  includes  several  examples  given 

under  a  and  /?. 


7  Perhaps  also  in  has-  ‘laugh’  and  hd- 
‘go’,  as  these  verbs  have  no  forms  with  gh\ 
also  nah-  ‘bind’-  in  spite  of  nad-dha-.  In 
several  words  the  origin  of  the  h  is  un¬ 
certain,  e.  g.  jahgahe  ‘struggles’,  as  the 
evidence  is  doubtful. 

8  See  Wackernagel  i,  216  b;  for  a  few 
doubtful  examples,  ibid.  216  a,  note. 


4* 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


-loZiita-  ‘red’,  beside  lodhd-  ‘reddish  animal’,  rudhira-  (A V.)  ‘red’;  also  rauZiina- 
beside  rudhikrd names  of  demons;  the  evidence  of  cognate  languages  further 
shows  that  h  represents  dh  in  grha-  ‘house’1. 

h  moreover  represents  dh  in  the  adverbial  suffix  -ha  in  visva-ha  beside 
visva-dha  ‘always’;  in  sahd  ‘together’,  beside  sadha-  in  compounds;  in  ihd 
‘here’,  as  shown  by  the  Prakrit  id  ha]  and  doubtless  also  in  sama-ha  ‘somehow’, 
though  there  is  no  direct  evidence.  The  evidence  of  cognate  languages,  more¬ 
over,  shows  that  in  the  endings  of  the  1.  du.  -vahe,  - va/ii ,  -vahai  and  the 
1.  pi.  -maZie,  - mahi ,  -mahai  h  represents  dh  (cp.  Gk.  -/j.s'hcc,  etc.)2. 

b.  h  takes  the  place  of  bh  in  the  verb  grab -,  grh-  ‘seize’  (with  its 
derivatives  grdha-  ‘ladleful’,  grdhi-  ‘demoness’,  grdZiyi-  ‘to  be  grasped’,  grhd- 
‘servant’,  Ziasta-grZiya  ‘having  take  the  hand’)  beside  grabZi-,  grbZi-  (with  the 
derivatives  grdbha-  ‘taking  possession  of’,  grdbZia-  ‘handful’);  and  in  the 
nouns  kaZzuhd-  ‘high’,  beside  Zzakbbh-  ‘height’,  Zzakubhd-  (VS.  TS.)  ‘high’,  m.  (AV.) 
a  kind  of  demon;  bali-hrt-  ‘paying  tax’  (beside  bhr-  ‘bear’);  probably  barjaha- 
‘udder’(?),  if  formed  with  suffix  -Zia  =  -bZia  (in  rsa-bhd -,  etc.)3. 

c.  Zi  takes  the  place  of  dh  in  barbrhi ,  2.  sing.  impv.  of  the  intv.  bdrbrZi- 
of  the  root  brZi-  ‘make  strong’,  for  *barbrdhi  (—  * barbrzdZii ,  with  the  cerebral 
dropped  after  lengthening  the  preceding  r  in  pronunciation)4. 

d.  The  rule  is  that  Zi  appears  for  dZi ,  dh,  bh,  only  between  vowels5, 
the  first  of  which  is  unaccented;  e.  g.  ihd,  kaZzuha -,  grha-  barjaJia -,  bali-Zirt- 
rauZiina-,  sahd.  Similarly  in  grabZi-  ‘seize’,  Zi  alone  appears  after  unaccented  r 
in  RV.i— ix6;  while  on  the  other  hand,  in  the  2.  sing.  impv.  of  graded  roots,  -dZii 
regularly  appears  after  strong  and  therefore  originally  accented  vowels;  e.  g. 
bodhi  (from  bZiu-  ‘be’),  yJdhi  (from  yu-  ‘yoke’),  yuyodhl  (from  yu-  ‘separate’); 
sisadZii,  but  sislZii  {sd-  ‘sharpen’).  Again,  in  rudZi-  ‘rise’,  the  unaccented  form 
of  the  root  is  regularly  ruZi-,  while  when  it  is  accented,  forms  such  as  rddhati 
appear  beside  rdhati,  and  in  nominal  derivatives  dZi  predominates  in  accented 
radical  syllables,  the  RV.  having  rddZia-  and  a-rodhana-  only,  but  the  AV. 
rdha-  and  drohana-1 . 


a.  At  the  same  time  dh  and  bh  remain  in  a  good  many  instances  after  an  un¬ 
accented  vowel;  thus  in  the  2.  sing.  impv.  krdhi,  gadhi,  srudhi,  srnudhi ;  m  adhhs  ‘below’, 
adhamd-  ‘lowest’,  abhi  ‘towards’;  rbhu-  ‘deft’;  mid  ha-  ‘reward’;  medha-  ‘wisdom’;  vidhati 
‘adores’;  vidhii-  ‘solitary’;  vidhavd -  ‘widow’;  vadhu-  ‘bride’;  sadhu-  ‘right’;  rudhira -  (AV.) 
‘red’;  derivatives  formed  with  -dhi-,  - bhd etcA  The  retention  of  the  dh  and  bh  here 
is  partly  to  be  explained  as  an  archaism,  and  partly  as  due  to  borrowing  from  a  dialect 
in  which  these  aspirates  did  not  become  h,  and  the  existence  of  which  is  indicated  by 
the  Prakrit  form  idha  beside  the  Vedic  ihd  ‘here’.  The  guttural  aspirate  media  is 
probably  to  be  similarly  explained  in  meghd-  ‘cloud’  and  aghd-  ‘sinful’. 


1  Cp.  Wackernagel  i,  217  a. 

2  The  Zi  in  the  perf.  aha,  ahur,  may 
represent  dh\  not,  however,  in  ndhyati  ‘binds’, 
in  spite  of  naddhd-;  nah -  rather  stands  for 
Hr.  nazh-  (cp.  Lat.  nedo) ;  the  pp.  instead  of 
*nadhd-,  became  naddhd-  through  the  in¬ 
fluence  of  baddhd-  from  bandh-  ‘bind’.  Cp. 
Wackernagel  i,  217  a,  note,  where  several 
other  wrong  explanations  of  h  —  dh  are 
discussed. 

3  Some  erroneous  etymologies  in  which 
h  is  explained  as  =  bh  are  discussed  in 
Wackernagel  i,  217  b,  note. 

4  Cp.  12  and  17,  5. 

5  It  appears  initially  in  hitd-  =  -dhita-, 

but  originally  it  was  doutbless  preceded  in 
this  position  by  a  final  vowel.  That  h 


appears,  though  a  vowel  does  not  follow, 
in  grhndtu  (iv.  57)  and  hasta-gfhya,  is  due 
to  other  forms  of  grabh-  in  which  h  is 
followed  by  a  vowel. 

6  In  RV.  x,  however,  grdha-  and  grdhi- 
occur;  cp.  above,  2  b. 

7  Exceptions  like  rohita-,  visvaha  and 
inflected  forms  such  as  gdhate,  are  due  to 
normalization. 

8  Where  the  RV.  fluctuates  between  h  and 
dh  bh  (above  2,  a,  b),  h  appears  throughout 
in  the  later  Samhitas ;  thus  always  -hi,  after 
vowels  in  imperatives  except  edhi  ‘be’;  thus 
for  srnudhi  (RV.  vin.  843),  SV.  has  srnuhi. 
But  a  new  h  of  this  kind  hardly  occurs. 
Cp.  Wackernagel  i,  219  a. 


1.  Phonology.  The  cerebral  /.  Anusvara  and  Anunasika.  53 

3.  The  various  origins  of  h  led  to  some  confusion  in  the  groups  of 
forms  belonging  to  roots  which  contain  h. 

a.  roots  in  which  h  represents  an  original  guttural  (Hr.  j/i)  show  some 
forms  which  would  presuppose  an  old  palatal  (Hr.  z/i).  Thus  from  muh-  ‘be 
confused’,  phonetic  derivatives  of  which  are  mugdhd -,  mogha are  formed 
mudhd-  (A V.)  ‘bewildered’  and  inuhur  ‘suddenly’. 

b.  roots  in  which  h  represents  an  old  palatal  (Hr.  z/i)  show  forms 
with  a  guttural  before  vowels  and  dentals;  thus  from  dih-  ‘besmear’ 
is  formed  digd/id-  (AV.)  ‘owing  to  the  influence  of  da/i-  ‘burn’,  and  duh-  ‘milk’. 
Similarly,  from  *sard/i-  ‘bee’,  beside  saradbhyas ,  is  formed  saraghd-  (AV.  VS.) 
‘derived  from  the  bee’1. 

c.  the  root  ruh though  —  rudh-  ‘ascend’,  is  treated  as  if  the  h  represented 
(as  in  vah-')  an  old  palatal  (Ur.  zh);  hence  aor.  druksat ,  des.  ruruksati , 
pp.  -rudha-  (AV.),  ger.  rudhvd  (AV.). 

59.  The  cerebral  /. — This  sound,  as  distinguished  from  the  ordinary 
dental  /,  is  a  cerebral  l2 3.  It  appears  in  our  (, Sakala )  recension  of  the  RV. 
as  a  substitute,  between  vowels,  for  the  cerebral  d  and,  with  the  appended 
sign  for  h ,  for  the  cerebral  aspirate  dhl\  e.  g.  ila-  ‘refreshment’;  d-salha- 
‘invincible’.  It  also  appears  in  Sandhi  when  final  before  an  initial  vowel; 
e.  g.  turasdl  abhibhutyojah  (hi.  434).  In  the  written  Samhita  text,  however, 
it  does  not  appear  if  followed  by  a  semivowel  which  must  be  pronounced  as 
a  vowel;  e.  g.  vidv-ahga-  ‘firm-limbed’,  to  be  pronounced  as  vllu-anga-  and 
analysed  thus  by  the  Padapatha.  In  one  passage  of  the  RV.  the  readings 
fluctuate  between  /  and  l  in  nflavat  or  nilavat  (vn.  976)4. 

60.  Anusvara  and  Anunasika.  —  Anusvara,  ‘after-sound’,  is  a  pure 
nasal  sound  which  differs  from  the  five  class  nasals;  for  it  appears  after 
vowels  only,  and  its  proper  use  is  not  before  mutes,  but  before  sibilants  or  h 
(which  have  no  class  nasal).  But  it  resembled  the  class  nasals  in  being 
pronounced,  according  to  the  Pratisakhyas  of  the  RV.  and  the  VS.5,  after 
the  vowel.  The  vowel  itself  might,  however,  be  nasalized,  forming  a  single 
combined  sound.  The  Pratisakhya  of  the  AV.6,  recognizes  this  nasal  vowel, 
called  Anunasika,  ‘accompanied  by  a  nasal’,  alone,  ignoring  Anusvara, 
which  with  the  preceding  vowel  represents  two  distinct  successive  sounds. 
Whitney7,  however,  denies  the  existence  of  any  distinction  between  Anunasika 
and  Anusvara.  In  any  case,  the  Vedic  Mss.  have  only  the  one  sign  4  (placed 
either  above  or  after  the  vowel)  for  both8,  employing  the  simple  dot  where 
neither  Anusvara  nor  Anunasika  is  allowable.  The  latter  sign  is  used  in  the 
TS.  for  final  m  before  y  v,  and  in  both  the  TS.  and  MS.  before  mutes 
instead  of  the  class  nasal9,  a  practice  arising  from  carelessness  or  the  desire 
to  save  trouble.  There  is  thus  no  ground  for  the  prevalent  opinion  that  4 
represents  Anunasika  and  Anusvara10.  Throughout  the  present  work  m  with 
a  dot  (m)  will  be  used  for  both,  except  if  they  appear  before  a  vowel, 
when  m  with  the  older  sign  (m)  will  be  employed. 


1  The  root  sagh-  ‘take  upon  oneself’, 

has  no  connexion  with  sah -  ‘overcome’ ; 
nor  vaghat -  "institutor  of  a  sacrifice’,  with 
vah -  ‘convey’.  The  relation  of  go-nyoghas- 
‘streaming  among  milk’,  to  vah-  is  un¬ 
certain;  cp.  Wackernagel  1,  220  b, 

note. 

2  Cp.  above  42. 

3  This  practice  is  followed  by  the  Mss. 

of  secondary  texts  of  the  RV. 


4  Cp.  Benfey,  Gott.  Abhandl.  19,  138, 
:  note.  See  also  Whitney  on  APr.  1.  29. 

5  See  RPr.  xiii.  13;  VS.  1.  74 f.,  147  f. 

6  See  Whitney  on  APr.  1.  11. 

7  On  TPr.  11.  30;  JAOS.  io,  Lxxxvif. 

8  Cp.  Whitney  on  TPr.  11.  30. 

9  In  the  MS.  also  when  -am  is  written  for 
•an. 

10  See  Whitney,  JAOS.  7,  92,  note. 


54  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache. 


4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


Anusvara  and  Anunasika  are  commonest  when  final.  As  in  that  position 
they  belong  to  the  sphere  of  Sandhi,  the  conditions  under  which  they  then 
appear,  will  be  stated  below1.  Medially  Anusvara  and  Anunasika  are  found 
under  the  following  conditions: 

a.  regularly  before  sibilants  and  h;  e.  g.  vainsa-  ‘reed’;  havimsi  ‘offerings’; 
mams  a-  ‘flesh’;  simZid -  ‘lion’.  This  is  generally  recognized  as  the  sphere  of 
Anusvara,  except  by  the  APr. 2;  but  mamscatu-  ‘light  yellow’,  is  stated3  to 
have  Anunasika,  while  pumscalz-  (AY.  VS.)  is  said  to  have  both  Anunasika 
and  Anusvara4.  The  Anusvara  usually  appears  before  s,  and  all  forms 
with  ms  are  shown  to  be  based  on  original  ns  or  ms  by  the  evidence  of 
cognate  forms  corroborated  by  that  of  allied  languages5;  thus  mams  ate ,  3.  sing, 
subj.  aor.  of  man-  ‘think’;  jighamsati ,  des.  from  han-  ‘strike’;  pimsanti  beside 
pindsii ,  from  pis-  ‘crush’;  the  neuter  plurals  in  - amsi ,  -Tmsi,  -utnsi  from  stems 
in  -as,  -is,  -its,  with  nasal  after  the  analogy  of  - anti ,  nom.  acc.  pi.  from 
neuters  in  - nt ;  stems  in  -yams,  -vams  beside  nom.  sing,  in  -yan,  -van)  kramsyate 
(AV.)  from  kram-  ‘stride’.  When  Anusvara  appears  before  s  and  h  derived 
from  an  IE.  palatal  or  guttural,  it  represents  the  corresponding  class  nasal. 
The  reduction  of  these  old  nasals  to  Anusvara  is  probably  Hr.  after  long 
vowels  {am,  -Tmr,  - umr );  probably  later  after  short  vowels,  for  it  does  not 
appear  in  forms  like  d/tan  (for  d/tans),  though  s  was  not  dropped  after  an 
in  the  Ilr.  period;  but  the  s  must  have  been  dropped  early  in  the  Indian 
period,  before  -ans  became  -ams6.  Anusvara  before  Zi  (==  Av.  vj)  must 
have  arisen  in  the  Indian  period. 

b.  before  any  consonant  in  the  intensive  reduplicative  syllable,  the  final 
of  which  is  treated  like  that  of  the  prior  member  of  a  compound;  e.  g.  ndmnam- 
iti  (v.  83s)7  from  nam-  ‘bend’. 

c.  before  any  consonant  which  is  the  initial  of  secondary  suffixes;  thus 
from  sam-  ‘blessing’,  is  formed  sam-yu-  ‘beneficent’;  sdm-tati-  or  sdntati- 


‘blessing’. 

61.  Voiceless  Spirants. —  a.  The  sound  called  Visarjaniya8  in  the 
Pratisakhyas9,  must  in  their  time  have  been  pronounced  as  a  voiceless 
breathing,  since  they  describe  it  as  an  Usman ,  the  common  term  for  breathings 
and  sibilants.  This  conclusion  is  borne  out  by  the  fact  that,  in  the  RPr., 
JihvamulTya  and  UpadhmanTya,  the  sounds  which  are  most  nearly  related 
to  and  may  be  replaced  by  Visarjaniya,  are  regarded  as  forming  the  second 
half  of  the  voiceless  aspirates  ZzZi  and  pZi  respectively,  just  as  Zi  forms  the 
second  half  of  the  voiced  aspirates  gZi,  bZi ,  etc.  At  the  present  day  Visarjaniya 
is  still  pronounced  in  India  as  a  voiceless  breathing,  which  is,  however,  followed 
by  a  weak  echo  of  the  preceding  vowel.  According  to  the  TPr.10,  Visarjaniya 
has  the  same  place  of  articulation  as  the  end  of  the  preceding  vowel.  The 
proper  function  of  this  sound  is  to  represent  final  t  and  r  in  pausa;  it  may, 
however,  also  appear  before  certain  voiceless  initial  sounds,  viz.  k,  ZzZi,  p,  pZi , 
and  the  sibilants  (occasionally  also  in  compounds) II. 

b.  Beside  and  instead  of  Visarjaniya,  the  Pratisakhyas  recognise  two 
voiceless  breathings  as  appropriate  before  initial  voiceless  gutturals  {Zz,  Z’Zi)1 2 


1  See  below,  Sandhi,  75. 

2  APr.  1.  67;  11.  33  f. 

3  Cp.  RPr.  IV.  35. 

4  Cp.  VPr.  iv.  7  f. 

5  Cp.  Wackernagel  1,  224  a. 

6  Loc.  cit. ;  cp.  Brugmann,  KG.  354,  17. 

7  In  Aufrecht’s  edition  printed  ndnna- 

mTti . 


8  The  term  visarga  is  not  found  in  the 
Pratisakhyas  (nor  in  Panini). 

9  RPr.  1.  5  etc.,  VPr.  1.  41  etc.;  APr.  1.  5 
etc.;  TPr.  1.  12  etc. 

10  See  Whitney  on  TPr.  11.  4S. 

See  below,  Sandhi,  78,  7 9. 

12  See  RPr.  1.  8;  VPr.  m.  11  etc. 


I.  Phonology.  Voiceless  Spirants.  Loss  of  Consonants. 


55 


and  labials  (/,  pk)1  respectively.  The  former  (//)  called  Jihvamuliya,  or 
sound  ‘formed  at  the  root  of  the  tongue’,  is  the  guttural  spirant  yy  the  latter  (/z), 
called  Upadhmaniya,  or  ‘on-breathing’,  is  the  bilabial  spirant  /2.  In  Mss. 
they  are  regularly  employed  in  the  Kasmirian  Sarada  character. 

62.  Loss  of  Consonants. —  Consonants  have  been  lost  almost  exclusively 
when  they  have  been  in  conjunction  with  others.  The  loss  of  a  single 
consonant  which  is  not  in  conjunction  with  another  is  restricted  to  the  dis¬ 
appearance  of  v  before  u,  and  much  more  rarely  of  y  before  /.  The  v 
thus  disappears  finally  in  the  Sandhi  of  av  before  u  in  the  RV.  and  VS.3 
Initially,  v  is  lost  before  fir  derived  from  a  r  vowel;  thus  in  urana-  and 
urd-  ‘sheep’;  liras-  ‘breast’;  ur-ana-,  mid.  part,  (vr-  ‘choose’);  ilrj-  ‘vigour’;  firnd- 
‘wool’;  urnoti  ‘covers’  (vr-  ‘cover’);  urdhva -  ‘high’;  urmi-  ‘wave’.  Such  loss 
of  v  before  fir  also  occurs  after  an  initial  consonant  in  turtd-  ‘quick’  (=  Hr. 
tzftd-);  dhfirvati ,  ddhursata ,  dhurii from  dhvr-  ‘cause  to  fall’;  httrya -,  juhur- 
thds ;  juhur ,  from  hvr-  ‘go  crookedly’4.  Before  simple  u  the  v  has  disappeared 
at  the  beginning  of  the  reduplicative  syllable  u-  (=  *vu-  for  original  va-), 
in  u-vdc-a  from  vac-  ‘speak’;  u-vdsa  from  vas-  ‘shine’;  u-vdh-a  from  vah- 
‘convey’. 

Similarly  initial  y  has  disappeared  from  the  reduplicative  syllable  i-  =  *yi- 
in  the  desiderative  l-yak-sati ,  i-yak-samdna -,  from  yaj-  ‘sacrifice’5. 

1.  When  a  group  of  consonants  is  final,  the  last  element  or  elements 
are  regularly  lost  (the  first  only,  as  a  rule,  remaining)  in  pausa  and  in 
Sandhi6. 

2.  When  a  group  of  consonants  is  initial,  the  first  element  is  frequently 
lost.  The  only  certain  example  of  an  initial  mute  having  disappeared  seems 
to  be  tur-iya-  ‘fourth’,  from  * ktur -,  the  low  grade  form  of  catur-  ‘four’,  because 
the  Vedic  language  did  not  tolerate  initial  conjunct  mutes7.  An  initial 
sibilant  is,  however,  often  lost  before  a  mute  or  nasal.  This  loss  was 
originally8  doubtless  caused  by  the  group  being  preceded  by  a  final  consonant. 
There  are  a  few  survivals  of  this  in  the  Vedas;  thus  cit  kambhanena  (x.  m5), 
otherwise  skambhana-  ‘support’;  and  the  roots  stambh-  ‘support’,  and  st/id- 
‘stand’,  lose  there  t  after  ud-;  e.  g.  ut-thita -,  fit-tabhita-.  On  the  other  hand 
the  sibilant  is  preserved  after  a  final  vowel,  in  compounds  or  in  Sandhi,  in 
a-skrdhoyu-  ‘uncurtailed’,  beside  krdhu-  ‘shortened’;  scandrd-  ‘brilliant’,  in  dsva- 
scandra-  ‘brilliant  with  horses’9,  dd/ii  scandrd m  (vih.  6 5 1 T),  also  in  the  intens. 
pres.  part,  cdni-scad-at  ‘shining  brightly’,  otherwise  candrd-  ‘shining’,  and  only 
candrd-mas -  ‘moon’.  In  derivatives  from  four  other  roots,  forms  with  and 
without  the  sibilant10  are  used  indiscriminately,  without  regard  to  the  preceding 


1  See  VPr.  1.  41. 

2  Cp.  Ebel,  KZ.  13,  277  f. 

3  See  below,  Sandhi,  73- 

4  The  v  has  either  remained  or  been 
restored  before  such  ur  and  ft r  in  hotr-vurya- 
‘election  of  the  invoker’;  in  the  opt.  vuflia, 
from  vr-  ‘choose’;  and  in  the  3.  pi.  perfect 
babhtt-vur ,  juhu-vur,  susu-vur ,  tustu-vur. 

5  The  evidence  of  cognate  languages  seems 
to  point  to  the  loss  of  initial  d  in  dsru-  ‘tear’ 
(Lat.  dacruma ,  Gk.  'ba.Kpv).  It  is,  however, 
probable  that  there  were  two  different  but 
synonymous  IE.  words  akm  and  dakru.  On 
some  doubtful  etymologies  based  on  loss  of 
initial  consonants,  see  Wackernagel  I,  228  c, 
note. 

6  See  below,  Sandhi,  65. 


7  There  are  some  words  in  which  an 
initial  mute  seems  to  have  been  lost  in  the 
IE.  period;  thus  t  in  saldin  ‘hundred’  (=  IE. 
tkntdm );  d  perhaps  in  vimsati-  ‘twenty’  and 
vi-  ‘between’;  /  perhaps  in ycikrt-  ‘liver’.  An 
initial  mute  seems  to  have  been  lost  before 
a  sibilant  (originally  perhaps  after  a  final 
consonant)  in  stdna-  ‘breast’,  svid-  ‘sweat’ ; 
sas-  ‘six’  (IvZ.  31,  415  ff.). 

8  Dissimilation  may  also  have  played 
some  part  in  the  loss  of  the  sibilant  in  the 
reduplicative  syllable  of  roots  with  initial  sk(/i) 
st(h),  sp(fi),  as  caskdnda ,  tisfhdmi,  paspdrsa. 

9  See  Grassmann’s  Worterbuch  sub  verbo 
scandrd-. 

The  verb  kr-  ‘do’,  after  pari  and  sam , 
shows  an  initial  j-;  e.  g.  pariskrnvanti ,  pari- 


56 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


sound;  from  stan-  ‘thunder’,  sta?iayitnu~,  beside  tanayitnu-  ‘thunder’,  tanyatu- 
(also  AV.)  ‘thunder’,  tanyu-  ‘thundering’,  ta/iyati  ‘resounds’;  stend -  ‘thief’, 
stay-ant-  (AV.)  ‘stealing’,  stay u-  (VS.)  ‘thief’,  ste'ya-  ‘theft’,  beside  tdyu-  ‘thief’; 
str-,  beside  tr-  ‘star’;  spas-  ‘spy’  and  spas'-  ‘see’  in  verbal  forms  d-spas-ta  aor., 
paspas-  perf.,  spasdyati  caus.,  -spasta-  part.,  ‘seen’,  beside  pdsyati  ‘sees’1. 

The  loss  of  initial  ^  may  be  inferred  in  the  following  words  from  the 
evidence  of  cognate  languages  in  which  it  has  been  preserved:  tij-  ‘sharpen’; 
tuj-  ‘strike’;  tud-  ‘beat’;  narma-  (VS.)  ‘jest’;  nrt-  ‘dance’;  parnd-  ‘wing’;  pikd- 
(VS.)  ‘Indian  cuckoo’;  plihdn-  (VS.  AV.)  ‘spleen’;  phena-  ‘foam’;  mrd-  ‘crush’, 
mrdu-  (VS.)  ‘soft’;  vip-  ‘tremble’;  supti-  ‘shoulder’. 

A  few  examples  occur  of  the  loss  of  the  semivowels  y  or  i^2  as 
the  last  element  of  an  initial  consonant  group.  Thus  y  disappears  in  derivatives 
of  roots  in  Tv  formed  with  suffixes  beginning  with  consonats:  -muta-  ‘moved’, 
mu-rd-  ‘impetuous’,  mfc-tra-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘urine’,  from  mlv-  ‘push’;  suet-  ‘needle’, 
su-nd-  ‘plaited  basket’,  stt-tra-  (AV.)  ‘thread’,  beside  syd-man-  ‘thong’,  syu-td- 
‘sewn’,  from  sw-  ‘sew’.  Loss  of  v  seems  to  have  taken  place  in  s'iti-  ‘white’ 
(only  at  the  beginning  of  compounds),  beside  svit-  ‘be  bright’,  svity-anc- 
‘brilliant’,  svitrd-  (AV.)  ‘white’,  svitrya -,  perhaps  ‘white’;  and,  on  the  evidence 
of  the  Avesta,  in  ksip-  ‘throw’  (Av.  hsiw ),  sds-  (Av.  psvas). 

3.  When  the  group  is  medial,  the  loss  usually  taken  takes  place  between 
single  consonants,  a.  The  sibilants  s  and  s  thus  regularly  disappear  between 
mutes;  e.  g.  d-bhak-ta ,  3.  sing,  aor.,  for  *db/iak-s-ta  beside  d-bhak-s-i ,  from  bhaj 
‘share’;  cas-te  for  caks-te  (=  original  *cas-s-te) L  Similarly  a-gdha-  (TS.)  ‘un¬ 
eaten’,  for  *a-ghs-ta -,  from  g/ias-  ‘eat’4. 

b.  The  dental  t  has  disappeared  between  a  sibilant  and  c  in  pas-cd  and 
pas-edt  ‘behind’  (=  IE.  post-qd ,  post-pit) ;  and  between  p  and  s  in  *nap-su 
which  must  have]been  the  loc.pl.  (A  N.nafsu),  from  *napt -,  ‘weak  stem  of  nap  at-, 
beside  the  dat.  ndd-bhyas  ‘to  the  grandsons'’,  for  napt-bhyas ,  where  on  the 
other  hand  the  p  has  been  dropped. 

c.  A  mute  may  disappear  between  a  nasal  and  a  mute;  e.  g.  paiiti-  for 
pankti -,  yuiidhi  for  yungdhi.  This  spelling  is  common  in  Vedic  Mss.;  it  is 
prescribed  in  APr.  11.  20,  and,  as  regards  the  mediae,  in  VPr.  vi.  30. 

4.  The  only  example  of  the  loss  of  an  initial 5  mute  in  a  medial 
group  of  consonants  seems  to  be  that  of  b  before  dbh  in  nddbhyas 
for  * nabdbhyas  from  napt-  for  ndpat-.  The  semivowel  r  seems  to  be 
lost  before  a  consonant  when  another  r  follows  in  cakr-dt  (Pp.  cakrdii)  and 
cakr-iyds 6  for  * carkr -  beside  carkar-mi ,  from  kr-  ‘commemorate'’;  and,  on 
the  evidence  of  the  Avesta,  in  tvdstr-  (cp.  pwarss  ‘cut’,  pwarsta-  ‘created’), 


skrta-,  sam-skrla- ;  also  after  nis  in  nir  askrtci 
(Pp.  akrtcT),  perhaps  owing  to  Sandhi  forms 
with  sk  such  as  niskuru  (AV.).  There  can 
be  little  doubt  that  the  s  here  was  not  ori¬ 
ginal  but  was  due  to  analogy;  cp.WACKER- 
NAGEL  I,  230  a,  j8,  note. 

1  Wackernagel  1,  230  a  7,  note,  discusses 
several  uncertain  or  erroneous  etymologies 
based  on  loss  of  initial  s  (including  maryas 
interpreted  as  2.  sing.  opt.  of  smr-).  The  evi¬ 
dence  of  Prakrit  seems  to  point  to  the  loss 
of  initial  s  in  sepa-  ‘tail’,  krid-  ‘leap’,  kriis- 
‘cry’,  paras u-  ‘axe’,  parusa-  ‘knotty’;  cp. 
Wackernagel  i,  230  b. 

2  On  the  possible  loss  of  r  in  bhahj- 
(Lat.  frango)  and  of  k  in  savya-  (Lat.  scaevus ), 
see  Wackernagel  i,  232  c,  note. 


3  See  above  56,  b. 

4  On  apnas-  ‘property’,  dampati-  ‘lord  of 
the  house’,  see  Wackernagel  i,  233  c,  note. 

5  The  guttural  mute  only  seems  to  be 
lost  when  ks  +  t  becomes  s(:  see  above, 
56,  6.  The  loss  of  m  in  the  inst.  sing,  -no,  of 
nouns  in  -man  is  only  a  seeming  one  ;  for  ddna, 
prdthind ,  prend ,  bhTtna ,  mahind ,  varind  (TS.) 
appear  beside  the  stems  daman-  etc.,  because 
some  of  them  had  a  stem  in  -n  without  m, 
so  that  -nd.  seemed  an  alternative  from  of 
-mud:  see  Benfey,  GGA.  J846,  702.  880; 
Gbttinger  Abhandlungen  19,  234;  Bloom¬ 
field,  JAOS.  17,  3;  cp.  IF.  8,  Anzeiger, 
p.  17. 

6  But  see  Geldner,  VS.  1,  279. 


I.  Phonology.  Loss  of  Consonants.  57 

probably  starting  from  forms  like  tvdsira  (AV.)  in  which  the  r  immediately 
followed 1 

But  the  loss  of  a  spirant  (Hr.  .s-,  z,  z,  ili)  at  the  beginning  of  a  medial 
group  is  common. 

a.  The  sibilant  s2  has  thus  been  lost  before  k  followed  by  a  consonant 
in  vavrktam ,  rrknd -,  rrktvi ,  vrksi  (TS.),  from  vrasc-  ‘lop’  (cp.  -vraskd-). 

b.  The  voiced  form  (Hr.  z)  of  dental  s  has  disappeared 3  before  voiced 
dentals,  without  leaving  any  trace,  in  the  roots  as-  ‘sit’,  and  sds-  ‘order’;  thus 
a-dkvam ,  sasa-dhi.  But  when  d  preceded  the  2,  the  disappearance  of  the 
sibilant  is  indicated  by  e  taking  the  place  of  az  before  d,  dh ,  h  (=  d/i); 
thus  e-dhi ,  from  as-  ‘be’;  sed- 4 5,  perfect  stem  of  sad-  ‘sit’  (for  sazd-,  like  sasc- 
from  sac-).  This  e  also  replaces  az  with  loss  of  the  sibilant  in  de-hi  ‘give’; 
dhe-hi  ‘put’;  kiye-dhti-  ‘containing  much’;  ned-Tyas-  and  ned-istha-  ‘very  much’ ; 
ped-ii-S  N. ;  medati  ‘is  fat’;  medhct-  and  vied  has-  ‘wisdom’;  medha-  ‘juice’6. 

c.  When  a  vowel  other  than  a  preceded,  the  z  was  cerebralized  (like 
before  a  voiceless  dental)  and  disappeared  after  cerebralizing  the  following 
dental  and  lengthening  the  preceding  vowel;  thus  a-sto-dhvam 7  (=  d-stoz-dhvam 
for  a-stos-dhvam )  2.  pi.  aor.,  beside  a-sto-s-ta ,  3.  sing.,  from  stu-  ‘praise’.  Thus 
also  are  to  be  explained  nldd-  ‘nest’  (=  nizda-  for  ni-sd-a-) ;  pid-  ‘press'’ 
(=  pizd-  for  pi-sd-  or  pis-d-) ;  viidhd-  ‘reward’  (Gk.  / utsdoi ;);  vul-u-  ‘strong’, 
viddyati  ‘is  strong’  (from  vis-  'work’  + -d)s ;  hid-9  ‘be  angry’,  and  its  Guna 
forms,  e.  g.  ked-as-  ‘anger’;  mrddti  ‘be  gracious’,  mrdikd-  ‘gracious’  (for 
mrz-d-  from  mrs-  ‘forget’)  with  vowel  pronounced  long  (12),  d-red-ant-  (TS.) 
‘not  deceiving’  (  =  a-rezd-ant -),  from  ris-  ‘injure’. 

d.  Similarly  the  old  voiced  palatal  spirant  (Hr.  z)  disappeared  after 
cerebralizing  a  following  d ^ or  dh  and  lengthening  the  preceding  vowel;  thus 
ta-dhi  for  * taz-dhi  (=  tak-s-dhi)  from  tabs  -  ‘fashion’;  so-dhd  for  * sas-dhd 
(=  sak-s-dha),  beside  sas-thd-  (AV.)  ‘sixth’.  A  similar  loss  is  to  be  assumed 
in  id-  ‘praise’  (=  iz-d  for  yaj-y  d) IO, 

e.  This  loss  is  specially  frequent  in  the  case  of  the  old  voiced  palatal 
aspirated  spirant  (Ilr.  zh)  represented  by  h ,  which  was  dropped  after  cerebralizing 
and  aspirating  a  followed  t  and  lengthening  the  preceding  vowel;  thus  badha- 


1  In  a  few  forms  of  the  AV.  the  semi¬ 
vowel  y  seems  to  be  lost  at  the  end  of  the 
medial  group  ksy:  meksami,  yokse,  vidhaksan , 
sakse.  But  these  forms  may  be  due  to  errors 
in  the  MSS. 

2  In  ch  =  IE.  skh,  the  original  s  was  lost 
in  a  pre-Indian  period. 

3  Before  voiced  mutes  other  than  dentals, 
z  became  d,  as  in  madgii-  (44,  3  a)  ‘diver’; 
similarly  z  became  d,  as  in  padbhis ,  from 
pas-  ‘look’  or  ‘cord’;  and  in  vi-prud-bhis 
from  viprus-  ‘drop’. 

4  The  lefss  of  the  voiced  sibilant  (z)  must 
be  older  than  the  original  text  of  the  RV., 
as  the  e  of  sed-  has  been  transferred  to 
other  stems  which  contain  no  sibilant,  as  in 
bhej-ire ,  from  bhaj-  ‘divide’.  Similarly  the 
vowel  of  hid-,  though  derived  from  iz,  is 
regarded  as  a  primitive  /  in  the  form  ajihidat 
(AV.):  cp.  Wackernagkl  i,  p.272  (mid.). 

5  Cp.  Bartholomae,  KZ.  27,  361.  On 
edh-  ‘thrive’,  miyedha-  ‘broth’,  vedhds-  ‘virtuous’, 
see  Wackernagel  i,  237  c. 

6  In  stems  in  -as  before  case  terminations 

beginning  with  bh ,  and  before  secondary 


suffixes  beginning  with  in,  y  or  v,  the  sibilant 
is  lost  (instead  of  becoming  d  in  the  former 
circumstances,  or  remaining  in  the  latter) 
owing  to  the  influence  of  Sandhi;  e.  g. 
dveso-bhis  from  -  dves-as-  ‘hate’.  An  original 
sibilant  has  perhaps  been  lost  in  mahisd-, 
sahvdms-,  jdhusa,  hraduni-, fas-  ‘be  exhausted’; 
cp.  Wackernagel  i,  237  a  /?,  note. 

7  The  origin  of  kroda-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘breast’ 
(Av.  hraozdra-  ‘hard’)  and  of  many  words 
with  d  or  dh  preceded  by  a  long  vowel,  and 
with  no  collateral  forms  containing  a  sibi¬ 
lant,  is  obscure. 

8  Cp.  Hubschmann,  KZ.  24,  408.  In 
slda-  (=  sizda -)  from  sad-  ‘sit’,  the  d  has 
been  retained  owing  to  the  influence  of 
other  forms  of  the  verb  sad-.  See,  however, 
Rozwadowski,  BB.  21,  147,  and  cp.  ZDMG. 
48,  519. 

9  P'inda-  perhaps  stands  for  *pbizda-,  from 
pis-  ‘crush;  cp.  Wackernagel  i,  146,  d. 

10  On  lend-,  cp.  Wackernagel  i,  238  b, 
note;  Pischel,  BB.  23,  253  ff.  On  id-,  cp. 
Oldknberg,  SBE.  30,  2. 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


‘strong’,  ?ii-bldha-  ‘dense’  (=  bazdha-  for  bah-td-)  from  bamh-  ‘be  strong’; 
sddhr-  ‘conqueror’,  d-sadha-  ‘invincible’,  from  sah-;  rldha-  (=  rizdha -),  from 
rih-  ‘lick’;  udha-  (=  uzdhd-)  from  vah-  ‘carry*;  gudhd-  ‘concealed’,  from  guh- 
‘hide’;  trdha -,  trdhva  (AV.),  from  trh-  ‘crush’;  drdhd-  ‘firm’,  from  drh-  ‘be 
strong’.  Here  e  also  appears  for  az  in  trnedhu  (AV.)  from  trh-  (=  trnaz- 
d/iu);  and  0  in  vodhdm  (=  vazdham ),  2.  du.  aor.  of  vah-  ‘carry’.  We  also 
find  e  as  Guna  of  i  in  medhra-  (AV.),  from  mih-  ‘mingere’  (=  mezdhra-). 

63.  Metathesis.  —  Apart  from  the  few  examples  of  ra  before  s  and  h 
(51  c),  there  are  probably  no  certain  instances  of  metathesis  in  the  RV.1. 
In  the  later  Samhitas,  however,  a  few  other  forms  of  metathesis  are  to  be  found. 
Thus  -valh-  seems  to  be  a  transposition  of  hval-  ‘go  deviously’  in  upa-valh- 
(VS.)  ‘propound  a  riddle  to’2.  In  valmika-  (VS.)  ‘anthill’,  m  appears  trans¬ 
posed  beside  vamri-  and  vamrd-  ‘ant’,  vamra-kd-  ‘little  ant’.  Metathesis  of 
quantity  occurs  in  as-thas  for  *as-thas ,  2.  sing.  mid.  aor.  of  as-  ‘throw’.  This  is 
analogous  to  the  shortening,  in  the  RV.,  of  the  radical  vowel  of  da-  ‘give’, 
in  the  forms  ddam,  ddas,  ddat,  where  the  verb  is  compounded  with  the  verbal 
prefix  a 3,  while  otherwise  the  forms  dam ,  das,  dat  alone  appear. 

64.  Syllable. — T  'he  notion  of  the  syllable  is  already  known  to  the  late 
hymns  of  the  Rgveda,  though  the  word  ( a-ksdra -)  is  there  generally  used  as 
an  adjective  meaning  ‘imperishable’.  Thus  aksdrena  miniate  saptd  vdnih  means 
‘with  the  syllable  they  measure  the  seven  metres’.  The  vowel  being  according 
to  the  Pratisakhyas 4  the  essential  element  of  the  syllable,  the  word  aksara -5 
is  used  by  them  in  the  sense  of  ‘vowel’  also.  Initially,  a  vowel,  or  a  con¬ 
sonant  and  the  following  vowel  form  a  syllable.  Medially,  a  simple  consonant 
begins  a  syllable,  e.  g.  ta-pas ;  when  there  is  a  group  of  consonants,  the  last 
begins  the  syllable,  e.  g.  tap-ta-,  and  if  the  last  is  a  sibilant  or  semivowel, 
the  penultimate  also  belongs  to  the  following  syllable6,  e.  g.  astam-psTt ,  an- 
tya-.  A  final  consonant  in  pausa  belongs  to  the  preceding  vowel,  e.  g. 
i-dam. 

By  the  process  called  haplology  one  of  two  identical  or  similar  syllables 
in  juxtaposition  is  dropped.  Syllable  is  here  to  be  taken  in  the  sense  not 
only  of  a  consonant  with  a  following  vowel,  but  of  a  vowel  with  a  following 
consonant. 

1.  The  first  of  the  two  syllables  is  dropped  within  a  word  in  tuvT-rd\va\van 
‘roaring  mightily’7,  beside  tuvi-rdva- ;  madh[ya]yd  ‘in  the  middle’,  from  mddhya- 
(like  asa-yd,  nahta-yd) ;  vr\ta\tha  ‘at  will’,  from  vrtd-  ‘willed’  (like  rtu-thd 
‘according  to  rtu-)\  svapatydi  for  svapat[yd]yai,  dat.  sing.  f.  of  sv-apatyd-  ‘having 
good  offspring’;  perhaps  also  yds,  beside ydyos,  gen.  loc.  du.  of ya-s.  Examples 
of  a  vowel  with  following  consonant  being  dropped  are:  ir[adh\ddhyai,  inf. 
of  iradh-  ‘seek  towin’;  cak[an\anta,  r\aii\a?ita,  v[an\anta9 ;  perhaps  sdd[as]as-pdti- 
beside  sddasas-pdti-  ‘lord  of  the  seat’10. 

a.  The  final  syllable  of  the  first  member  of  a  compound  is  sometimes  dropped 
in  this  way;  thus  se\va\vara-  ‘treasury’;  se\va\-vrdha-  ‘dear’;  madugha-  (AV.), 


1  Perhaps  s/o/ea-  ‘drop’,  may  stand  for 
*s/cota-,  from  scut-  ‘drip-,  under  the  influence 
of  stiika-  ‘tuft’. 

2  Cp.  Wackernagel  1,  212  b,  note,  and 
239  b. 

3  These  forms  are  not  resolved  in  the 
Pada  text,  i.  e.  they  are  treated  as  if  they 
did  not  contain  the  verbal  prefix  a. 

4  RPr.  XVIII.  17;  VPr.  I,  99. 

5  Though  known  to  Katyayana  and  Patan- 

jali  as  well  as  to  the  Pratisakhyas,  aksara- 


as  the  designation  of  syllable  is  not  found 
I  in  Panini. 

6  See  TPr.  XXI.  7,  9.  On  the  division  of 
syllables  cp.  further  RPr.  I.  15;  VPr.  1.  iooff. ; 
APr.  1.  55 ff. ;  TPr.  xxi.  iff.;  and  Whitney 
on  TPr.  xxi.  5. 

7  Cp.  Bartholomae,  IvZ.  29,  527,  562. 

8  Cp.,  however,  en-os  for  ena-yos. 

9  See  KZ.  20,  70  f. 

10  See  Bloomfield,  JAOS.  16,  xxxv. 


II.  Euphonic  Combination  (Sandhi).  59 

N.  of  a  plant  yielding  honey,  beside  madhu-dugha-  ‘shedding  sweetness’; 
sas[pa\-pinjara-  (VS.)  ‘tawny  like  young  grass’  h 

2. The  second  syllable  is  dropped  in  the  datives pdumsya[ya\  ratnadheyi\ya\ 
sakhyti[ya\  and  abhikhyd  beside  abhikhytiya ;  also  in  vrkat[at]i-  ‘destruction’, 
beside  vrkdtat -  and  deva-tati-\  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  second  member  of 
a  compound  in  slrsa-[sa\kt'i-  (AV.)  ‘headache’1 2 3. 

a.  A  following  syllable  is  sometimes  dropped  in  spite  of  a  different  one 
intervening;  thus  in  the  dative  marydda[ya\  ‘boundary’;  and  somewhat 
peculiarly  in  dvarlv\ar\ur,  3.  pi.  impf.  beside  the  3.  sing,  d  varTvar  and  3.  sing, 
pres.  d  varTvarti. 

II.  EUPHONIC  COMBINATION  (SANDHI). 

Benfey,  Vollstandige  Grammatik  p.  21 — 70.  —  Whitney,  Sanskrit  Grammar  p.  34  — 
87.  —  Wackernagel,  Altindische  Grammatik  1,  301 — 343.  —  Arnold,  Vedic  Metre 
p.  70 — So. 

65.  The  nature  of  Vedic  Sandhi. — The  sentence  is  naturally  the 
unit  of  speech  which  forms  an  unbroken  chain  of  syllables  euphonically 
combined.  It  is,  however,  strictly  so  only  in  the  prose  portion  of  the  AV.5 
and  the  prose  Mantras  of  the  YV.  As  the  great  bulk  of  the  Vedas  is 
metrical,  the  RV.  and  the  SV.  being  entirely  so,  the  editors  of  the  Samhita 
text  treat  the  hemistich  (consisting  generally  of  two  Padas  or  verses)4  as  the 
euphonic  unit,  applying  the  rules  of  Sandhi  with  special  stringency  between 
the  Padas  or  metrical  units  which  form  the  hemistich.  The  evidence  of 
metre,  however,  shows  that,  in  the  original  form  of  the  text,  Sandhi  at  the 
end  of  an  internal  Pada  is  all  but  unknown5.  The  verse,  therefore,  is  the 
true  euphonic  unit6.  The  final  of  a  word  appears  either  at  the  end  of  this 
unit  in  pausa  ( avasane ) 7,  or  within  it  as  modified  by  contact  with  a  following 
initial.  The  form  which  the  final  of  a  word  assumes  in  pausa,  being  regarded 
as  the  normal  ending,  is  generally  the  basis  of  the  modification  appearing 
within  the  verse.  It  will  therefore  conduce  to  clearness  if  the  rules  relating 
to  absolute  finals  are  first  stated. 

66.  Finals  in  pausa.  —  a.  Vowels8  in  this  position  undergo  no  change 
other  than  occasional  nasalization. 

1.  In  all  the  Samhitas  at  21 9  are  frequently  nasalized  when  prolated; 
e.  g.  vindatinn  |  =  vindati  (x.  146');  babhuvaim  |  =  babhuva  (AV.  x.  228); 
vivesdim  |  =  vivesa  (VS.  xxm.  49);  mamdim  |  =  mama  (TS.  vii.  420). 

2.  In  the  Samhita  text  of  the  RV.  there  survive,  at  the  end  of  a  verse 
within  a  hemistich,  from  the  period  when  such  end  also  was  accounted  a 
pause,  several  instances  of  nasalized  a,  preserved  to  avoid  hiatus  and  con- 


1  This  explanation  is  doubtful  in  ulokci- 
for  u\lii\loka-  (cp.  Brugmann,  Grundriss  I, 
624,  p.  471);  susmaya-  (TS.)  for  susma- 
mayci-\  bhimala-  (VS.)  ‘terrible’,  for  bkl?na- 
mala- ;  improbable  in  rujanas  for  rujana-nas, 
‘with  broken  nose’  (Bloomfield,  JAOS.  16, 
xxxiv). 

2  Cp.  Whitney,  Translation  of  AV.  I,  123. 

3  See  Bloomfield,  The  Atharvaveda,  in 
this  Encyclopedia,  §1  (beginning)  and  note  L 

4  In  the  Gayatrl  metre,  in  which  there 

are  three  Padas,  the  third  alone  constitutes 

the  second  hemistich;  in  the  Pankti,  which 

has  five  Padas,  the  last  three  constitute  the 

second  hemistich. 


5  The  only  probable  exception  is  RV.  IX. 
113,  7  c  d;  cp.  Arnold,  Vedic  Metre  119. 

6  The  sentence  within  a  Pada,  as  well  as 
the  Pada  itself,  is  the  unit  of  accent;  cp. 
below,  83. 

7  Cp.  RPr.  I.  3;  VI.  5;  X.  5;  XI.  30. 

8  Final  r  never  occurs  in  the  RV.,  its 
place  being  supplied  by  w  as  nom.  acc.  s.  n. 
e.  g.  sthalur  ‘standing’  (cp.  Wackernagel, 
KZ.  25,  287  f . ) ;  but  the  TS.  already  has 
janayitr  and  bhcirtf  (B?),  Wackernagel  1, 
259  a,  note. 

9  The  vowels  T  and  u,  when  dual  termina¬ 
tions  (pragrhya),  cannot  be  nasalized. 


6 o  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

traction.  Thus  a  appears  as  am  before  and  0;  e.  g.  ghanenamd'kas  (1.  331 2 3 4 5); 
d  appears  am  before  e  0  r;  e.  g.  ydih'rnaiKcaye  (v.  3014);  while  the  prepositions 
^  ‘near’,  and  jtfAz  ‘together’,  are  nasalized  before  any  vowel;  e.  g.  sdcam'udyan. 
The  vowel  a  once  appears  as  am  before  r  in  vipa?iyd?n [rtdsya  (iv.  i12), 
following  the  regular  rule  that  unnasalized  a  is  shortened  before  r  in  the  RV. 

b.  Consonants  are  liable  to  change  of  mode  of  articulation  and,  to 
some  extent,  of  place  of  articulation. 

1.  Final  mutes,  whether  tenuis,  media,  or  aspirate,  are  without  distinction 
represented  by  the  corresponding  tenuis;  e.  g.  durdt  (m.  5 9 3)  =  dilrdd  ‘from 
afar’;  usar-bhut  (1.  659)  =  usar-budh  ‘waking  at  dawn’. 

2.  The  palatals  c  and  j  revert  to  the  original  guttural,  becoming  k; 
thus  arvdk  (1.  1182)  =  arvdc  ‘coming  hither’;  su-yuk  =  su-yuj  ‘well  yoked’. 
The  old  palatal  /,  however,  becomes  /,  e.  g.  rdt  (1.  12b),  m.  f.  ‘king’,  ‘queen’, 
=  rdj ;  in  rtvik ,  however,  it  becomes  the  guttural,  =  rtvij  ‘priest’  (from  yaj- 
‘sacrifice’) 3. 

3.  The  ritual  exclamations  vdsat  (x.  1 1 59)  and  srdusat  (1.  1391),  which 
are  probably  modified  forms  of  the  3.  sing.  aor.  subj.  of  vah-  ‘carry’,  and  sru- 
‘hear’4,  have  /  for  t  owing  to  the  analogy  of  the  exclamations  vdt  (VS.),  vat 
(TS.),  3.  sing.  aor.  of  ]/ vah-'*. 

4.  The  nasals  occurring  as  finals,  u,  ?i,  m 6,  remain  unchanged.  Of 
these,  n  and  m  are  very  common;  but  n  is  found  very  rarely  and  only 
secondarily  after  the  loss  of  a  following  k  (representing  an  original  palatal; 
e.  g.  prdh  for  *prdnk ,  from  prd/ic-).  Probably  no  instance  of  final  n  can  be 
found  in  Yedic  Mantras.  The  palatal  n  never  occurs,  since  final  palatals 
become  guttural  (b,  2). 

a.  In  the  rare  instances  in  which  a  radical  m  becomes  final  after 
dropping  a  following  -t  or  - s ,  it  appears  as  11  owing  to  the  influence  of  the 
dental;  thus  dan  (=  * dam-s )  ‘of  the  house’  (< dam -)7;  d-kran  (=  *a-kram-f), 
3.  sing.  aor.  of  kram-  ‘stride’;  d-gan  (=  *a-gam-s,  * a-gam-t ),  2.  3.  sing,  aor., 
a-jagan  (=  *ajagam-t),  3.  sing,  plup.,  aganfgan  (VS.),  3.  sing.  intv.  of  gam-  £go’; 
d-yan  (=  *a-yam-s-t),  3.  sing.  aor.  of  yam-  ‘reach’8. 

5.  The  semivowels  y  v  l9  do  not  occur  as  finals,  r  is  represented  by 
Visarga;  thus  punar  ‘again’,  is  written  puna/i 10 * *. 

6.  The  sibilants  and  h  are  all  changed  when  final. 

a.  The  dental  s,  which  is  by  far  the  commonest  of  final  sibilants, 
becomes  Visarga;  e.  g.  betas  is  written  ketuh  (in.  613). 

The  cerebral  s,  which  is  very  rare  as  a  final,  becomes  cerebral  t 
in  sat  ‘six’,  for  sds;  -dvit  ‘hating’,  for  -dvis;  vi-prut  (AV.)  ‘sprinkling’, 


1  The  ritual  interjection  6711  (VS.)  may  be 
due  to  the  nasalization  of  an  original  0 
prolated  (cp.  RPr.  xv.  3).  Thus  the  JUB. 
I.  24.  3  fif.,  mentions  the  pronunciations  0  as 
well  as  om,  both  of  which  it  rejects  in  favour 

Of  07)1. 

2  Cp.  RPr.  1.  13;  Whitney  on  APr.  1.43. 

3  Cp.  Wackernagel  1,  149  a  a. 

4  Cp.  above  42  c  (p.  34). 

5  Loc.  cit. 

6  Final  m  is  often  incorrectly  written  as 

Anusvara  in  Mss.  (as  conversely  in  Prakrit 

Mss.  7)1  is  often  written  as  771  under  Sanskrit 

influence:  cp.PiscHEL,  Gramm  at  ik  derPrakrit- 

Sprachen,  in  this  Encyclopedia,  339,  348), 

and  their  example  is  sometimes  followed  in 

printed  editions. 


7  In  the  K.  also  occurs  the  form  a-nan 
=  *-ita))i-s-t,  from  770.771 -  ‘bend’.  The  SB. 
has  p)-asd)i  ‘painless’,  =  *pra-sa»i-s. 

8  See  46  d,  /?. 

9  Final  l  is  spoken  of  as  occurring  rarely 
(Wackernagel  1,  260  c),  or  as  veiy  rare 
(Whitney  144),  but  I  have  been  unable 
to  find  a  single  example  in  the  Vedas  (or 
even  in  post-Vedic  Sanskrit).  But  though  no 
etymologically  final  l  seems  to  occur  either 
in  pausa  or  in  Sandhi,  it  is  found  as  a  sub¬ 
stitute  for  d  in  two  or  three  words  in  the 
later  Samhitas  (see  above  52  d,  p.  45). 

10  When  h  stands  for  etymological  r,  this 
is  indicated  by  an  added  iti  in  the  Pada- 
patha;  e.  g.  punar  iti  (x.  85 l8). 


II.  Euphonic  Combination.  Finals.  Rules  of  Sandhi.  6i 


for  vi-prus.  These  are  the  only  examples  occurring  in  the  RV.  and  AV.  In 
the  only  two  examples  in  which  s  occurs  in  the  RV.  as  a  final  in  the  com¬ 
pound  form  ks,  it  is  dropped:  andk  ‘eyeless’,  from  an-aks d-myak ,  3.  sing.  aor. 
of  inyaks-  ‘be  situated’  (?). 

y.  The  palatal  s  becomes  either  k  or  e.  g.  -drk  for  drs-  (in.  61 9); 
v! pat,  N.  of  a  river,  for  vlpris-. 

d.  According  as  it  is  guttural  or  palatal  in  origin,  h  become  k  or  t; 
thus  d-dhok ,  3.  sing.  impf.  of  duh-  ‘milk’;  but  a-vdt,  3.  sing.  aor.  of  vah-  ‘carry’. 

c.  The  rule  is,  that  only  a  single  consonant  may  be  final.  Hence  all 
but  the  first  of  a  group  of  consonants  are  dropped;  e.  g.  dbhavan  for 
*dbhavant;  trim  for  *trins ;  tuddn  for  tuddnts ;  prrih  for  *prrihks  (=  *pr rifles)  ; 
acchan  for  *achantst ,  3,  sing.  aor.  of  chatid-  ‘be  pleasing’. 

ct.  k  t  or  t ,  when  they  follow  an  r  and  belong  to  the  root,  are  allowed  to  remain; 
e.  g.  vark ,  2.  3.  sing.  aor.  of  vrj-  ‘bend’;  urkpW S  ),  nom.  of  Ay- ‘strength’;  a-mdrf,  3.  sing, 
impf.  of  mrj-  ‘wipe’;  d-vart ,  3.  sing.  aor.  of  vrt-  ‘turn’;  suhdrt  (AV.),  nom.  of  suhcird- 
‘friend’.  The  only  instance  of  a  suffix  remaining  after  r  is  dar-t ,  3  sing.  aor.  of  dr- 
‘cleave’,  used  also  for  2.  sing,  beside  d-dah  —  ci-dar  (for  *d-dars). 

(}.  Some  half-dozen  instances  have  been  noted,  in  the  Samhitas,  in  which  a  sufnxal 
s  or  f  seems  to  have  been  retained  instead  of  the  preceding  consonant;  but  they  are 
probably  all  to  be  explained  as  due  to  analogical  influence.  They  are : 

1.  the  nominatives  sadha-mds  (beside  sadha-mdd )  ‘companion  of  the  feast’;  ava-yds 
‘sacrificial  share’,  and  puro-das  (acc.  purodasam )  ‘sacrificial  cake’.  Sadha-mds  may  be  due 
to  the  influence  of  nom.  with  phonetic  ^  like  -mas  ‘moon’,  beside  inst.  pi.  vidd-bhis 
(44  a  3).  Ava-yds,  in  the  only  passage  in  which  it  occurs  in  the  RV.,  has  to  be  read  as 
quadrisyllable  (also  in  AV.),  i.  e.  as  ava-yajah ,  and  is  probably  to  be  explained  as  a  con¬ 
traction  which  retains  the  living  -s  of  the  nom.  (and  not  the  prehistoric  j  of  *-ydj-s). 
Puro-das  (from  das-  ‘worship’),  occurring  only  twice  in  the  RV.,  may  be  due  to  the  in¬ 
fluence  of  a  frequent  nom.  like  dravino-dds  ‘wealth-giver’.  That  the  prehistoric  nom.  -s 
should  in  these  three  forms  have  survived  in  the  linguistic  consciousness  of  the  Vedic 
poets,  and  as  such  have  ousted  the  preceding  consonant,  which  in  all  other  analogous 
nominatives  alone  remains,  is  hardly  conceivable2 3.  The  only  reasonable  explanation  is 
to  assume  the  analogical  influence  of  the  nom.  which  was  in  living  use  after 
vowels. 

2.  The  four  verbal  preterite  forms  ( a-yds  (for  *a-yap-s)  beside  a-ydt,  2.  sing.  aor.  of  yap - 
‘sacrifice’;  srds  (AV.)  =  *a-sraj-s,  2.  sing.  aor.  of  srj-  ‘emit’;  a-bhanas  (AV .)  =  *a-bhajiak-s, 

2.  sing.  impf.  of  bhahj-  ‘break’;  and  a-srat  (VS.)  =  *a-sras-t,  3.  sing.  aor.  of  sras-  ‘fall’) 
are  the  beginnings  of  the  tendency  (of  which  there  are  several  other  examples 
in  the  Brahmanas)3,  to  normalize  the  terminations,  so  as  to  have  -s  in  2.  sing,  and  -t  in 

3.  sing.  This  tendency  is  extended  in  the  RV.  from  the  s  and  t  of  2.  3.  sing,  even  to  1.  sing, 
in  the  forms  a-kramlm  (beside  a-kramisam )  owing  to  a-kram-Ts,  a-kram-lt\  and  vam  (for 
var-ani)  owing  to  2.  sing,  vah  (for  var ),  aor.  of  vr-  ‘cover’. 

67.  Rules  of  Sandhi. — The  body  of  euphonic  rules  by  which  final 
consonants  are  assimilated  to  following  initials  and  hiatus  is  avoided  between 
final  and  initial  vowels  is  called  Sandhi  in  the  Pratisakhyas 4.  The  editors  of 
the  Samhita  of  the  RY.  have  greatly  obscured  the  true  condition  of  the  text 
with  which  they  dealt  by  applying  to  it  rules  of  euphonic  combination  which 
did  not  prevail  at  the  time  when  the  text  was  composed.  Thus  though  the 
Sandhi  between  the  verses  of  a  hemistich  is  (excepting  a  few  survivals  from 
the  older  form  of  the  text)5  applied  with  greater  stringency  than  elsewhere, 
the  metre  clearly  shows  that  the  end  of  the  first  verse  of  a  hemistich  con¬ 
stitutes  a  pause  as  much  as  the  end  of  the  last.  Within  the  verse,  moreover, 
Sandhi  is,  according  to  metrical  evidence,  not  applied  where  the  caesura 
occurs;  nd,  when  it  means  ‘like’  (as  opposed  to  nd  ‘not’),  is  never  contracted 
with  any  following  vowel,  nor  rid  ‘then’  with  a  preceding  a6;  i  and  z!  before 


1  Cp.  43  a.  4  RPr.  11.  2.  7.  13;  VII.  I;  VPr.  in.  2; 

2  Cp.  Whitney  146  a;  Bloomfield,  AJP.  APr.  iv.  414. 

3,  28  ff.;  Bartholomae,  KZ.  29,  578  ff.  5  E.  g.  manTsa  |  agnik  (1.  701). 

3  Cp.  Whitney  555  a.  6  In.  these  instances  there  is  a  pause  in 


6  2 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


dissimilar  initial  vowels  are  hardly  ever  changed  to  the  corresponding  semi¬ 
vowels1,  and  often  remain  uncontracted  even  before  similar  vowels2;  the 
elision  of  a  after  e  0  is  rare3;  contraction  is  commonly  avoided  by  the  final 
vowel  of  monosyllabic  words,  and  by  an  initial  vowel  followed  by  conjunct 
consonants4.  Nevertheless,  it  may  be  said  in  a  general  way  that  the  poets 
of  the  RV.  show  a  tendency  to  avoid  the  meeting  of  vowels5.  The  divergences 
between  the  apparent  and  the  real  Sandhi  which  appear  in  the  RV.,  decrease 
in  the  later  Vedas,  while  the  application  of  particular  rules  of  Sandhi  becomes 
more  uniform0. 

a.  External  Sandhi,  or  that  which  applies  between  words  in  the  sentence, 
is  to  a  considerable  extent  identical  with  internal  Sandhi,  or  that  which  applies 
within  words.  The  most  striking  difference  is,  that  in  the  latter  consonants 
remain  unchanged  before  verbal  and  nominal  terminations  beginning  with 
vowels,  semivowels,  or  nasals7.  External  Sandhi  is  on  the  whole  followed  in 
the  formation  of  compounds,  the  divergences  from  it  in  the  latter  being 
merely  survivals  of  an  earlier  stage  of  external  Sandhi  due  to  the  closer 
connexion  between  members  of  a  compound  that  renders  them  less  liable 
than  separate  words  to  be  affected  by  modifications  of  phonetic  laws. 

External  Sandhi  is  to  a  considerable  extent  affected  by  the  law  of  finals 
in  pausa.  Under  that  influence  it  avoids  final  aspirates  and  palatals.  There 
are,  however,  in  the  treatment  of  final  n  r,  and  s,  certain  survivals  which  do 
not  agree  with  the  corresponding  forms  in  pausa. 

b.  There  are  certain  duplicate  forms  which  were  originally  due  to 
divergent  euphonic  conditions.  Thus  the  tendency  was  to  employ  the  dual 
ending  a  before  consonants,  but  au  before  vowels.  Similarly,  the  word  sdda 
‘always’,  was  used  before  consonants,  but  sddcun  before  vowels8. 

68.  Lengthening  of  final  vowels.  —  Final  vowels  as  a  rule  remain 
unchanged  before  consonants.  But  a  i  u  are  very  frequently  lengthened9 
before  a  single  initial  consonant10  both  in  the  metrical  portion  of  the  Samhitas 
and  in  the  prose  formulas  of  the  Yajurveda;  e.  g.  srudhz  hdvam  ‘hear  (our) 
call’.  This  practice  includes  examples  in  which  the  consonant  is  followed  by 
a  written  y  or  v,  to  be  pronounced,  however,  as  i  or  n\  e.  g.  ddha  hy  dgne 
(iv.  io2a)  =  ddha  hi  agne ;  abhz  sv  dry  ah  (x.  593a)  =  abhz  su  ary  ah.  The 
lengthening  here  appears  to  have  arisen  from  an  ancient  rhythmic  tendency 
of  the  language  to  pronounce  long,  between  two  short  syllables,  a  final  short 
vowel  which  was  liable  to  be  lengthened  elsewhere  as  well11;  this  tendency 
being  utilized  by  the  poets  of  the  Samhitas  where  metrical  exigencies  required 
a  long  syllable.  Thus  ddha  ‘then’,  appears  as  ddha  when  a  short  syllable 
follows.  Similarly  tu  ‘but’  generally  becomes  tfi  before  a  short  syllable;  and 
su  ‘well’  nearly  always  becomes  sfi  between  short  syllables12. 


the  sense;  cp.  Oldenberg,  Prolegomena  443, 
note  2;  Arnold  122. 

1  Arnold  125. 

2  Op.  cit.  124. 

3  Op.  cit.  127. 

4  Thus  mapsavah  (iv.  47T)  must  be  read 
via  apsavah,  but  maduvah  {for  via  aduvah ) 
remains  (ibid.). 

5  Cp.  Oldenberg  434  k 

6  Cp.  Bartholomae  in  ICZ.  29,  37, 

p.  511  f. 

7  Thus  sakat,  a-saknuvan,  sakra-,  sdkvan- 
(from  sake-  ‘be  able’),  in  all  which  forms  g 
would  be  required  by  external  Sandhi. 


8  Cp.  Wackernagel  j,  309,  bottom. 

9  The  Padapatha  in  these  instances  regu¬ 
larly  gives  the  original  unlengthened  vowel. 

10  Except  in  compounds,  this  lengthening 
disappears  in  the  later  language;  there  are, 
however,  several  survivals  in  the  Brahmanas ; 
see  Aufrecht,  Aitareya  Brahmana  427;  and 
cp.  Wackernagel  1,  264  b. 

11  This  tendency  survived  in  the  post- 
Vedic  language  in  compounds,  in  words 
(which  followed  the  analogy  of  compounds) 
before  suffixes  beginning  with  consonants, 
and  in  reduplicative  syllables. 

12  Cp.  Wackernagel  i,  266  b. 


II.  Euphonic  Combination.  Vowels.  63 


a.  The  short  vowel  regularly  remains  unchanged  at  the  end  of  a  verse1 
(even  within  a  hemistich);  and  often  before  the  caesura  of  a  Tristubh  or 
JagatT  Pada  (even  in  terminations  otherwise  liable  to  be  lengthened) 2. 

b.  The  final  vowel  is  not  lengthened  in  1.  vocatives  (except  vrsabha 
viii.  45 38,  and  hariyojana  1.  6116);  2.  datives  in  -ay a ;  3.  nom.  plur.  neuter  in-/; 
4.  verbal  forms  ending  in  -/  and  - u  (excepting  imperatives  in  -dhi  and  the 
3.  sing,  rdksati  11.  2  64)  3;  5.  the  prepositions  upa*  and  dpa  (except  dpa  vrdhi 

VII.  2  72). 

c.  In  some  instances  final  vowels  appear  to  be  lengthened  before 
vowels5  or  two  consonants6. 

69.  Contraction  of  similar  vowels.  —  When  a  final  a  i  or  ?/7  is 
followed  by  corresponding  initial  a  i  or  u,  contraction  resulting  in  the  long 
form  of  the  respective  vowel  regularly  takes  place;  e.  g.  ihAsti  =  ihd  asti; 
indrA  =  indr  a  A ;  tvdgne  =  tv  a  ague;  viddm  (vi.  9Q)  =  vi  iddm ; 

a.  The  contraction  of  a  +  a  and  of  u  T  u  occasionally  does  not  take 
place  even  in  the  written  text  of  the  RV.  both  at  the  end  of  and  within  a 
Pada;  thus  mamsA  |  agnih  (1.  701);  mamsA  abhl  (1. 1017);  pusA  asurah  (v.5111), 
pus  A  abhi -  (vi.  505),  pus  A  avistu  (x.  26ld);  vJlA  utd  (1.  39s);  su  Tirdhvd(Zi) 
(vi.  249);  su  utzbhih  (1.  ii2I— 23);  the  compound  suutdyah  (viii.  4 7 1  lS) 8. 

b.  On  the  other  hand,  in  many  instances  where  the  contraction  is  written, 
the  original  vowels  have  to  be  restored  in  pronunciation  with  hiatus9.  The  restored 
initial  in  these  instances  is  long  by  nature  or  position,  and  the  preceding  final  if 
long  must  be  shortened  in  pronunciation10;  e.  g.  casAt  (1.  2  73)  —  ca  asAt;  carcata 
(1.  155’)  =  ca  areata;  mApeh  =  ma  apeh;  niApsdvah  —  ma  apsdvah ;  mrlatzdrse 
(IV*  57 x)  =  znrlati  idrse ;  ydntzndavah  (iv.472)  —ydnti  indavah;  bhavantuksdnah 
(vi.  1647)  =  bhavantu  uksanah.  After  monosyllables,  the  hiatus  is  regular  in  the 
case  of  the  written  contractions  T  and  z7,  especially  when  the  monosyllables  are 
vi  and  hi;  e.  g.  vTndra  (x.  32s)  =  vi  in  dr  a;  hTndra  (1.  102  s)  =  hi  indra II. 

c.  Duals  in  a  /  u  are  regularly  uncombined.  Such  1  and  u  are  usually 
written  with  hiatus  in  the  Samhita  text;  the  dual  a  always  appears  before  ^I2, 
but  at  the  end  of  internal  Padas  invariably  coalesces  in  the  written  text. 

70.  Contraction  of  a  with  dissimilar  vowels.— 1.  When  final  a  is 
followed  by  1  u,  contraction  takes  place  resulting  in  e  0 13  respectively;  e.  g. 
piteva  —  pit  A  iva;  ern  =  A  Tin ;  cbhA  =  A  ubhA.  When  a  is  followed  by  r, 
contraction  is  never  written  in  the  RV.  and  VS. I4,  but  the  metre  shows  that 
the  combination  is  sometimes  pronounced  as  ar,  as  is  the  case  in  the  compound 
saptarsdyah  She  seven  seers’ IS. 


1  Apparent  exceptions  are  due  to  erroneous 
metrical  division  of  Padas  by  the  editors  of 
the  Samhitas,  or  to  mechanical  repetition  of 
formulas  originally  used  in  a  different  posi¬ 
tion  in  the  verse.  Thus  srudhT  |  havam  (1.  2 5 1 9) 
appears  in  imitation  of  srudhi  havam  which 
is  frequent  at  the  beginning  of  a  verse 
(11.  in,  etc.).  Cp.  Oldenberg  420 f. 

2  See  Zubaty,  Der  Quantitatswechsel  im 
Auslaute  vedischer  Worter,  Vienna  Or. 
Journal  2,  315. 

3  See  Zubatv,  op.  cit.  3,  89. 

4  See  Oldenberg  399. 

5  Op.  cit.  60. 

6  Cp.  Wackernagel  1.  265  b,  note. 

7  There  is  no  example  of  contracted  r  in  the 

Samhitas,  as  r  r  never  meet;  and  in  the  RV. 

final  r  never  occurs  (cp.  above,  p.  59,  note  8). 


8  Cp.  Benfey,  SV.  xxxnf. ;  Roth,  Litte- 
ratur  67  f. 

9  7ia  ‘like’,  is  never  combined  in  pro¬ 
nunciation,  see  above  67;  cp.  Arnold  120. 

10  Long  vowels  being  regularly  shortened 
before  vowels;  see  Oldenberg  465k 

Cp.  Arnold  124. 

12  Op.  cit.  120.  Before  other  vowels,  dv, 
the  Sandhi  form  of  an ,  the  alternative  dual 
ending,  appears. 

x3  Because  the  long  monophthongs  e  and  3 
represent  IE.  di  and  an. 

J4  The  MS.  does  not  contract  either,  but 
on  the  contrary  often  lengthens  d  to  a ,  even 
where  the  metre  requires  contraction.  Cp. 
Wackernagel  i,  267  a  a,  note. 

See  Grassmann,  Worterbuch  p.  vii. 


64 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


a.  In  the  RV.  d-\-i  is  once  contracted  to  ai-  in prdisayur  (1.  1205)  =  pra  isayuh  (Pp.)1; 
in  the  SV.  d-\-i  is  once  contracted  to  ai-  in  dindra  =  d  indr  a  (1.  2.  1.  45);  and  in  the 
AV.  and  VS.  the  preposition  d  contracts  with  r  to  dr  in  drti-  =  d-fti-  ‘suffering’,  and 
archatu  —  ci-rcchaiu 2.  The  last  three  instances  are  perhaps  survivals  of  an  older  con¬ 
traction.  That  a  is  not  otherwise  contracted  with  1  u  r  to  ai  an  dr,  is  doubtless  to  be 
accounted  for  by  the  previous  shortening  of  d  in  hiatus  3. 

b.  Occasionally  a  followed  by  i  remains  uncontracted  in  the  written  text  of  the 
RV.  ;  thus  jyci  iydm  (vi.  753);  pdd  imam  (vill.  1 7 T) ;  ranaya  ihd  (VIII.  3411)  4.  When  a 
is  followed  by  r,  it  is  either  shortened  5  or  nasalized;  e.  g.  tatha  r-tiih  for  tcithd  r- ; 
kaddm  rtacid  (v.  39)  =  kadd  r- ;  vibhvdm  rbhi'ir 
(IV.  112)  =  vipanyd  rlasya. 

c.  On  the  other  hand,  in  many  instances  where  the  contraction  e  or  0  is  written, 
the  original  simple  vowels  must  be  restored  with  hiatus;  e.  g.  endrdgm  (i.  io8t)  =  a 

indragm ;  subhdgosah  (i.  487)  =  subhdgd  us  ah  8. 


(lV.  333)6  —  vibhva  r-;  vipanydml  \  rlasya 


2.  Final  a  contracts  with  a  following  e  or  ai  to  ai ;  and  with  0  or  au  to  au\ 
e.  g.  aibhih  for  d  ebhih.  But  though  the  contraction  is  written,  the  original 
vowels  must  sometimes  be  restored;  e.  g.  disn  (1.  6116)  must  be  read  d  esu. 

a.  Final  a,  instead  of  being  contracted  with  e  and  0,  is  in  a  few  instances  elided 
before  those  diphthongs;  thus  ialdr’ eved  (vii.  333)  =  tatdra  eved ;  iv’  el  ay  ah  (x.  QI+)  = 
iva  eiay ah ;  asvin’ evet  (Vll.  99)  =  asvind  |  evet ;  ydlh’ohise  (vm.  53)  —  yathx  oh  se ;  tip’  esatu 
=  it  pa  esatu9.  An  example  of  a  compound  with  this  elision  seems  to  be  ddsoni - 10  = 
ddsa-oni-  ‘having  ten  aids’. 

b.  Final  d,  instead  of  being  contracted  with  e  is,  in  a  few  instances,  nasalized 
before  that  diphthong;  thus  ami  nan  tain  evaih  1 1  (1.  792)  for  -a  e -;  sasaddnam  esi  (i.  1 2 3 1  °) 
for  -a  e- ;  uphsthdm  |  ekd  (i.  356)  for  -a  <?-. 


3.  When  a  remains  after  a  final  y  01  s  has  been  dropped,  it  does  not 
as  a  rule  contract  with  the  following  vowel.  Nevertheless  such  contraction  is 
not  infrequent  in  the  Samhitas.  In  some  instances  it  is  actually  written;  thus 
sdrtavdjau  (hi.  326)  =  Pp.  sdrtavdi  aj an ;  vdsdu  (v.  1 7 3)  =  Pp.  vdi  asdu; 
and  the  compound  rdjesitam  (vm,  4b28 5)  =  Pp.  rdjah-isitam ;  in  the  later  Sam¬ 
hitas  are  found  krtyeti  (AV.  x.  115)  -  -  pp.  kftyah  iti ;  pzvopavasdnandm  (VS. 
xxi.  43)  =  Pp.  piv ah-up av a sanandm  12 . 

In  other  instances  the  contraction,  though  not  written,  is  required  by  the 
metre;  thus  ta  indra  (vii.  219),  Pp.  te  indra ,  must  be  read  as  tendra ;  prthivyii 
antdriksat  (AV.  ix.  19),  Pp.  prthivydh ,  as  prthivydntdriksat  v ;  gosthd  upa  (AV. 
ix.  423),  Pp.  gosthd  upa ,  as  gosth'pa. 

a.  There  appear  to  be  several  other  instances  of  such  written  contraction,  which 
are  however  otherwise  explained  by  the  I’adapatha;  thus  rdyota  (x.  9310)  =  rdye  utd, 


1  Several  instances  of  this  contraction 
occur  in  B  and  later. 

2  The  TS.  extends  this  contraction  to  pre¬ 
positions  ending  in  a:  updrchati ,  avarchati ; 
see  Whitney,  APr.  111.  47  {.,  TPr.  111.  9P 
In  the  post-Vedic  language  this  contraction 
was^  extended  to  all  prepositions  ending 
in  d. 

3  Cp.  Benfey,  GGA.  1846,  p.  822. 

4  The  Pp.  explains  pibd-  and  ranaya  as 
imperatives  [piba,  ranaya );  but  the  a  here 
may  represent  -as  of  the  subjunctive  (cp. 
Wackernagel  1,  p.  311  mid.).  Occasionally 
a  remain  uncontracted  because  the  editors 
regarded  them  as  representing  ah-e,  or  ah,  as 
in  rania  itya  (vii.  ^pjmayci  dtra  (vii.  393).  Cp. 
RPr.  11.  28 f.;  Benfey,  SV.  xxxf.;  Wacker¬ 
nagel  1,  267  a  g 

5  See  p.  63,  note  10 ;  d  is  shortened 
before  r  in  the  AB.;  see  Aufrecht’s  ed. 
427. 


6  vibhvdm  occurs  thus  three  times;  see 
Lanman  529. 

7  In  opposition  to  the  Mss.  Max  Muller, 
RV2.  reads  vipanyam  rlasya  because  Sayana 
appears  to  favour  that  reading. 

8  See  Arnold,  Vedic  Metre  123. 

9  This  is  a  precursor  of  the  post-V  edic 
rule  by  which  the  I  of  a  preposition  before 
initial  e  and  0  of  verbs  (except  eti  etc.  and 
edhate  etc.)  is  elided. 

10  Though  the  AV.  has  pahcaudana-  — 
fiahca  odana-  the  elision  of  a  before  -odana- 
often  takes  place  in  the  Sutras  and  later. 

The  old  hiatus  is  here  treated  as  it 
would  be  at  the  end  of  an  internal  Pada. 
The  TS.  (III.  1,  115)  retains  the  hiatus  in 
the  same  verse  without  nasalization;  cp. 
Oldenberg  469  ff. 

12  See  Wackernagel  i,  268  b. 

13  In  the  Paippalada  recension  this  con¬ 
traction  is  actually  written. 


II.  Euphonic  Combination.  Vowels.  65 


PP.  ray  a  uta ;  bhumyopari  (x.  753)  =  bhmnyah  upari,  Pp.  bhumya  upari 1.  In  a  few  of 

these  the  contraction  must  be  removed  as  contrary  to  metre;  thus  usa  ydti  (ill.  6t4 5), 
Pp.  us  Ah  yaii,  which  means  ‘Dawn  goes’,  should  be  read  as  usa'  A  yati ,  as  the  sense 
requires  ‘Dawn  comes’,  and  the  metre  requires  an  additional  syllable;  abhistipasi  (11.  202), 
Pp.  -pa  asi,  should  be  read  as  abhistipg,{h )  asi;  vrsabheva  (VI.  464),  Pp.  vrsabha  iva 2 ,  as 
vrsabhd'h )  iva. 

b.  In  a  very  few  instances  a  final  m  is  dropped  after  a,  which  then  combines  with 
a  following  vowel.  This  contraction  is  actually  written  in  durgdhaitdt  (iv.  182)  for 
dmgaham  etdt  (but  Pp.  durgdha  etdt)  3,  and  savaneddm  (TS.  I.  4.  442)  for  sdvanam  idam 
(Pp.  savana  idam).  Occasionally  this  contraction  though  not  written  is  required  by  the 
metre;  thus  rdstrdm  ihd  (AV.)  must  be  read  rdstrehd. 

71.  Final  /  and  u  before  dissimilar  vowels. — 1.  The  final  vowels  i 
and  ii 4  before  dissimilar  initial  vowels  and  before  diphthongs  are  in  the 
Samhitas  regularly  written  as  /  and  if  5  respectively;  e.  g.  prdty  ayam 
(1.  ii6 7)  =  prdti  dyam ;  A  tv  eta  (1.  51)  =  A  tu  eta ;  jdnitry  ajljanat  (x.  1341) 

=  jdnitrl  ajljanat.  The  evidence  of  the  metre,  however,  shows  that  this  y 

or  v  nearly  always  has  the  syllabic  value  of  i  or  w6;  e.  g.  vy  usdh  (1.  92**) 
must  be  read  as  vi  us  Ah :  viddthesv  ahjdn  (1.  92  s)  as  vidathesu  anjdn. 

a.  The  final  of  disyllabic  prepositions  must,  however,  frequently  be  pronounced  as 

a  semivowel,  especially  before  augmented  forms;  e.  g.  adhyasthdh  (1.  492);  dnv  acdrisam 
(l.  2323);  also  dnv  ihi  (x.  5 36)  7.  • 

b.  In  all  the  Samhitas  the  particle  u  following  a  consonant  is  written  as  v  and 

pronounced  as  u  before  a  vowel;  e.  g.  avid  v  indra  (1.  2S1)8 *;  but  the  long  form  of  the  - 

same  particle  occasionally  remains  unchanged  in  the  RV.  even  after  a  consonant;  e.  g. 
iid  ft  ayam  (vi.  7 L  5J ;  tdm  u  akrnvan  (X.  8810). 

c.  In  RV.  I — IX  there  are  other  instances  of  monosyllabic  and  disyllabic  words  at 
the  end  of  which  y  and  v  are  pronounced;  but  the  only  example  of  a  trisyllabic  word 
in  which  this  occurs  is  sfvyatu  in  stvyaiv  dpah  (11.324).  In  RV.  x  there  are  a  few  further 
examples;  e.  g.  devisv  ddhi  (x.  1218)9. 

d.  The  semivowel  is  regular  in  the  compounds  rtv-ij-,  gdvy-feti- l0,  sv-aha,  and  sv-id11. 

2.  Unchangeable  T  and  u .  a.  The  dual  1  and  u  never  change  to 

y  or  v;  nor  is  the  former  ever  prosodically  shortened,  though  the  latter  some¬ 
times  is;  e.  g.  hdrl  (v  -)  rtdsya ;  but  sadhu  (_  w)  astnai  (11. 2715).  The  dual  T  may 
remain  even  before  i;  e.  g.  hdrl  iva,  hdrl  indra,  akst  iva\  but  the  contraction 
is  written  in  upadhiva ,  pradhiva ,  dd/npatlva,  vispatlva,  nrpatlva  (AV.),  rodaslme 
(vn.  90 3)  =  rddasl  ime  ‘these  two  worlds’.  There  are  also  several  passages 
in  which  the  contraction,  though  not  written,  must  be  read12. 

b.  The  rare  locatives  in  1  and  u 13  (from  stems  in  i  and  u )  are  regularly 
written  unchanged  in  the  Samhita  text  of  the  RV.,  except  vedy  asyAm  (n.34), 


1  Cp.  Wackernagel  1,  268  a. 

2  In  instances  in  which  contraction  with 
iva  seems  to  take  place,  the  existence  of  a 
byform  va  has  to  be  taken  into  consider¬ 
ation;  cp.  Grassmann,  Wdrterbuch,  column 
221;  Wackernagel  i,  268  a,  note. 

3  Cp.  Delbruck,  Verbum  67,  end. 

4  In  the  RV.  r  is  never  final,  and  I  doubt 
whether  any  example  can  be  quoted  from 
the  other  Samhitas  in  which  it  is  followed 
by  an  initial  vowel. 

5  The  Sandhi  which  changes  a  vowel  to 
the  semivowel  is  called  ksaipra  ‘gliding’, 
in  the  Pratisakhyas;  cp.  RPr.  II.  8;  III.  7  5 
VH.  5; 

6  The  long  vowel  being  regularly  short¬ 
ened;  cp.  Oldenberg  465. 

7  Wackernagel  1,  271  b;  Oldenberg  438, 
note,  ZDMG.  44,  326  note;  Arnold,  Vedic 
Metre  125. 

8  The  TS.  has  uv  for  v.  Elsewhere  also 

Indo-arische  Philologie.  I.  4. 


iy  and  uv  are  sometimes  written  for  i  and  u; 

e.  g.  suv-itd-  =  su-itd -  ‘accessible’ ;  hence 
the  pronunciation  may  have  been  iy,  uv;  cp. 
Wackernagel  i,  270  c,  271  a. 

9  See  Arnold,  Vedic  Metre  125. 

If  the  analysis  of  BR .,  gdvi-iiti-,  is  correct; 
the  Pp.  divides  go-  ydti-. 

11  See  Arnold,  Vedic  Metre  125. 

12  Cp.  Wackernagel  i,  270  b,  note.  Here 
we  have  probably  not  contracted  forms  with 
iva,  but  the  dual  l  -p  va,  the  byform  of  iva. 

13  The  vowels  which  regularly  remain 
unchanged  are  called  pragrhya,  ‘separated’, 
by  the  native  phoneticians;  see  RPr.  1.  16 
etc.;  VPr.  I.  92  etc.;  APr.  1.  73  etc.  They 
are  indicated  as  such  in  the  Pp.  by  an 
appended  Hi.  The  particle  u  is  indicated 
as  pragrhya  in  the  Pp.  of  RV.  and  AV.  by 
its  nasalized  form  dm  (nasalization  being 
employed  to  avoid  hiatus:  see  above  66,  1). 


66 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


where,  however,  the  vowel  must  be  pronounced  (_v-_).  The  vowrels  here 
(unlike  the  dual  t)  seem  ahvays  to  be  treated  as  prosodically  short1. 

c.  The  final  1  of  other  cases  also  occasionally  remains  unchanged; 
thus  the  nominatives  prthivi ,  prthujrdyT ,  samrajm  and  the  instrumental  susamT 
sometimes  retain  their  I,  and  the  inst.  uti  frequently  does  so  \ 

72.  Final  e  and  0.  —  1.  a.  Before  a.  The  diphthongs  e  and  0  remain 
unchanged  before  an  initial  a.  This  a  is  often  not  written  in  the  Samhitas3, 
being  dropped  in  about  three-fourths  of  its  occurrences  in  the  RV.  and  in  about 
two-thirds  in  the  AY.4;  but  the  evidence  of  metre  shows  that,  in  99  instances 
out  of  100  in  the  RV.,  and  in  about  80  in  the  AY.  and  the  metrical  parts  of 
the  YV.,  it  is,  whether  written  or  not,  to  be  read,  and  at  the  same  time 
shortens  the  preceding  diphthong  to  e  or  d5.  In  visve  devdiso  apturah  (1.  3s) 
the  a  is  both  written  and  pronounced;  in  sundve  \  ’gne  (1.  U)  it  must  be 
restored:  sundve  |  ague6.  The  exceptional  treatment  of  e  in  stdtava  ambyatn 
(viii.  72s),  for  stotave  ambyam ,  indicates  that  the  Sandhi  of  e  and  0  before  a 
was  originally  the  same  as  before  other  vowels7 *.  But  their  unchanged  form, 
as  before  consonants,  gained  the  day,  because  the  short  close  d,  when  coming 
immediately  after  them  in  their  character  of  monophthongs,  would  have  a 
natural  tendency  fo  disappear  and  thus  leave  a  consonant  to  follow. 

b.  Before  other  vowels.  The  diphthongs  e  and  0  before  any  vowels 
but  d  would  naturally  become  ay  and  av,  as  being  originally  =  di  and  du, 
and  as  having  the  form  of  ay  and  av  within  a  wrord.  But  ay  regularly  drops 
the  y ;  e.  g.  agna  ihd  (1.  2210);  av  on  the  other  hand  generally  retains  the  v, 
dropping  it  before  u&;  e.  g.  vdyav  d  yd  hi  (1.  21);  but  vdya  ukthebhir  (1.  22). 

2.  Unchangeable  e.  a.  The  e  of  the  dual  nom.  acc.  f.  n.  of  ^-sterns, 
e.  g.  ubhe  ‘both’,  is  regularly  uncontracted  ( pragrhya ),  because  it  consists  oi 
a  +  the  dual  I9. 

b.  Under  the  influence  of  this  nominal  dual  e,  the  verbal  dual  e10  of 
the  2.  3.  present  and  perfect  middle,  e.  g.  vdhethe  ‘ye  two  bring’,  bruvate 
‘they  two  speak’,  as-athe  ‘ye  two  have  obtained’,  come  to  be  uncontractable, 
though  the  e  is  nearly  always' prosodically  shortened;  e.  g.  yuhjdthe  apdh 
(1.  1 5 14);  but  parimamndthe  asmdin  (vn.  93'fl. 

c.  The  e  of  the  locative  tve  ‘in  thee’,  is  uncontractable.  Under  its 
influence  the  other  pronominal  forms  asms  ‘us’,  and  yusme  ‘you’,  are  also 
always  treated  as  pragrhya  by  the  Samhita  as  well  as  the  Padapatha;  it  is, 


1  Cp.  Oldenberg  456,  note;  Wacker- 
NAGEL  I,  270  b. 

2  Cp.  op.  cit.  I,  270  b,  note.  Such  forms, 
in  which  the  absence  of  contraction  is  only 
occasional,  are  not  indicated  by  iti  in 
the  Pp. 

3  This  form  of  Sandhi  is  in  the  Piati- 
sakhyas  called  abhinihita  ‘elided’;  RPr.  11. 
13  etc.;  VPr.  I.  114,  125;  APr.  ill.  54;  TIT. 
11.  8. 

4  See  Whitney  135  c. 

5  Cp.  Oldenberg  435  f.,  453  ff.,  ZDMG. 
44,  331  ff . ;  Wackernagel  1,  p.  324. 

6  The  few  instances  (70  out  of  4500)  of 
the  elision  of  a  in  the  RV.  are  the  fore¬ 
runners  of  the  invariable  practice  of  post- 
Vedic  Sandhi. 

7  Internally  the  original  .Sandhi  of  the 

compound  gd-agra -  must  have  been  gav-agra- ; 

cp.  Wackernagel  i,  p.  325,  note. 


8  There  are  a  few  survivals  of  ay;  e.  g. 
tdy  a  (MS.  1.  11)  =  id  a  (TS.);  cp.  TPr.  x. 
23;  Oldenberg  447  ff.  In  the  MS.,  the  K., 
and  Mantras  occurring  in  the  Manavasutras, 
unaccented  a  for  e  before  an  accented  initial 
vowel  is  lengthened;  e.  g.  a  dadha,  iti. 

9  See  above  7C  2-  A  dual  e  once 
appears  contracted  in  dh'isnyeme  (vu.  723), 
which,  however,  should  probably  be  read 
uncontracted  as  dhisnye  ime.  The  -eva  which 
occurs  several  times  (1.  1864  etc  )  and  looks 
like  a  contraction  of  the  dual  e  with  iva ,  in 
reality  probably  stands  for  the  dual  e -\ -va, 
the  byform  of  iva;  cp.  Wackernagel  i,  p.  3 1 7, 
note,  top. 

i°  There  was  originally  no  difference  be¬ 
tween  this  dual  e  and  any  other  e  in  middle 
forms,  such  as  that  of  the  dual  -vahe>  the 
singular  -te,  and  the  plural  -ante. 


II.  Euphonic  Combination.  Consonants.  67 

however,  doubtful  whether  they  were  so  treated  in  the  original  text  of 
the  RV.1. 

3.  Unchangeable  0.  a.  When  0  is  the  result  of  combining  the  final  a 
of  particles  with  u  (which  itself  is  often  unchangeable)2,  it  is  pragrhya ;  thus 
6  (=  d  u),  dtho  (—  dtha  u ),  uto  (==  utd  u),  md  (—  md  u). 

b.  Following  this  analogy,  the  vocative  in  0  of  z/-stems  is  sometimes 
treated  as  pragrhya  in  the  Samhita  of  the  TS.;  e.  g.  pito  d  (TS.v.  7.24).  It  is 
regularly  so  treated  in  the  Padapathas  of  the  RV.,  AV.,  VS.,  TS.  (but  not  SV.). 
Thus  in  vdyav  d  (1.  21),  vdiya  ukthebhir  (1.  22),  vdyo  tdva  (1.  23)  the  vocative 
is  equally  given  in  the  Padapatha  as  vdyo  iti. 

73.  The  diphthongs  ai  and  au.  — The  diphthongs  ai  and  an  are  treated 
throughout  in  the  same  way  as  e  and  0  before  vowels  other  than  a.  Thus 
ai  is  regularly  written  a  (having  dropped  the  y  of  ay) ;  e.  g.  tdsma  aksi 
(1.  11616);  tdsma  indraya  (1.  49).  On  the  other  hand,  au  is  generally  written 
av,  but  always  a  before  u  in  the  RV.  and  VS.;  e. g.  tdv  d  (1.  2 5 );  tdv 
indragni  (1. 1083);  but  sujihvd  upa  (1.  138).  In  the  AV.  a  appears  before  u 
in  pdda  ucyete  (AV.  xix.  65).  In  the  MS.  a  appears  before  other  vowels  also3. 

74.  Euphonic  combination  of  consonants.  —  The  Sandhi  of  final 
consonants,  generally  speaking,  starts  from  the  form  which  they  assume  in 
pausa.  Thus  an  aspirate  first  loses  its  aspiration;  the  palatal  c  becomes  k ; 
jsh  become  k  or  t*;  and  of  a  group  of  consonants  the  first  alone  remains. 
Final  11  is,  however,  to  a  great  extent  differently  treated  from  what  it  is  in 
pausa;  and  the  Sandhi  of  s  and  r  is,  for  the  most  part,  based  not  on  h, 
their  form  in  pausa,  but  on  the  original  letter. 

A  final  consonant  is  assimilated5  in  quality6  to  the  following  initial, 
becoming  voiceless  before  a  voiceless  consonant,  and  voiced  before  a  voiced 
sound7;  e.  g.  tat  satydm  (1.  15)  for  tad ;  ydt  tva  (1.  1510)  for ydd;  havyavdd 
juhvasyah  (1.  126),  through  -vdt  for  - vdh ;  gam  ad  vdjebhih  (1.  53)  for  gdmat ; 
arvdg  rddhah  (1.  9s)  for  arvdc  through  arvdk . 

a.  A  final  media  before  a  nasal  may  become  the  nasal  of  its  own  class.  There 
seems  to  be  no  certain  instance  of  this  in  the  RV. ;  ccikran  11a  (x.  9512-  T3),  however, 
probably  stands  for  cakrat  na,  though  the  Pp.  has  cakrdn  nd.  This  assimilation  is  regular 
in  some  compounds;  e.  g.  san-n  avail-  ‘96’  for  sat-navati-.  From  here  it  penetrated  into 
internal  Sandhi;  e.  g.  san-n  am. 

b.  Assimilation  not  only  in  quality,  but  also  largely  in  the  place  of  articulation 
occurs  in  the  Sandhi  of  final  m,  of  the  final  dentals8  1  n  s,  and  of  final  r  (under  the 
influence  of  s). 

75.  Euphonic  combination  of  final  m.  —  1.  Before  vowels,  final  m 
remains  unchanged;  e.  g.  agnim  Tie  (1.  1 1).  In  a  very  few  instances,  however, 
the  m  is  dropped,  and  the  vowels  then  contract.  This  Sandhi  is  mostly 
indicated  by  the  metre  only:  it  is  very  rarely  written9,  as  in  durgdhaitdt 


1  Cp.  Oldenberg  455,  note. 

2  Cp.  above  71,  1  b. 

3  See  Garbe,  GGA.  1SS2,  117  f.;  Wacker- 
nagel  i,  274;  Oldenberg,  ZUMG.  60,  755 
—  758  (Duale  auf  -d  und  - au ). 

4  Some  compounds,  however,  preserve 
survivals  of  an  earlier  phase  of  Sandhi;  e.  g. 
vis-pdtl-  ‘lord  of  the  house’;  vispald-  N.,  not 
vil-\  nabh-raj-  (MS.)  ‘cloud-king’,  not  nab-rdj-. 
Cp.  L.  v.  Schroeder,  ed.  of  MS.  1 ,  P-  XVI. 

5  Final  t  before  vowels  becomes  /  in  the 
RV.,  not  d  as  later;  e.  g.  bat  itthcL ,  for  bat. 

6  Within  a  word  a  voiced  consonant  is 

not  necessary  before  vowels,  semivowels, 

and  nasals. 


7  Some  scholars  think  that  the  3.  sing.impv., 

e.  g.  bhavatu  represents  bhavat  u  for  original 
bhavad  u ,  the  t  being  retained  owing  to  the 
influence  of  the  innumerable  forms  of  the 
3.  sing,  with  -ti,  ~te,  etc.  (cp.  Wacker- 
NAGEL  I,  276b);  but  this  is  doubtful;  Del- 
bruck,  Altindische  Syntax  517  ff.,  thinks  it 
may  originally  have  been  (particle); 

cp.  IF.  18,  71. 

8  An  example  of  a  final  guttural  becoming 
a  dental  before  a  dental  occurs  in  TS.  I. 
2.  71,  where  samydt  te  stands  for  samydk  te. 
There  are  a  few  other  examples  in  B.  passages 
of  the  TS.;  see  Wackernagel  i,  277  b. 

9  See  above  70,  3  b. 


63 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


(iv.  181 2)  for  durgdham  etdt,  and  it  is  never  analysed  by  the  Padapatha  in 
this  way.  It  may  perhaps  have  started  from  the  analogy  of  the  doublet 
tubhya  beside  tubhyam  ho  thee’1. 

2.  Before  mutes,  final  in  is  regularly  assimilated2,  becoming  the 
corresponding  nasal,  and  before  n  similarly  becoming  n.  The  Mss.  and 
printed  texts,  however,  represent  this  assimilated  m  by  the  Anusvara  sign; 
e.  g.  bhadram  karisydsi  (1.  i6)  for  bhadrdh  karisydsi ;  bhadrdm  no  (x.  201)  for 
bhadrdn  no.  This  actual  change  of  m  to  n  before  dentals  led  to  some  errors 
in  the  Pada  text;  e.  g.  ydn  ni-pdsi  (iv.  116),  analysed  as  ydt  instead  of  yam) 
avi-venan  tdm  (iv.  2  46),  analysed  as  dvi-venan  instead  of  dvi-venam  (cp.  iv.  25s). 

3.  Before  r  s'  s  s  and  h3,  final  in  becomes  Anusvara  (in) ;  e.  g.  hdtaram 
ratnadh dta mam  (1.  i1);  vardhamcinam  sve  (1.  i9j;  mitrdm  huve  (1.  27).  From 
its  original  use  before  sibilants  and  /z,  Anusvara  came  to  be  employed  before 
the  semivowel  also4.  A  compound  like  sam-rdj-  ‘overlord’  shows  that  m 
originally  remained  unchanged  in  Sandhi  before  r. 

4.  Before  /  /  v,  final  in  is  assimilated  as  nasalized  y  /  v.  The  TPr.6, 
however,  allows  Anusvara  beside  these,  while  the  APr.  even  requires  Anunasika 
before  y  and  v)  and  the  printed  texts  regularly  use  Anusvara;  e.  g .  sdm  yudhi 
(1.  83);  yajnam  vastu  (1.  3010).  Forms  like  yamydmana-  ‘extended’  and  dpa- 
mlukta-  ‘concealed’  show  that  final  m  originally  remained  unchanged  in  Sandhi 
before  y  and  /5;  and  forms  like  jaganvdn,  from  gam-  ‘go’,  point  to  its  having 
at  one  time  become  11  before  v  in  Sandhi. 

76.  Euphonic  combination  of  final  t.  —  1.  Before  /,  final  / 6  becomes 
fully  assimilated  as  /;  e.  g.  ahgal  lomnah  (x.  1636)  for  dngat  lomnah. 

2.  Before  palatals  (including  s')7  final  t 1  becomes  palatal8;  e.  g.  tdc 
cdksuh  (vn.  66l6)  for  tad  cdksuh ;  rohic  chyavd  (1.  10016)  for  rohit  syavd ;  and 
in  a  compound  yataydj-jana-  ‘marshalling  men’,  for  ycitaydt-jana -. 

77.  Euphonic  combination  of  final  n.  —  1.  Before  vowels.  Final  zz9, 
a.  if  preceded  by  a  short  vowel,  is  doubled10;  e.  g.  dhann  dhim  (11.  n5)  for 
dhan.  The  final  n  is  here  chiefly  based  on  original  ns  or  id.  Though  it  is 
always  written  double11,  the  evidence  of  metre  shows  that  this  rule  was  only 
partially  applied  in  the  RY. I2. 

b.  If  preceded  by  a  long  vowel,  it  becomes  within1-5  a  Pada  in  the  RY. 
in  after  a1*,  but  ihr  after  T  u  r 1 5 ;  e.  g.  sargam  iva ,  for  sargdn ;  paridhimr  dti,  for 
paridhin ;  abhisuihr  iva ,  for  abhisun)  nfmr  abhi ,  for  nfn.  This  Sandhi  was 
caused  by  the  n  having  originally  been  followed  byM6;  e.  g.  vfkan  originally 


1  Cp.  Wackernagel  1,  283  a,  note. 

2  Op.  cit.  1,  283,  b  a. 

3  Op.  cit.  1,  283  d. 

4  In  the  post- Vedic  language  Anusvara 
came  to  be  allowed  before  mutes  and  nasals 
also. 

5  Cp.  Wackernagel  i,  283  c. 

6  Representing  th  d  dh  also,  if  they  occur. 

7  In  the  MS.  t  anomalously  becomes  n, 
instead  of  c,  before  s;  see  L.  V.  Schroeder, 
ZDMG.  33,  185;  ed.  of  MS.  1,  p.  xxix.  On 
the  aspiration  of  s  in  this  Sandhi,  see 
below  80  a. 

8  Final  dentals  never  come  into  contact 
with  initial  cerebrals  in  the  Samhitas. 

9  This  rule  applies  to  final  guttural  h 
also;  e.  g.  kJdfhh  i-  (x.  io83),  cp.  Lanman 
490;  hihh  akrnot  (i.  16428)  for  Juh  a-. 

10  The  compound  vrsan-asva -  ‘having 

stallions  as  steeds’,  forms  an  exception. 


11  For  various  explanations  of  this  doubling, 
see  Wackernagel  i,  279  a  (p.  330). 

12  Cp.  Oldenberg  424  b,  429  ff. 

13  At  the  end  of  a  Pada,  -an  -In  -un  remain 
unchanged  (as  being  in  pausa)  before  a 
vowel.  For  passages  in  which  -an  is  un¬ 
changed  within  a  Pada,  see  below  and 
Oldenberg  428. 

x4  In  the  MS.  and  K.,  -dm  is  shortened 
to  -am;  e.  g.  asmam  asnolu  for  asman.  Cp. 
v.  Schroeder,  ed.  of  the  MS.  1,  p.  xxix. 

15  fn  becomes  fmr  only  once  (v.  54I8)> 
remaining  unchanged  elsewhere  because  two 
r  sounds  are  avoided  in  the  same  syllable 
(see  below  79). 

16  For  examples  of  this  Sandhi  applied  to 
nominatives  in  -an,  see  Lanman  506  A, 
note  ( mahan ),  512  (-va?i),  514  (- yan ),  517 
(-man);  for  accusatives,  346. 


II.  Euphonic  Combination.  Consonants.  69 

*vrkans *;  mahtin  for  *mahdnts;  d-yan,  3.sing.aor.  for  *d-yan-st  ( 1 .  sing,  d-yamsam) 1  2. 
The  n  became  Anusvara  (or  Anunasika)  before  this  s,  which  was  treated  in 
exactly  the  same  way  as  when  it  followed  an  unnasalized  vowel  (as  becoming 
d,  but  Is,  us,  rs  becoming  Jr,  Ur,  fr). 

«.  The  an  of  the  3.  pi.  subjunctive  (originally  dnl),  however,  remains  unchanged 
before  vowels  within  a  Pada,  obviously  owing  to  the  -t  which  at  one  time  followed. 
There  happen  to  be  only  five  occurrences  of  this  form  under  the  conditions  required: 
a  vahan  dsu  (I.  8418);  ghosdn  uttard  (lit.  33^);  sphuran  rjipyam  (vi.  67 1  x) ;  gacchdn  id 
(VIII.  795);  gacchan  uttara  (X.  1010)3, 

2.  Before  consonants.  Final  n  remains  unchanged  before  all  gutturals 
and  labials  (including  vi),  as  well  as  before  voiced  dentals  (including  n).  It 
is,  however,  liable  to  be  changed  before  the  following  sounds: 

a.  Before/?,  final  71,  when  etymologically  =  ns,  sometimes  becomes;/^; 
thus  nrmh  pa  hi  (vm.  Sq3)4;  nfmh  p  dt ram  (1.  1211). 

b.  Before  all  palatals  that  occur  it  becomes  palatal  h;  e.  g.  urdhvdh 
cardthaya  (1. 36  ’4)  for  urdhvdn ;  tcm  jusetham  (v.  516)  for  td?i;  vajriii  chnathihi 
(  I.  63  s)  for  vajrin  snathihi 5 ;  devdii  chlokah  (x.  12  s)  for  devdn  sldkah. 

Before  c,  however,  the  palatal  sibilant  is  sometimes  inserted0  in  the 
RV.,  the  n  then  becoming  Anusvara.  This  insertion  occurs  only  when  the 
sibilant  is  etymologically  justified  (that  is,  in  the  nom.  sing,  and  acc.  pi. 
masc.)  almost  exclusively  (though  not  invariably)  before  ca  and  cid;  thus 
anuyajdms  ca  (x.  5 18 *),  amend  ins  cid  (v.  312)7.  In  the  other  Samhitas  the 
inserted  sibilant  becomes  commoner,  occurring  even  where  it  is  not  etymo¬ 
logically  justified  (that  is,  in  the  3.  pi.  impf.,  and  the  voc.  and  loc.  of  n- 
stems)  8. 

c.  Before  dental  1 9,  final  n  usually  remains;  but  the  dental  sibilant  is 
sometimes  inserted  in  the  RV.,  the  n  then  becoming  Anusvara.  This  insertion, 
however,  occurs  in  the  RV.  only  when  it  is  etymologically  justified;  it  is 
commoner  in  the  other  Samhitas10,  where  it  appears  even  when  not  etymolog¬ 
ically  justified. 

d.  Before  y  r  v  h,  final  n  as  a  rule  remains  unchanged;  but  -an,  -in, 
-un  sometimes  become  -am1',  -Tmr,  - umr ,  as  before  vowels;  e.  g.  -annaiii 
rayivrdhah  (vii.  913)  for  - annan ;  dadvdm  vd  (x.  1323)  for  dadvdn ;  panhhr 
hatam  (1.  1842)  for  panin;  ddsyuihr  yonau  (1.  63/)  for  ddsyun . 

e.  Before  /,  final  n  always  becomes  nasalized  /  I2;  e.  g.jigivdl laksdm(\\.  1 2 *). 

f.  Before  the  dental  sibilant,  final  n  remains;  but  a  transitional  /I3 
may  be  inserted;  e.  g.  ahant  sdhasa  (1.  8o10)  ‘he  slew  with  might’;  tdn  mm 
may  also  be  written  tdnt  sdm *4.  In  the  former  example  the  t  is  organic; 
from  such  survivals  it  spread  to  cases  where  it  was  not  justified.  A  similar 
insertion  may  take  place  before  s';  that  is,  vajrin  snathihi  may  become  vajriii 
snathihi  or  vajrin  chnathihi  (through  vajrihc  snathihi  for  vajrint  snathihi)  I5. 


1  Cp.  Cretic  XvKovg. 

2  In  all  the  other  Samhitas  the  pause 
forms  -an  -in  -un  -fit  predominate.  In  the 
post-Vedic  language  they  became  the  only 
allowable  forms. 

3  Cp.  Oldenberg  428. 

4  The  MS.  (IL  1311)  has  nr  ms  paid. 

5  For  examples  of  nominatives  with  this 
Sandhi,  see  Lanman  506  A,  note,  512  (top), 
517. 

6  Op.  cit.,  506  A,  note,  and  514. 

7  Op.  cit.,  512. 

8  There  are  no  examples  of  the  inserted 

sibilant  before  ch  in  the  Samhitas.  In  the 


post-Vedic  language  a  sibilant  is  invariably 
inserted  after  n  before  all  voiceless  palatals, 
cerebrals,  and  dentals. 

9  Neither  th  nor  t  th  occur  in  the  Sam¬ 
hitas  after  final  n. 

10  Cp.  Lanman  536  A,  note. 

11  For  dadhanvdm ycih,  of  the  RV.  (ix.  1071) 
and  SV.,  the  VS.  (xix.  2)  has  dadhanva  yah. 

12  As  m  does  before  /;  see  above  75,  4. 
x3  Before  a  transitional  k  may  similarly 

be  inserted  after  a  final  ii;  e.  g.  pratycih  sd 
may  also  be  written  pratyahk  sd. 

J4  See  Lanman  506  A,  note,  and  346. 

*5  Cp.  Wackernagel  1,  282,  note. 


70  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

78.  Euphonic  combination  of  final  s.  —  1.  Before  voiced  sounds. 

a.  Final  s  after  all  vowels  except  a,  assumes  its  voiced  form  r  before  all 
vowels  and  voiced  consonants1;  e.  g.  fsibhir  idyo  (1.  i2)  for  fsibhis ;  agnir 
hotel  (1.  15)  for  agnis ;  paribhtir  a  si  (1.  14)  for  paribhfis ;  n  fit  an  air  utd  (1.  i2) 
for  nfitanais. 

The  j  doubtless  became  r  through  an  older  transitional  voiced  cerebral 
z2,  as  is  shown  by  the  Avesta,  e.  g.  in  duzita-  —  dur-ita -3. 

b.  Final  s  after  a  must  originally  have  become  z  before  voiced 
sounds.  But  az  drops  the  sibilant  before  vowels  and  voiced  consonants, 
while  az  drops  it  before  vowels  except  a\  but  becomes  0 5  before  voiced  con¬ 
sonants6  and  a ;  thus  sutd  ime  (1.  34)  for  sutds;  visvd  vi  (1.  3 1 2;,  for  visvds ; 
khya  d  for  khyas  (1.  43);  no  dti  (1. 43)  for  nas;  indavo  vam  (1. 21)  for  indavas. 

2.  Before  voiceless  consonants,  a.  Before  the  palatals  c)  ch ,  s' 
final  t  becomes  the  palatal  sibilant  s'7 *;  e.  g.  devas  cakrmd  (x.  3712). 

b.  Be  fore  the  dental  t9,  final  t  following  a  always  remains;  e.  g. yds  te 
(1.  44);  me'dhiras  tesdm  (1.  117).  After  1  ul°,  it  remains  as  a  rule;  e.  g. 
dnvibhis  tana  (1.  34).  But  s  becomes  s,  which  cerebralizes  the  following  t  to  t: 
a.  regularly  in  compounds'1  in  all  the  Samhitas;  e.  g.  dus-tara-  ‘insuperable’ 
for  diis-tara-  (but  rajas-ti'ir-  ‘traversing  the  air’);  (j.  often  in  external  Sandhi 
in  the  RV.  This  occurs  chiefly,  and  in  the  independent  passages  of  the  other 
Samhitas12  only,  before  pronouns;  e.  g.  agnis  te;  krdtus  tdm;  otherwise  it 
occurs  occasionally  only  in  the  RV. ;  thus  nis-tataksur  (x.  317);  gob  his  tarema 
(x.  4210);  nakis  taniisu  (viii.  20 ,2)  T 

c.  Before  k  kh  p  ph,  final  i'  as  a  rule  becomes  Visarjaniya  (its  pause 


1  When  final  s  becomes  r  before  r,  it  is 
treated  like  an  original  r,  being  dropped 
after  lengthening  the  preceding  vowel. 

2  This  z  would  be  the  voiced  cerebral 
corresponding  to  the  voiceless s  which  appears 
before  voiceless  consonants  (e.  g.  in  duskha-). 

3  This  z  would  account  for  the  Sandhi  of 
some  Vedic  compounds  formed  with  dus- 
‘ill’  :dic-ddbha-,  du-das-,  dcc-dhf-,  du-ndsa -,  du- 
nasa-,  beside  dur-niy antic-.  It  may  possibly 
also  account  for  the  forms  svddhit7va(y.?>~), 
for  svcidhitiz  va  (Pp.  svadhitir-iva ),  and  nrv 
iva  (ix.  9615),  where  the  mttre  requires  urn  va 
(Pp,  uru-iva );  the  cerebral  being  dropped 
after  lengthening  the  preceding  vowel. 

4  In  the  MS.  unaccented  -a  for  -as  is 
lengthened  before  an  accented  vowel;  e.  g. 
tala  tndrah.  InTS.ll.  4.  71  ar  for  a  in  jinvar 
dvft  is  merely  a  bad  reading  (MS.  II.  4 7  j 
jenva  rdvat );  cp.  above  p.  33,  note  !3. 

5  In  the  compound  anar-vis-  (I.  1 2 17) 
‘having  a  wain  as  Ins  abode’,  ar  instead  of 

(cp.  dnas-vant-  ‘possessed  of  a  wain)’  is  j 
perhaps  due  to  the  influence  of  vanar-, 

beside  vanas-  and  vana-.  On  a  still  more 

anomalous  compound  of  the  same  word, 
anad-vah-  ‘drawer  of  a  cart’,  ‘bull’,  cp. 
Wackernagel  1,  p.  339,  top.  The  vowel 
d  appears  instead  of  0  in  fir  ace  td  |  raian 
(I.  24*4)  ‘O  wise  king’  ( praceto  raj  an  in  the 

same  verse,  TS.  1.  5.  11 3),  probably  owing 

to  the  voc.  firacetah ,  as  it  would  have  been 

pronounced  at  the  end  of  a  Pada  in  the 

original  text,  having  been  misunderstood  as 


a  voc.  in  -tar  (from  a  stem  in  -tf),  which 
would  become  -td  before  r. 

6  The  starting  point  of  this  Sandhi  was 
probably  the  treatment  of  az  before  voiced 
dentals,  where  the  sibilant  was  dropped  and 
the  preceding  vowel  lengthened  to  e  or  0. 
The  latter  finally  carried  the  day,  e  surviving 
only  in  sure  duhitd  (1.  345);  cp.  Bartholo- 
mae,  BB.  15,  if.;  Wackernagel  i,  p.  338. 

7  So  cit  does  not  stand  for  sdh  cit ,  but 
for  sd  u  cit. 

8  If  initial  cerebral  mutes  had  existed  in 
the  Samhitas,  final  s  would  doubtless  have 
become  the  cerebral  sibilant  s  before  them. 

9  No  example  of  initial  th  occurs  in  the 
Samhitas ;  but  the  internal  Sandhi  of  sthd- 
‘stand’,  in  ti-sthati  (for  ti-stha-ti)  shows  that 
initial  th  would  have  been  treated  in  the 
same  way  as  t. 

10  Pinal  rs  never  occurs ;  fs ,  occurring  only 
once  in  the  RV.,  remains  unchanged  in 

mdtfs  trm  (1.  16410). 

11  The  only  exception  in  the  RV.  is 
catus-trimsat  ‘thirty  four’,  doubtless  due  to 
the  avoidance  of  the  combination  sfr. 

12  The  TS.  also  has  nis  tap-  ‘heat’.  On  the 
usage  of  the  SV.,  see  Benfey,  SV.  p.  XLHi; 
on  that  of  the  AV.,  see  Whitney,  APr.  11.  84. 

13  Owing  to  the  far  more  numerous 
occurrences  of  as  before  /,  combined  with 
the  disinclination  to  change  theo  following 
initial,  the  retention  of  j  after  i  u  gradually 
gained  ground  and  finally  prevailed  in  the 
post-Vedic  language,  even  in  compounds. 


II.  Euphonic  Combination.  Consonants. 


7i 

form),  or  JihvamulTya  (h)  before  the  gutturals  and  UpadhmanTya  (h)  before 
the  labials;  e.  g.  indrah  pahca  (1.  79).  But  as  remains  and  is  us  rs  become 
is  us  rs1:  a.  regularly  in  compounds  in  all  the  Samhitas;  e.  g.  paras-pd- 
‘far-protecting’;  havis-pd-  ‘drinking  the  offering’;  dus-krt-  ‘evil-doing’;  dus-pdd- 
‘evil-footed’.  The  general  rule,  however,  applies  in  the  following  compounds: 
purdh-prasravana-  ‘streaming  forth’;  chdndah-paksa-  (AV.)  ‘borne  on  the  wings 
of  desire’;  sreyah-keta-  (AV.)  ‘striving  after  superiority’;  sadyah-krz-  (AV.) 
‘bought  on  the  same  day’;  bahih-paridhl  (TS.)  ‘outside  the  enclosure’;  itd/i- 
pradana-  (TS.)  ‘offering  from  hence  (=  this  world)’. 

The  repeated  (or  dmreiita )  compounds  also  follow  the  general  rule, 
doubtless  from  a  desire  to  change  the  repeated  word  as  little  as  possible; 
thus  pttrvah-purvo  ‘each  first’;  pardh-parah  ‘always  without’  (AV.);  pdrusah- 
parusas  (VS.)  ‘from  every  knot’;  purusah-puruso  (TS.)  ‘every  man’;  pdrith- 
paruh  (TS.)  ‘joint  by  joint’,  but  pdrus-parur  also  in  RV.  AV.  TS. 

Often  in  external  Sandhi  in  the  RV.2;  e.  g.  divas  pari  (x.  45 ') 
‘from  the  sky’;  patnivatas  krdhi  (1.  147)  ‘make  them  possessed  of  wives’; 
dydus  pitd  (iv.  1 10)  ‘Father  Heaven’. 

d.  Before  mutes  immediately  followed  by  5  or  s,  final  t  regularly 
becomes  Visarjanlya;  e.  g.  satdkratuh  tsdrat  (vm.  i11);  ubhayatah-ksnur  (TS.) 
‘two-edged’.  Occasionally  the  sibilant  disappears,  as  in  adha  ksdrantir  (vn.  34s)  3. 

e.  1.  Before  a  simple  sibilant  final  s  is  either  assimilated  or  becomes 
Visarjanlya;  e.  g.  vas  sivdtamo  or  v ah  sivdtamo  (x.  9');  dev  is  sal  or  devih  sal 
(x.  1284 5);  nas  sapdtna  or  nah  sapdtna  (x.  1289).  Assimilation  is  undoubtedly 
the  original  Sandhi*  and  is  required  by  some  of  the  Pratisakhyas5;  but  the 
Mss.  usually  employ  Visarjanlya,  and  European  editions  regularly  follow  this 
practice6. 

a.  The  sibilant  disappears  in  the  compounds  barhi-sad-  ‘sitting  on  the  sacrificial 
litter’;  dyau-samsita-  (AV.)  ‘sky-sharpened’;  and,  after  lengthening  the  preceding  a ,  ay i- 
saj  a  rajd-sayd  kard-saya  (TS.  I.  2.  1 1 2  =  MS.  I.  27)  for  ay  as-,  rajas-,  haras-. 

2.  Before  a  sibilant  immediately  followed  by  a  voiceless  mute,  a  final 
sibilant  is  dropped;  e.  g.  mandibhi  stdmebhir  (1.  95)  for  mandbhis)  mitha- 
sprdhya  (1.  1669)  for  mil  has-)  du-stuti -  ‘ill  praise’  for  dus-7.  The  omission  is 
required  by  the  Pratisakhyas  of  the  RV.,  VS,,  TS.,  and  is  the  practice  of  all 
the  Mss.  of  the  MS. 

3.  Before  a  sibilant  immediately  followed  by  a  nasal  or  semivowel,  a 
final  sibilant  is  optionally  dropped;  thus  krta  srdvah  (vi.  5s3),  beside  which 
(though  the  Pp.  reads  krta)  the  MS.  reads  krtah  srdvah 8;  ni-svardm  (vn.  i7) 
for  nis-svardm  ‘noiseless’  (Pp.,  however,  ni-svardm). 

79.  Euphonic  combination  of  final  r.  —  As  h  is  the  pause  form  of 
both  r  and  s ,  a  certain  amount  of  mutual  contamination  appears  in  their 
Sandhi;  r}  however,  suffers  much  more  in  this  respect  than  s.  Since  both  j 
and  r  when  preceded  by  1  u  have  the  same  natural  Sandhi,  it  is  in  a  few 


1  This  treatment  of  final  s  before  voice¬ 
less  gutturals  and  labials,  which  is  parallel 
to  that  before  t,  was  doubtless  the  original 
from  of  sentence  Sandhi. 

2  ado  pito  (1.  187/)  is  probably  only  an 
apparent  exception,  as  add  —  dda  it,  not  , 
cidas  (Pp.  adah);  the  Paippalada  recension 
of  the  AV.,  however,  has  a  das  pilo,  for 
adds. 

3  Though  the  Pp.  reads  adha,  the  PI3.  in 
quoting  the  verse  has  ddhah ;  see  Olden- 
berg  369,  note  1. 


4  Cp.  Whitney  on  APr.  11.  40. 

5  Cp.  Wackernagel  r,  p.  342,  top. 

6  In  pari  to  sihcata  (X.  107'),  ltd  probably 
=  itd  u  (Pp.  pari  itdfj). 

7  The  omission  was  doubtless  due  to  the 
fact  that  it  made  no  difference  to  the  pro¬ 
nunciation.  Hence  probably  the  wrong 
analysis  of  isastut  by  the  Pp.  as  isah-stul, 
instead  of  is  a- s  tut,  as  in  isd-vant-  (cp.  BR.). 

8  Cp.  Bollensen,  ZDMG.  45,  24;  Pischel, 
Vedische  Studien  I,  13. 


72  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


instances  uncertain  which  was  the  original  sound.  Thus  it  is  somewhat  doubtful 
whether  the  -uh  of  the  abl.  gen.  sing,  of  /--stems  and  of  the  3.  pi.  act.  of  past 
tenses  represents  original  us  or  ur.  In  the  verbal  form,  the  r  in  the  corre¬ 
sponding  middle  termination  of  the  perfect,  -re,  seems  to  decide  in  favour 
of  urx. 

1.  a.  Before  vowels  and  voiced  consonants  (except  r  itself)  r  remains 
not  only  when  preceded  by  1  u1 2,  but  by  a  also3;  e.  g.  gir  |  isd  (1.  1171); 
par  devatrn  (vii.  52’);  pratdr  agniti  (v.  181);  pi'tnar  nah  (x.  57s);  svcir  druho 
(n.  356)4. 

b.  Before  r,  r  disappears,  after  lengthening  a  preceding  vowel;  e.  g. 
puna  rupfiiu  (AV.  1.  2  44).  In  a  few  instances,  however,  0  appears  instead  of 
a  (=ar),  under  the  influence  of  -ah  as  the  pause  form  of  neuters  in  -as; 
thus  Udho  romasdm  (vm.  319),  for  ttdha;  and  the  compound  aho-ratrd-  Vlay 
and  night’,  for  aha-. 

2.  Before  voiceless  consonants  final  r  is  as  a  rule  treated  like  .r. 

a.  Before  the  gutturals  k  kh  and  the  labials  p  ph1  it  becomes  h 
under  the  influence  of  the  pause  form;  e.  g.  punah  hatch  (x.  39s);  pmiah 
patrilm  (x.  8539);  punah-punar  (1.  9210).  But  that  the  r  originally  remained 
before  these  consonants  is  shown  by  its  survival  in  the  compounds  piir-pati -, 
svdr-pati -,  vdr-karya -,  ahdr-pati-  (VS.).  But  even  here  the  pause  form  was 
gradually  introduced;  e.  g.  svah-pati-  (SV.);  it  supplanted  the  r  of  antdr 
throughout;  e.  g.  antah-pcya-  ‘drinking  up’;  antah-kosd-  (AV.)  ‘inside  of  a 
store-room’;  antah-parsavyd-  (VS.)  ‘flesh  between  the  ribs’;  antah-patrd-  (AV.) 
‘interior  of  a  vessel’;  and  because  the  pause  form  of  r  and  j  was  identical, 
the  Sandhi  of  s  came  to  be  applied  here  even  in  the  RV.;  thus  dntas-patha- 
‘being  on  the  way’  (for  dntar-);  cdtus-kaparda-  ‘having  four  braids’,  cdtus-pad- 
‘four-footed’  (for  catur-'). 

b.  Before  the  palatals  c  ch ,  final  r  invariably  (like  s)  becomes  the 
palatal  sibilant  /;  e.  g.  pas  ca  (1.  1892)  for  par  ca.  This  applies  almost  always 
even  in  compounds;  e.  g.  cdtus-catvarimsat  (VS.)  ‘forty-four’.  There  are  only 
two  examples  of  the  r  being  retained  even  here:  svar-caksas-  ‘brilliant  as  light’, 
svar-canas-  ‘lovely  as  light’. 

c.  Before  dental  t,  final  r  is  without  exception  treated  like  s;  e.  g. 
gls  tribarhisi  (1. 1818)  for  gir;  cdtus-trimsat  ‘thirty-four’  for  catur-.  The  retention 
of  r  before  t  in  dvar  tdmah  (1. 924)  is  only  apparently  an  exception,  as  this 
really  stands  for  avart  tdmah5. 

d.  Before  sibilants,  final  r  appears  in  its  pause  form  as  VisarjanTya 
in  sentence  Sandhi,  e.  g.  punah  sam  (11.  384).  In  compounds,  however,  it 


1  Cp.  Wackernagel  1,  2S4  note  (p.  335). 

2  A  list  of  root-stems  in  -ir  and  -ur  will 
be  found  in  Grassmann’s  Worterbuch  1693 
— 1694,  columns  3—4. 

3  r  is  original  in  dvar -  ‘door’;  var-  ‘pro¬ 
tector’;  var-  ‘water’ ;  ahar-  ‘day’;  us  dr-  ‘dawn’; 
udhar -  ‘udder’;  vddhar-  ‘weapon’;  vanar- 
‘wood’;  ivar-  ‘light’;  antdr  ‘within’;  avdr 
‘down’;  punar  ‘again’;  pratdr  ‘early’;  the 
voc.  of  r-stems,  e.  g.  bhratar ;  the  2.  3.  sing,  of 
past  tenses  from  roots  in  -r,  e.  g.  dvar ,  from 
vr-  ‘cover’. 

4  aha  eva  (vi.  48^)  for  dhar  eva  is  due  to 

dhah,  the  pause  form  of  ahar ,  being  treated 

like  that  of  a  neuter  in  -as,  dhas.  In  aksd 

indur  (ix.  983)  for  aksar  indur  (Pp.  aksdr ),  the 

editors  of  the  Samhita  misunderstood  aksdh, 


as  the  form  would  originally  have  been 
pronounced  at  the  end  of  an  internal  Pada. 
■udho  for  udhar ,  which  appears  before  a 
and  m,  is  due  to  the  influence  of  neuters 
in  as,  the  pause  form  of  which,  -ah,  would 
be  the  same  as  of  those  in  -ar.  The  form 
avd,  for  avdr  ‘down’,  which  appears  be¬ 
fore  d  {avo  divdh  V.  406,  etc.;  but  before 
m,  avdr  mahdh,  I.  I336)>  (^ue  1°  the 
influence  of  pdro  divdh  and  pdro  diva  (for 
paras),  cp.  RPr.  I.  32.  avo  before  a,  d,  m, 
explained  by  Benfey  (SV.  XL  and  176)  as 
standing  for  dvar  is  probably  from  vas- 
‘shine’  (cp.  Wackernagel  i,  p.  335, 
top). 

5  Cp.  above  62,  I. 


II.  Euphonic  Combination.  Compounds. 


73 

frequently  remains;  thus  vanar-sdd-  and  vanar-sdd-  ‘sitting  in  the  wood’; 
dhur-sdd-  ‘being  on  the  yoke’;  svar-sd-  ‘winning  light’;  svcir-sdti-  ‘acquisition 
of  light’;  dhur-sah-  (VS.)  ‘bearing  the  yoke’.  This  indicates  that  it  originally 
remained  before  sibilants  in  sentence  Sandhi  also. 

80.  Initial  aspiration.  —  The  palatal  sibilant  s'  and  the  breathing  hy 
when  initial,  may  under  certain  conditions  be  changed  to  aspirates. 

a.  After  a  final  c,  initial  /  may  become,  and  in  practice  always  does 

become,  c/i;  e.  g.  ydc  chaknavama  (x.  21 2 3)  for  ydd  saknavama.  The  same 

change  occasionally  takes  place  after  /;  thus  vipdt  chutudri  (hi.  331).  for 
sutudri ;  turdsdt  dins  mi  (v.  404)  for  susmi. 

b.  After  a  final  voiced  mute,  initial  h  may  be  and  usually  is  changed 

to  the  aspirate  of  that  mute;  e.  g.  tad  dhl  (1. 1262)  for  tad  hi ;  sidad  dhotd 

(x.  121)  for  sidad  (=  sidat)  /iota ;  dvad  tihavydni  (x.  1612)  for  havydni. 

81.  Sandhi  of  compounds1.  —  The  euphonic  combination  at  the  junction 
of  the  members  of  compounds  is  on  the  whole  subject  to  the  rules  prevailing 
in  external  Sandhi  or  between  words  in  a  sentence.  Thus  the  evidence  of 
metre  shows  that  contracted  vowels  are  often  even  in  compounds  to  be  read 
with  hiatus,  when  the  initial  vowel  of  the  second  member  is  in  a  heavy 
syllable;  e.  g.  yukta-asva-  ‘having  yoked  horses’,  devd-iddha -  ‘kindled  by  the 
gods’,  dccha-ukti-  ‘invitation’.  Many  archaisms  of  Sandhi  are,  however,  preserved 
in  compounds  which  have  either  disappeared  from  or  are  obsolescent  in  the 
sentence. 

1.  An  earlier  stage  of  Sandhi  has  been  preserved  by  compounds  alone 
in  the  following  instances: 

a.  Several  old  phonetic  combinations  appear  in  single  words:  dvi-bdrha- 
jman-  ‘having  a  double  course’  for  dvi-barhaj-jman-  (=  *dvi-bdrhad-  from 
bdrh-as ,  with  -ad  for  -as  before  the  voiced  palatal)2;  barhi-sdd-  ‘sitting  on 
the  sacrificial  litter’  (from  barhis-  for  barhis-sad-)’,  vis-pdti-  ‘lord  of  the  house’ 
and  vis-pdtni-  ‘mistress  of  the  house’  (with  s'  retained  instead  of/;3,  sam-rdj- 
‘sovereign  ruler’  (with  m  preserved  before  r)  L 

b.  In  a  group  of  compounds  with  dus-  ‘ill’  as  first  member,  the  combi¬ 
nations  du-d  =  duz-d  and  du-n  —  duz-11  appear  instead  of  dur-d  and  dur-n  : 
du-ddbha-  ‘hard  to  deceive’,  du-dhi-  ‘malevolent’,  du-nasa-  ‘hard  to  attain’,  du- 
ndsa-  ‘hard  to  attain’  and  ‘hard  to  destroy’,  du-dds-  (AV.)  ‘not  worshipping’. 
But  dur -,  the  form  which  would  be  required  by  external  Sandhi,  is  already 
commoner  in  the  RV.;  e.  g.  dur-drsika-  ‘looking  bad’,  dur-dhdr-i-tu-  ‘hard 
to  restrain’,  dur-ndman-  ‘having  a  bad  name’,  dur-ndsa-  (AV.)  ‘hard  to  attain’. 

c.  Final  r  in  the  first  member  is  preserved  in  the  RV.  before  voiceless 
sounds5 *;  thus  var-karyd-  ‘producing  water’,  svar-caksas-  ‘brilliant  as  light’, 
pdr-pati-  ‘lord  of  the  stronghold’,  svdr-pati-  ‘lord  of  heaven’,  dhur-sdd ‘being 
on  the  yoke’. 

d.  Radical  stems  ending  in  -ir  and  -ur  mostly  lengthen  their  vowel 
before  consonants  (as  within  words),  e.  g.  dhur-sdd-  ‘being  on  the  yoke’,  dhur- 
sah-  (VS.)  ‘bearing  the  yoke’,  phr-pati-  ‘lord  of  the  stronghold’,  pur-bhid- 
‘breaking  down  forts’,  pur-bhidya-  n.  ‘destruction  of  forts’,  pur-ydna-1  ‘leading 
to  the  fort’. 


1  See  Benfey,  Gottingische  Abhandlungen 
15,  105  ff. ;  WACKERNAGEL  21,  I25 — 1 39. 

2  Cp.  above  44  a,  3. 

3  Later  vif-pati- { TB.  11.  5.  74),  and  even  in 
the  RV.  pdd-bisa-  ‘fetter’  from  pas-  ‘bind’. 

4  Otherwise  Anusvara,  as  in  s  am -raj  ant  am. 

5  While  in  external  Sandhi  it  would  be¬ 

come  Visarjaniya  or  a  sibilant. 


6  External  Sandhi  gradually  encroaches 
here  in  the  later  Samhitas,  as  in  svah-pati- 
(SV.).  On  punah.-  for  punar-  in  punah-sard-, 
dntas-  for  dntar-  in  dntas-patha-,  and  antah- 
in  antah-peya-  see  Wackernagel  21,  1267, 
note,  and  above  79,  2  a. 

7  But  gir  retains  the  short  vowel  in  gir- 
vanas-  ‘fond  of  praise’,  gir-vahas-  ‘praised  in 


74 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


e.  As  first  member  of  a  compound  dyu-  ‘heaven’  appears  as  div-  before 
vowels 1  (while  yu  would  in  external  Sandhi  become  yv),  as  d'v-isti-  ‘striving 
for  heaven’,  div- it-  ‘going  to  heaven’. 

2.  Compounds  in  the  Samhitas  preserve  many  euphonic  archaisms  which, 
while  still  existing  in  external  Sandhi,  disappear  from  the  sentence  in  later 
periods  of  the  language  though  still  partially  surviving  in  compounds. 

a.  A  final  consonant  disappears  before  the  same  consonant  when  the 
latter  is  the  initial  of  a  group:  upa{s)-stha-  ‘lap’,  nd(k)-ksatra -  ‘star’, 
hr{d)-dyotd-  (AY.),  an  internal  disease,  hr{d)-dydtana  (AV.)  ‘breaking  the 
heart’ 2. 

b.  A  final  sibilant  disappears  before  a  mute  followed  by  a  sibilant, 
as  in  divd-ksa-  ‘heavenly’  (‘ruling  over  heaven’,  div-ds ,  gen.)3. 

c.  A  sibilant  as  initial  of  the  second  member  is  retained  ;  thus  scandra- 
‘bright’  in  puru-scandrd-  ‘much-shining’  and  many  other  compounds,  but  almost 
invariably  candrd -  as  an  independent  word4. 

d.  A  final  5  in  the  first  member  or  an  initial  5  in  the  second  is 
cerebralized;  e.  g.  dus-idra-  ‘invincible’,  nis-tdkvarl-  (AY.)  ‘running  away’, 
dus-svdpnya-  ‘evil  dream’. 

e.  An  original  n  in  the  second  member  is  cerebralized  after  a  r  r  s 
with  the  necessary  phonetic  restrictions  (47)  a.  In  derivatives  from  verbs  com¬ 
pounded  with  prepositions  containing  r,  initial,  medial,  or  final  n  of  the  root 
is  almost  invariably  cerebralized  in  the  Samhitas;  thus  nir-nij-  ‘bright  garment’, 
pari-hnuta-  (AY.)  ‘denied’  (  \f  /mu-),  parJ-ndh-  ‘enclosure’,  pary-a-naddha-  (AV.) 
‘tied  up’,  pra-ni-  and  pra-netr-  ‘leader’,  pra-mti-  ‘guidance’,  prana-  ‘breath’, 
prdnana-  and  pranatha-  (VS.)  ‘respiration’  {an-  ‘breathe’).  The  cerebralization 
appears  even  in  suffixes,  as  pra-ydna-  ‘advance’5. 

In  other  compounds  n  greatly  predominates  when  the  second  member 
is  a  verbal  noun;  e.  g.  grdma-ni-  ‘chief  ol  a  village’,  dur-gdni  ‘dangers’;  nr- 
pdna-  ‘giving  drink  to  men’,  pitr-ydna-  ‘trodden  by  the  fathers’,  pur-ydna-  (AY.) 
‘leading  to  the  fort’,  rakso-hdn-  ‘demon-slaying’,  vrtra-hdn-  ‘Vrtra-slaying’.  The 
cerebralization  fluctuates  in  - yavan :  thus  pratar-ydvan-  ‘going  out  early’, 
vrsa-pra-yavan-  ‘going  with  stallions’,  but  puro-ydvan-  ‘going  in  front’,  subhra- 
y avan-  ‘going  in  a  radiant  chariot’;  also  in  purTsa-vdhana-  (VS.)  and  purTsa- 
vdhana-  (TS.  K.)  ‘removing  rubbish’.  Cerebralization  never  takes  place 
in  -ghn-}  the  weak  form  of  -ban-  ‘killing’;  nor  in  aksa-ndh-  ‘tied  to  the  axle’, 
kravya-vdhana -6  ‘conveying  corpses’,  carma-mnd-  ‘tanner’,  yusmd-mta-  ‘led 
by  you’. 

y.  The  cerebralization  takes  place  somewhat  less  regularly  when  the 
second  member  is  an  ordinary  (non-verbal)  noun;  e.  g.  uru-nasd-  ‘broad-nosed’, 
tri-nava-  (VS.)  ‘consisting  of  three  times  nine  parts’,  tri-naman-  (AV.)7  ‘having 
three  names’,  dru-ghana-  ‘mallet’,  nr-mdnas-  ‘friendly  to  men’,  puru-nama?i- 
‘many-named’,  purvahnd-  ‘forenoon’,  prd-napat-  ‘great-grandson’.  There  is 


song’.  The  long  vowel  in  dn-asTr-da-  ‘not 
fulfilling  expectation’,  dsir-dti-  and  dsir-ddya- 
‘fulfilment  of  a  benediction’  is  due  to  analogy, 
as  d-sis-  is  derived  from  the  root  sds-. 

1  dyu-  remains  before  consonants:  dyu-ksa 
dyu-ga-t-,  dyu-bhakta-. 

2  Also  in  external  Sandhi  t a  dyam  (AV. 
IV.  196)  for  tad  dyam. 

3  Also  in  external  Sandhi  adha  ksaraniir 
(vu.  342),  cp.  above  78,  2  d. 

4  Divergence  from  external  Sandhi  is 
sometimes  not  archaic  but  due  to  innovation; 


as  go-  ‘cow’  instead  of  gav-  before  vowels, 
e.  g.  gd-agra-  ‘headed  by  cows’ ;  cp.  Wacicer- 
NAGEL  21,  p.  129  e.  Another  kind  of  inno¬ 
vation  in  compounds  is  due  to  haplology; 
cp.  Wackernagel  1,  24 1  a  (1;  21,  p.  128 
bottom. 

5  There  are  a  few  exceptions:  pari-pana- 
‘drink’,  pary-uhyamdna -  ‘being  led  home’ 
(y/vah-),  pra-pma-  (VS.)  ‘distended’. 

6  Like  havya  vahana-  ‘conveying  oblations’. 

7  The  later  Samhitas  always  have  n  after 
tri-,  while  the  RV.  always  has  n ;  as  tri- 


II.  Euphonic  Combination.  Compounds 


75 


fluctuation  when  dus-  ‘ill’  assumes  the  later  Sandhi  form  of  dur as  dur - 
ndman-  ‘having  a  bad  name5,  dur-hanu-  ‘having  ugly  jaws’,  but  dur-iiiydntu- 
‘hard  to  restrain’1;  also  in  vdrdhra-nasa-  (TS.)  ‘rhinoceros’  and  vardhn-nasd- 
(VS.)  ‘having  streaks  on  the  nose’;  sri-manas -  (TS.)  and  sri-manas-  (VS.) 
‘well-disposed’. 

But  /;  often  remains  in  this  type  of  compound:  initially  in  krpd-nlla- 
< whose  home  is  splendour’,  candrd-nirnij-  ‘having  a  brilliant  garment’,  varsd- 
nirnij-  ‘clothed  with  rain’,  tvesd-nrmna-  ‘of  brilliant  power’,  dirghd-nitha -,  N.  of 
a  man,  punar-nava-  ‘again  renewed’,  babhru-mkasa-  (VS.)  ‘looking  brownish’, 
vrsa-ndbhi-  ‘having  a  mighty  nave’;  medially  in  rsi-manas-2  ‘inspired’,  indragni 
‘Indra  and  Agni’,  kscitra-vdni-  (AV.)  ‘addicted  to  military  rule’,  ‘ brdhma-vani -  (VS.) 
‘well  disposed  to  the  priesthood’,  catur-amka-  ‘four-faced’,  try-a?ukd-  ‘three¬ 
faced’,  jyotir-amka- 3  ‘having  a  shining  face’,  citra-bhdnu-  ‘having  bright  lustre’, 
dhruvd-yoni-  (VS.)  ‘having  a  fixed  abode’,  pra-mdnas -  (AV.)  ‘careful’,  hdri- 
manyu-sdyaka- 4  (RV.  x)  ‘stimulating  the  mettle  of  the  bays’. 

f.  The  final  vowel  of  the  first  member  is  often  lengthened.  This 
frequently  occurs  before  v-\  e.  g.  annd-vrdh-  ‘prospering  by  food’,  pratT  vartd- 
(AV.)  ‘returning  into  itself,  prd-vrs-  5  ‘rainy  season’.  It  is  often  due  to  the 
rhythmical  tendency  (which  also  prevails  in  the  sentence)  to  lengthen  a 
vowel  before  a  single  consonant  between  two  short  syllables;  e.  g.  ahi-suva -, 
N.  of  a  demon  (from  a  hi-),  uru-nasa-  ‘broad-nosed’,  rta-sdk-  (VS.)  ‘maintaining 
the  sacred  law’,  pain-nasa-  (AV.)  ‘having  a  nose  like  a  spearhead’,  nagha-risd- 0 
(AV.)  N.  of  a  plant’,  ratha-sdh-  ‘able  to  draw  the  car’.  Lengthening  of  a 
vowel  between  other  than  two  short  syllables  is  less  common,  being  probably 
due  to  imitation  of  compounds  in  which  the  long  vowel  is  produced  by  the 
normal  rhythm;  e.  g.  dhanva-sdh-  ‘skilled  in  archery’  and  vibhvd-sah -‘overcoming 
the  rich’  like  ratha-sdh -;  sahdsrd-magha-  ‘having  a  thousand  gifts’  like  s'atd- 
mag/ia-  ‘having  a  hundred  gifts’.  The  interchange  of  short  and  long  is  entirely 
regulated  by  the  rhythmic  principle  in  sand-  ‘of  old’  and  almost  entirely  in 
tuvi-  ‘much’;  e.  g.  sand-jur-  ‘long  since  aged’  and  saiia-srata-  ‘famous  of  old’, 
tuvT-maghd-  ‘very  rich’  and  tuvi-badhd-  ‘killing  many’ 1 .  The  final  vowel  of 
prepositions  is  particularly  often  lengthened  in  the  later  Samhitas  without 
reference  to  rhythm,  especially  before  nouns  ending  in  -a  with  long  radical 
vowel,  e.  g.  nT-vid-  (AV.)  ‘liturgical  invitation’,  ab/u-mo da-mud-  (AV.)  ‘excessively 
joyful’,  ni-nahd-  (AV.)  ‘girth’,  prati-bodha-  (AV.)  ‘vigilance’,  z n-barhd-  (AV.) 
‘scattering’.  Sometimes  the  final  vowel  is  left  unlengthened  between  two 
short  syllables;  e.  g.  rayi-pdti-  ‘lord  of  wealth’,  ghrta-duh-as  (voc.  pi.)  ‘yielding 
ghee  ’ 8. 

g.  On  the  other  hand,  final  a  and  T  of  the  first  member  are  often 
shortened  before  a  group  of  consonants  or  a  long  syllable;  e.  g.  anuva- 
cdtana-  (AV.)  ‘driving  away  disease’  and  amwa-hdn-  ‘destroying  disease’  ( dmlvd -) ; 
drna-mradas-  ‘soft  as  wool’  (n-rnd-)  and  *urna-vabhi-  ‘spinning  wool’,  ‘spider’, 
in  the  patronymic  aurnavabhd -;  kaksya-prd-  ‘filling  out  the  girth’  (kaksya-) ; 


ncikd-  ‘third  heaven’,  tri-nabhi-  ‘having  three 
naves’. 

1  The  AV.  here  always  has  the  cerebral, 
as  dur-nihita-  ‘badly  kept’. 

2  But  nr-mdnas-  ‘friendly  to  men’  and 
vrsa-manas-  ‘  m  an  1  y -  s p i  r i  t e  d  ’ . 

3  But  purv-anika -  ‘having  many  faces’. 

4  But  vfsa-manyu-  (RV.  i)  ‘vigorous- 
minded’. 

5  Cp.  Wackernagel  I,  42. 

6  Beside  nagha-mara-  (AV.)  X.  of  a  plant. 


7  Cp.  also  prd-sdh-  and pra-sah-  ‘victorious’. 
The  long  vowel  in  the  former  is  probably 
historic,  =  IE.  pro. 

8  The  vowel  is  originally  long,  in  as/a- 
‘eiglit’,  probably  also  in  acchd-  ‘to’  and 
visvd-  ‘all’,  and  may  be  differently  ex¬ 
plained  in  a-deva-  ‘hostile  to  the  gods’, 
a-rupila -  (tv.  57)  meaning,  and  a -sat-;  see 
Wackernagel  21,  d.  131,  note. 


76 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


sena-jit-  (VS.)  ‘vanquishing  armies’  (. sena -);  gduri-viti-  N.  of  a  seer  (from 
gauri ),  prthivi-stha-  ‘standing  on  the  earth’;  even  before  a  short  syllable 
in  prthivi-sdd-  (AV.)  and  prthivi-sdd-  (VS.)  ‘sitting  on  the  earth’  ( prthivi -), 
sdrasvati-krta-  (VS.)  ‘made  by  Sarasvati’1. 

82.  Extension  of  external  to  internal  Sandhi.  —  The  rules  of  sentence 
Sandhi  as  applied  between  members  of  a  compound  are  often  found  to  affect 
the  internal  form  of  words. 

a.  Nominal  (chiefly  secondary)  suffixes  with  initial  consonants  are 
frequently  treated  like  the  second  member  of  a  compound;  e.  g.  beside 
duvas-yu-  ‘worshipping’,  appears  duzo-yu-2.  This  influence  extends  even  to 
radical  finals  before  primary  suffixes;  e.  g.  dn-na-  ‘food’  for  dd-na-;  san-ndm 
for  sat-nctm ,  from  sets-  ‘six’;  ndmo-bhis ,  from  namas-  ‘obeisance’,  with  0  for  ad 
(as  in  usdd-bhis  from  usds-  ‘dawn’)3;  havih-su 4  for  havis-su,  from  havis- 
‘oblation’;  jigl-vdms-  for  jigi-vdms-  ‘having  conquered’,  with  radical  final 
lengthened  as  in  sentence  Sandhi. 

b.  In  the  verb  the  influence  of  sentence  Sandhi  is  seen  in  reduplicated 
forms.  Thus  parallel  with  the  lengthening  of  final  syllables  in  the  sentence, 
the  final  radical  vowel  is  made  long  before  the  ending  -hi  in  didlhi  beside 
the  more  usual  didihi ,  from  dT-  ‘shine’.  The  rhythmical  lengthening  in  the 
reduplicated  aorist  is  probably  due  to  a  similar  influence. 

III.  ACCENT. 

Roth,  Nirukta  lvii— lxxii:  Ueber  die  Elemente  des  indischen  Accentes  nach  den 
Praticakhja  Sutren.  —  Benfey,  Vollstandige  Grammatik  p.  9 — 13.  —  Whitney,  ‘On  the 
nature  and  designation  of  the  accent  in  Sanskrit’,  Transactions  of  the  American  Philo¬ 
logical  Association,  1869 — 70;  Oriental  and  Linguistic  Studies  2,  318  ff. ;  Sanskrit  Grammars, 
p.  28 — 33;  see  also  General  Index,  s.  v.  ‘Accent’.  —  Haug,  Ueber  das  Wesen  und  den 
Werth  des  wedischen  Accents,  Munchen  1873  (cp.  Weber,  Indische  Streifen  3,  335  ff.; 
Whitney,  JAOS.  10,  ix  ff.,  cm  f.).  — Wackernagel,  Altindische  Grammatik  1,  243  d. — 
Cp.  also  PIirt,  Der  indogermanische  Akzent,  Strassburg  1895,  an(f  Akzentstudien  in  IF. 
vi — IX;  Brugmann,  Ivurze  vergleichenae  Grammatik  I  (Strassburg  1902),  p.  52 — 66. 

Besides  the  Pratisakhyas  several  other  native  authorities  refer  to  the  accent.  Panini 
and  his  commentators  give  an  account  of  it;  all  the  Sutras  of  Panini  relating  to  accentu¬ 
ation  are  collected  in  a  chapter  of  the  Siddhanta-kaumudl  called  vaidika-svara-pra kriya 
‘section  on  the  Vedic  accent’.  The  accent  is  further  dealt  with  in  the  Bhasikasutra,  in 
the  Pratijhasutra,  in  the  Siksas,  and  as  regards  the  position  of  the  accent  in  individual 
words,  in  the  Unadisutras  and  especially  in  the  Phitsutras. 

83.  General  character  of  the  Vedic  accent.  —  In  Vedic  literature 
sacred  texts  only,  primarily  all  the  Samhitas  5  have  been  handed  down  in  an 
accented  form.  Of  all  other  sacred  texts,  only  those  to  which  a  special 
importance  was  attached,  have  preserved  the  accent.  These  are  the  Taittirlya 
Brahmana  (together  with  its  Aranyaka)  and  the  Satapatha  Brahmana  (including 
the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad).  There  is,  however,  evidence  to  show  that  the 
Pancavimsa  Brahmana6  and  other  Brahmanas  were  at  one  time  accented7. 


1  On  the  relation  of  this  shortening  to 
the  lengthening  in  the  same  position,  and 
its  probable  explanation,  see  Wackernagel 
2b  P-  135  (56  g). 

2  Hence  the  Padapatha  treats  a  nominal 
stem  which  takes  a  suffix  with  initial  consonant 
like  the  first  member  of  a  compound, 
separating  it  from  the  suffix  by  Avagraha; 
e.  g.  duvahSyuh  for  dttvoyiih ;  adriSvah  for 
adrivah,  voc.,  ‘armed  with  a  bolt’;  iit’dbhih 
for  iittbhis  ‘with  aids’. 

3  See  above  44  a,  3. 


4  See  57,  1. 

5  The  Mss.  of  the  Kathaka  are  so 
defective  as  regards  accentuation  that  L.  v. 
Schroeder  found  it  possible  to  print  parts 
only  of  his  edition  of  the  text  (vol.  I,  1900) 
with  accents. 

6  Weber,  Indische  Studien  10,  421;  cp. 
Max  Muller,  ASL.  348;  Burnell,  Sama- 
vidhana  Brahmana  p.  VI.  The  Mantra  parts 
of  the  AitareyaAranyaka  are  accented  (Keith’s 
ed.  p.  10). 

7  The  Suparnadhyaya,  an  artificially  archaic 


III.  Accent.  General  Character  of  Vedic  Accent.  7  7 


The  Sutras,  though  not  themselves  accented,  occasionally  accent  the  Mantras 
which  they  quote. 

The  Vedic  accent,  like  that  of  ancient  Greece,  was  of  an  essentially 
musical  nature.  This  is  indicated  by  the  fact  that  the  accent  exercises  no 
influence  on  the  rhythm  of  versification.  The  phoneticians  of  the  Prati¬ 
sakhyas,  in  describing  it,  speak  only  of  its  pitch,  which  is  also  indicated  by 
the  name  of  the  chief  tone,  ud-atta  ‘raised’,  ‘high’1.  But  that  the  Vedic  accent 
was  accompanied  by  some  stress2,  is  shown  by  certain  phonetic  changes  which 
cannot  otherwise  be  explained3. 

In  the  Vedic  accent  three  degrees  of  pitch  may  be  distinguished:  the 
high,  properly  represented  by  the  udatta ,  the  middle  by  the  svarita  (‘sounded’), 
and  the  low  by  the  an-udatta  (‘not  raised’).  That  the  Udatta  originally 
denoted  the  highest  pitch  in  the  oldest  form  of  the  Vedic  language,  is 
shown  by  the  evidence  of  Comparative  Philology,  and  especially  of  Greek 
which,  as  far  as  its  peculiar  laws  of  accent  will  admit,  has  the  acute  on  the 
same  syllable  as  in  the  Vedic  language  has  the  Udatta  (e.  g.  A  if  og  :  divas ; 
surd  :  saptd ;  ox  to:  :  astdu).  This  conclusion  is  also  supported  by  the  method 
of  marking  the  Udatta  in  the  Samaveda,  the  Maitrayani  Samhita,  and  the 
Kathaka.  In  the  Rgveda,  however,  the  Udatta  has  a  middle  pitch,  lower 
than  that  of  the  Svarita,  as  is  shown  both  by  the  way  in  which  it  is  marked 
and  by  the  account  given  of  it  in  the  Pratisakhyas.  This  must  be  an  innovation, 
though  an  old  one. 

The  Svarita  is  a  falling  accent  of  a  dependent  nature,  marking 
the  transition  from  an  accented  to  a  toneless  syllable.  It  regularly  follows 
an  Udatta,  to  the  rise  of  which  its  fall  corresponds  in  pitch.  It  assumes  an 
independent  appearance  when  the  preceding  Udatta  is  lost  in  consequence  of 
the  vowel  that  bears  the  Udatta  being  changed  to  a  semivowel  in  Sandhi. 
It  is  described  in  Panini  1.  2 31 4  as  a  combination  of  Udatta  and  Anudatta, 
which  means  that  it  falls  from  the  high  pitch  of  the  acute  to  the  low  pitch 
of  unaccented  syllables.  According  to  the  RV.  Pratisakhya  and  the  TS. 
Pratisakhya,  however,  the  first  part  of  the  Svarita  sounds  higher  than  the 
Udatta.  This  means  that,  instead  of  falling  immediately  from  the  high  pitch 
of  the  preceding  Udatta,  it  first  rises  somewhat  before  falling  to  low  pitch5. 
It  would  thus  have  something  of  the  nature  of  a  circumflex  in  the  RV.;  only 
the  rise  in  pitch  above  the  highest  level  of  the  Udatta  is  but  slight  (corre¬ 
sponding  to  the  initial  rise  of  the  Udatta  from  Anudattatara  to  Anudatta 
level),  while  the  fall  corresponds  to  the  total  rise  of  the  Udatta0.  The  low 
tone  of  the  syllables  preceding  an  accented  syllable  (with  Udatta  or  Svarita) 
is  called  an-udatta  ‘not  raised’  in  the  Pratisakhyas7.  When  it  follows  a 
Svarita  it  is  called  the  pracaya 8  ( svara ),  or  ‘accumulated  pitch’  (as  several 
such  unaccented  syllables  often  occur  in  succession)  which  continues  at  the 
low  level  reached  by  the  preceding  Svarita  till  the  syllable  immediately 


poem  composed  in  the  style  of  the  Vedic 
hymns,  is  also  accented,  but  with  many 
mistakes;  see  Grube’s  edition  in  Indische 
Studien,  vol.  XIV. 

1  Cp.  Haug,  op.  cit.  19. 

2  The  Vedic  accent,  like  the  Greek,  was, 
after  the  beginning  of  our  era,  changed  to 
a  stress  accent  which,  however,  unlike  the 
modern  Greek  stress  accent,  did  not  remain 
on  the  original  syllable,  but  is  regulated  by 
the  quantity  of  the  last  two  or  three  syllables, 
much  as  in  Latin;  cp.  Haug  99,  end. 


3  See  Wackernagel  1,  21S  and  cp.  Ost- 
hoff,  Morphologische  Untersuchungen  4,  73. 

4  In  agreement  with  VPr.  I.  126;  APr.  1. 
17;  cp.  Haug  73. 

5  See  Oldenberg,  Prolegomena  483  f. 

6  According  to  Panini’s  account  the  Svarita 
does  not  rise  above  Udatta  pitch  before 
falling;  see  Oldenberg,  loc.  cit. 

7  See  RPr.  111.  1 ;  cp.  Haug  9L. 

8  Haug  92  f. 


78  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

preceding  the  next  accent1 2.  The  latter  syllable,  called  sanna-tara  ‘lower’  or 
anudatta-tara 2  ‘more  lowered’,  sinks  somewhat  below  this  monotone. 

84.  Methods  of  marking  the  accent.  —  The  accent  is  maiked  in  the 
Vedic  texts  in  four  different  ways. 

1.  The  system  of  the  Rgveda  is  followed  also  by  the  Atharvaveda 3, 
the  TaittirTya  Samhita  (along  with  its  Brahmana)  and,  with  only  slight  devia¬ 
tions  in  the  treatment  of  the  Svarita,  by  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita.  This  system 
is  peculiar  in  not  marking  the  principal  accent  at  all.  The  explanation  is 
doubtless  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  the  pitch  of  the  Udatta  is  in  the  RV. 
intermediate  between  that  of  the  other  two  tones.  Hence  the  preceding 
Anudatta,  as  having  low  pitch,  is  marked  by  a  horizontal  stroke  below  the 
syllable,  while  the  following  Svarita,  as  rising  to  a  higher  pitch,  is  marked 
by  a  vertical  stroke  above  the  syllable4;  e.  g.  agnina  —  agnina.  The 

presence  of  successive  Udattas  at  the  beginning  of  a  hemistich  is  recognizable 
by  the  absence  of  all  marks  till  the  Svarita  which  follows  the  last  of  them, 
or  the  Anudatta  which  follows  the  last  of  them  and  precedes  the  next  accented 
syllable;  thus  rTT'tfT  SHH*?  tav  a  yatam  =  tdv  d  ydtam ;  tavet  tat  salyarn  =  tdvct 
tat  satydm.  On  the  other  hand,  all  the  unaccented  syllables  at  the  beginning  of  a 
hemistich  are  marked;  e.  g.  —  vaihanaram  =  vaisvdnardm .  But  all  the 

syllables  following  a  Svarita  remain  unmarked  till  the  one  immediately  preceding 
the  next  Udatta  or  Svarita;  e.  g.  it  imam  me  gauge 

yamune  sarasvati_  sutndri  =  imam  tne  gauge  yamune  sarasvati  sutudri 5. 

a.  The  hemistich  being  treated  as  the  unit  with  regard  to  accentuation6, 
the  marking  of  the  Anudatta  and  of  the  Svarita  is  not  limited  to  the  word 
containing  the  Udatta  which  those  accents  precede  and  follow  respectively7. 
Hence  the  final  syllable  of  one  word  may  be  marked  with  an  Anudatta  as 
preceding  an  Udatta  of  the  next  initial  syllable;  or  the  initial  syllable  of  one 
word  may  be  marked  with  the  Svarita  following  the  Udatta  at  the  end  of 
the  preceding  word;  e.  g.  tpfttBRfftrfvTT  purvebhir  rsibhir  =  pdrvebhir  f  sib  him, 

yajham  ctdhvaram  =  yajfidm  adhvardm .  But  if  an  initial  syllable 
after  a  final  Udatta  precedes  an  accented  syllable,  it  loses  the  enclitic  Svarita 
and  must  be  marked  as  Anudatta;  e.  g.  devam  rtvijam  =  devdm 

rtvijam. 

b.  If  an  independent  Svarita8  precedes  an  Udatta,  it  is  marked  with  the 
numeral  (1)  when  its  vowel  is  short,  and  with  B  (3)  when  it  is  long,  the 
figures  receiving  both  the  sign  of  the  Svarita  and  that  of  the  Anudatta9  which 
precedes  an  Udatta;  e. g.  4  nT'  —apsv  dutdr;  irar  B  cjfW:  =  rdyo  ’vanih. 
The  phenomenon  is  described  by  the  phoneticians  with  the  words  karnpa 


1  See  Oldenberg,  Prolegomena  485,  end. 

2  Sanna-tara,  APr.  I.  43 ;  anudatta-tara  in 
Kasika  vrtti  on  Panini  1.  2  4°. 

3  The  Mss.  of  the  AV.,  however,  show 
considerable  variations;  see  Whitney's 
Translation  p.  cxxt  ff. 

4  In  the  Kashmir  Ms.  of  the  RV.  the 
Udatta  and  the  independent  Svarita  only 
are  marked,  the  former  by  a  vertical  stroke 
above  the  accented  syllable,  the  latter  by  a 
hook  (c\)  above  the  accented  syllable;  see 
Scheftelowitz,  Die  Apokrvphen  des  Rgveda 
48  ff. 

5  Cp.  IdAUG,  op.  cit.  92  f. 

6  brom  the  point  of  view  of  the  sentence 

accent  the  Pada  is  the  unit;  thus  a  verb  or 

vocative  is  alwrays  accented  at  its  beginning. 


7  In  the  Padapatha,  on  the  other  hand, 
each  word  receives  its  natural  accent  only, 
so  that  where  the  one  text  has  a  Svarita, 
the  other  may  have  an  Anudatta;  e.  g.  in 
I.  l3  the  Samhita  has  rayim  asnavqt ,  the 
Pada  rayim  asnavat  (the  latter  word  being 
unaccented  has  the  Anudatta  marked  under 
each  syllable). 

8  Examples  of  independent  Svarita  are 
svar  for  suar ;  kva  for  kua ;  viryam  for  viriam . 
‘Independent’  Svarita  in  the  above  rule  is 
intended  to  include  that  which  results  from 
change  to  a  semivowel  ( ksaipra ),  from 
contraction  (praslis/a)  and  from  elision  of  a 
( abhinihita ). 

9  The  long  vowel  before  the  ^  receives 
the  Anudatta  stroke  as  well. 


III.  Accent.  Method  of  marking  Accent.  79 

‘quaver’,  vikampita ,  and  the  verb  pra-kamp-.  In  the  TS.  it  appears  only  when 
the  second  syllable  as  well  as  the  first  has  the  Svarita,  and  the  figure  2,  as 
well  as  1  and  3,  is  here  used. 

2.  In  the  system  of  the  Maitrayani  Samhita1  and  of  the  Kathaka2, 
the  Udatta  is  marked  by  a  vertical  stroke  above  (which  seems  to  indicate 
that  this  accent  was  here  pronounced  with  the  highest  pitch);  e.  g. 

=  agnina.  The  two  Samhitas,  however,  diverge  in  their  method  of  indicating 
the  Svarita.  The  MS.  marks  the  independent  Svarita  by  a  curve  below  the 
accented  syllable,  e.  g.  ghra  viryam)  but  the  dependent  Svarita  by  a  horizontal 
stroke  in  the  middle  or  three  vertical  strokes  above  the  accented  syllable. 
The  Kathaka,  on  the  other  hand,  marks  the  independent  Svarita  by  a  curve 
below  (if  an  unaccented  syllable  follows),  e.  g.  ciyifk  viryam  badhnati ; 
or  by  a  hook  below  (if  an  accented  syllable  follows)  e.  g.  effij  zmwz  viryam 
zydcaste;  but  the  dependent  Svarita  by  a  dot  below  the  accented  syllable3. 
Both  these  Samhitas  mark  the  Anudattatara  in  the  ordinary  way  by  a  stroke 
below  the  syllable.  I11  L.  v.  Schroeder’s  editions,  however,  the  Udatta  and 
the  independent  Svarita  only  are  marked.  When  the  text  of  any  of  the 
Samhitas  is  transliterated  in  Roman  characters,  it  is  the  regular  practice  to  omit 
any  indication  of  the  dependent  Svarita  and  of  the  Anudatta  as  unnecessary. 

3.  In  the  system  of  the  Samaveda,  the  figures  123  are  written 
above  the  accented  syllables  to  represent  three  degrees  of  pitch.  Here 
1  always  stands  for  the  highest  pitch  (Udatta),  and  3  always  for  the 
lowest  (Anudatta),  and  2  generally  for  the  middle  pitch  (Svarita);  e.  g. 

3  12 

barhisi  —  RY.  barhisi  {bar hist).  But  2  also  represents  the  Udatta  when 

the  latter  is  not  followed  by  a  Svarita  (that  is  when  the  Udatta  syllable  is 

final  in  the  hemistich  or  when  an  Anudattatara  preceding  another  accented 

32  ;  3  2  3  ^  2  3  1  2  . 

syllable  follows);  e.  g.  gird  —  RV.  gird  (gird)-,  yajhdnam  hotd  visvesaih 

—  RV.  yajhdnam  hota  visvesdm  { yajhanam  hotd  visvesdm).  If  there  are  two 

successive  Udattas,  the  second  is  not  marked,  but  2  r  is  written  over  the 

3  1  2r 

following  Svarita;  e.g.  dviso  martyasya  =  RV.  dviso  martyasya  (< dviso  mdrtyasya). 
If  in  such  case  there  is  no  room  for  2r,  the  first  Udatta  has  2U  written  over 

3  2U  3  1  2 

it  instead;  e.  g.  esa  sya  pltaye  =  RV.  esa  sya  pit  aye  ( esa  syd  pltdye).  The 
independent  Svarita  (as  well  as  the  dependent  one  which  follows  two  successive 
Udattas)  is  marked  with  2r;  and  the  Anudatta  which  precedes  it,  with  3  k; 

3k  2  r 

e.  g.  tanvd.  Syllables  which  follow  a  Svarita  and  in  which  the  pitch  remains 

31  2  312 

unchanged,  are  left  unmarked;  e.  g.  dutam  vrnlmahe  hotaram  =  RV.  dutam 
vrnlmahe  hotaram  ( dutam  vrnlmahe  hotaram ) 4. 

4.  Though  the  Brahmanas  do  not  come  within  the  scope  of  this  work, 
the  system  of  accentuation  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana  cannot  be  passed 
over  here,  as  it  must  be  treated  in  connexion  with  the  other  systems  of  the 
Vedic  period.  It  is  historically  important  as  forming  a  transition  to  the  post- 
Vedic  period,  when  the  accent  assumed  a  different  character5.  The  system 
of  the  SB.  in  various  respects  differs  considerably  from  the  three  de¬ 
scribed  above. 


1  See  Haug  27  —  32;  L.'  v.  Schroeder,  1  On  some  peculiarities  of  the  VS.  in 

Introduction  to  his  edition  1,  p.  XXIX — xxxiv;  marking  the  Svarita,  see  Haug  32 — 35. 
ZDMG.  33,  186  IT.  1  4  f  or  further  details  see  Haug  35 — 42. 

2  Cp.  L.  v.  Schroeder,  Introduction  to  his  5  Cp.  Leumann,  KZ.  31,  50  (mid.), 

edition,  2,  p.  x — XI. 


So  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


a.  Its  chief  peculiarity  is  that  it  marks  only  the  main  accent,  the 

Udatta.  This  is  done  by  means  of  a  horizontal  stroke  below  the  accented 
syllable;  e.  g.  purusah.  If  there  are  two  or  more  successive  Udattas, 

only  the  last  is  marked;  e.  g.  agnir  hi  vai  dhur  qtha  =  agnlr  hi  vdi  dhhr 
dtha.  When,  however,  an  Udatta  is  thrown  back  as  the  result  of  Sandhi,  an 
immediately  preceding  Udatta  is  also  marked;  e.  g.  so  \ 'gnim  evabhiksamdnah 
—  so  ’ 'gnim  evabhiksamdnah ,  where  evabhi-  stands  for  evabhi-  =  end  abhi-. 
Two  successive  syllables  are  also  sometimes  marked  when  a  compound  receives 
a  secondary  Udatta;  e.  g.  spy  hay ad- varnah,  for  sprhaydd-varnah . 

b.  An  independent  Svarita  is  thrown  back  on  the  preceding  syllable 
in  the  form  of  an  Udatta;  e.  g.  manusyesu ,  that  is,  manusyesu  for  manusyesu. 
The  Svarita  resulting  from  change  to  a  semivowel  (, ksaipra ),  from  contraction 
( praslista ),  or  elision  of  a  (. abhinihita ),  is  similarly  treated;  e.  g.  katham  nv 
imam ,  that  is,  katham  nv  imam  for  kathdin  nv  imam;  evaitad,  that  is,  evaitad 
from  evd  etdd ;  te  ’ rcantaJi ,  that  is,  te  ’rcaniah  for  te  drcantah. 

When,  however,  the  prepositions  d  and  prd ,  and  final  a  in  the  first 
member  of  a  compound,  combine  with  an  unaccented  vowel,  the  contracted 
syllable  retains  the  Udatta;  e.  g.  ehi  (==  d  ihi);  prdha  (=  prd  aha)',  citroti- 
(=>  citrd-uti-)  ‘bestowing  wondrous  gifts’. 

c.  Before  a  pause  an  accented  syllable  may  lose  its  Udatta  or 
receive  a  reduced  accent  marked  with  three  dots,  if  the  initial  syllable 
after  the  pause  has  an  Udatta  or  independent  Svarita;  e.  g.  sa  bhagah  \sqmsthite, 
for  sd  bhagd/i  |  sdmsthite.  The  penultimate  syllable  may  also  be  thus  reduced; 
e.  g.  juhoti | [ qt/ia,  for  juhoti\\dt ha.  This  may  occur  even  when  the  following 
initial  syllable  is  unaccented;  e.  g.  napsu\\apq,  for  ndpsu  1 1  apd. 

d.  Reduplicated  forms  or  long  compounds  accented  on  the  first  syllable 
or  prior  member,  sometimes  receive  a  secondary  accent  near  the  end  of 
the  word;  e.  g.  balballti ,  that  is  bdlbaliti  for  bdlbaliti ;  eka- catvarimsat ,  that  is, 
eka-catvariinsdt  for  eka-catvarimsat.  Sometimes,  in  such  case,  the  primary 
accent  itself  is  lost;  e.  g.  eka-saptatih  beside  eka-saptatih.  Somewhat  analogous  to 
this  double  accentuation  of  compounds  is  the  frequent  accentuation  of  both 
verbal  prefix  and  verb  at  the  same  time;  e.  g.  abhi gopayed  (cp.  109).  Finally, 
the  accent  occasionally  appears  on  a  syllable  different  from  that  on  which  it 
usually  rests.  The  irregularities  mentioned  here  (d)  are  much  commoner  in 
Books  x— xiii  than  in  the  earlier  Books;  they  are  commonest  of  all  in  xiv1. 

85.  Normal  accentuation  of  words.  —  As  a  general  rule,  every  Vedic 
word  is  both  accented  and  has  one  main  accent  only.  The  Udatta  is  the 
only  main  accent  in  the  original  text  of  the  Rgveda.  It  is  generally  found 
on  the  syllable  which,  according  to  the  evidence  of  Comparative  Philology2,  bore 
it  in  the  Indo-European  period3.  Sometimes,  however,  the  Udatta  is  secondary, 
being  a  substitute  for  the  independent  Svarita  (itself  the  result  of  an  original 
Udatta).  Thus  there  is  already  a  tendency  in  the  RV.  to  change  a  final 
Svarita  into  a  final  Udatta:  the  vocative  dycius  (=  diaus)  ‘O  Heaven’,  appears 
as  dydus  (vm.  8912);  aryci-  (==  aria-)  ‘kind’,  occurring  only  once  (1.  1231), 
otherwise  and  very  frequently  appears  as  aryd-;  thus,  too,  svdn-  ‘dog’,  was 
probably  at  one  time  svdn-  for  suan-  (Gk.  /cucov),  which  would  explain  the 


1  For  further  details,  see  Haug,  43—48; 
Leumann,  Die  accentuation  des  ()atapatha- 
Brahmana,  IvZ.  31,  22— 51 ;  cp.  also  Wacker- 
nagel  i,  252;  Bhasikavrtti,  ed.  by  Kiel- 
horn  IS.  10,  397  ff. 

2  Cp.  Brugmann.  KG.  45,  r. 

3  Under  the  influence  of  analoew  the 

o  ^ 


Vedic  Udatta  shifted,  in  a  few  instances,  to 
other  syllables  in  the  Brahmanas  and  in 
Panini’s  system;  thus  sapid,  SB.  and  C. 
sdpia,  astau,  C.  dsiair,  AV.  VS.  SB.  tild- 
‘sesamum’,  C.  til  a- ;  sidati  ‘sit’,  C.  also  sidati ; 
AV.  gdhvara -  ‘deep’,  C.  gahvard-. 


III.  Accent.  Normal  Accentuation  of  Words. 


8i 


abnormal  accentuation  sitnas  etc.  instead  of  the  regular  accentuation  *sunds  etc. 
prevailing  in  monosyllabic  stems  (93).  Or  the  final  Svarita  is  thrown  back 
as  an  Udatta  on  the  preceding  syllable:  thus  mitrya-  ‘friendly’,  beside  mitrya-  k 

In  some  Yedic  words,  however,  the  only  accent  which  is  written  is  the 
‘independent'  Svarita,  by  the  native  phoneticians  called  the  ‘genuine'  ( jatya )1 2 
or  also  the  ‘invariable’  ( nitya ).  Always  following  a  y  or  v.  it  is,  however, 
just  as  much  due  to  a  preceding  Udatta  (lost  by  the  change  of  1  and  u  to 
y  and  v),  as  the  dependent  Svarita  is;  e.  g.  kvd  (=  kua)  ‘where?’;  svcir 
(=  sudr,  TS.  suvar )  ‘light’;  rathydm  (=  rathiam ,  from  rathi-  ‘charioteer’); 
tanvam  (=  tanucun  from  tantt-  body’);  ok-ya-  (=  ok-ia-)  ‘belonging  to  home’; 
vasav-yd-  (=  vasav-id-)  ‘wealthy’.  In  reading  the  RV.  the  original  vowel  with 
its  Udatta  must  be  restored  except  in  a  very  few  late  passages3. 

a.  Double  accent.  Contrary  to  the  general  rule  that  a  word  has  a 
single  accent  only,  a  certain  class  of  infinitives  and  a  special  type  of  compounds 
have  a  double  accent4.  The  infinitives  in  -tavai,  of  which  more  than  a  dozen 
examples  occur,  accent  both  the  first  and  the  last  syllable;  e.  g.  e-tavai 
‘to  go’,  dpa-bhartavdi  ‘to  take  away’.  The  Udatta  on  the  final  syllable  is 
probably  to  be  explained  as  a  secondary  accent  like  that  of  the  SB.  in 
intensives  and  compounds  ( bdlbaliti ,  eka-catvarimsdt ,  cp.  84,  4  d),  where  an 
accent  at  the  beginning  of  a  word  is  counterbalanced  by  another  at  the  end. 

A  good  many  compounds  of  a  syntactical  type,  in  which  both  members 
are  duals  in  form  or  in  which  the  first  member  is  nearly  always  a  genitive  in 
form,  accent  both  members;  e.  g.  mitrd-vdruna  ‘Mitra  and  Varuna’,  bfhas-pdti- 
‘Lord  of  prayer’5. 

b.  Lack  of  accent.  Contrary  to  the  general  rule  that  every  word  is 
accented,  some  words  never  have  an  accent,  while  others  lose  their  accent 
under  special  conditions. 

1.  The  following  are  invariably  enclitic : 

a.  pronouns:  tv  a-  ‘another’;  sama-  ‘some’;  ena-  ‘he’,  ‘she’6;  me,  D.  G., 
‘of  or  to  me’;  ma ,  A.,  ‘me’;  new ,  du.  A.  D.  G.,  ‘us  two’,  etc.;  nas,  A.  D.  G., 
‘us’,  etc.;  te,  D.  G.,  ‘of  or  to  thee’;  tva ,  A.,  ‘thee’;  vam,  A.  D.  G.,  ‘ye  two’, 
etc.;  vas,  A.  D.  G.,  ‘you’,  etc.;  Ini,  slm  ‘him’,  ‘her’,  ‘it’,  ‘them’,  etc.;  kis  ‘some 
one’  in  nd-kis ,  md-kis  ‘no  one’;  kirn  in  d-Jzim  ‘from’,  nd-klm ,  mdi-kun  ‘never'. 

£?.  particles:  ca  ‘and’;  u  ‘on  the  other  hand’;  va  ‘or’;  iva  ‘like3,  ‘as  it 
were’;  kam  ‘indeed’  (after  nu ,  sit,  hi)-,  gha ,  ha  ‘just’  (emphasizing);  cid  ‘at  all’; 
bhala  ‘indeed’;  sama-ha  ‘somehow’;  sma  ‘just’,  ‘indeed’  (almost  invariably  with 
the  present  tense);  svid  ‘probably’. 

2.  The  following  classes  of  forms  or  individual  words  are  subject  to  loss 
of  accent  according  to  their  position  or  function  in  the  sentence: 

a.  vocatives,  unless  beginning  the  sentence  or  Pada. 

(j.  finite  verbs,  in  principal  clauses,  unless  beginning  the  sentence 
or  Pada. 

y.  all  oblique  cases  formed  from  the  demonstrative  pronoun  a-, 
when  used  merely  to  replace  a  preceding  substantive,  and  not  occurring  at 
the  beginning  of  a  sentence  or  Pada;  e.  g.  asya  jdnimani  ‘his  (i.  e.  Agni’s) 
births’  (but  asyd  usdsa/i  ‘of  that  Dawn’). 


1  Cp.  the  accentuation  of  the  SB.,  84,  4  b. 
In  Panini’s  system  of  accentuation  this 
tendency  went  still  further;  thus  V.  vTrya- 
(=  viria-),  becomes  in  C.  virya- ;  and  the 
gerundive  in  -tavya  (=  - tav'ia )  appears  in 
C.  as  -tavya  also. 

2  RPr.  in.  4,  VPr.  1.  ill  f.;  cp.  Haug  75. 

Indo-arische  Philologie.  I.  4. 


3  Cp.  Benfey,  Gott.  Abhandlungen  27, 
3 1  ff. 

4  In  the  Brahmanas  also  the  particle  vavd- 

5  See  below,  on  the  accentuation  of 
compounds,  91. 

5  The  A.  sing.  f.  occurs  once  (vm.  6*9) 
accented  at  the  beginning  of  a  Pada  as  enam. 


82  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


8.  yatha  ‘as’,  when  used  in  the  sense  of  iva  ‘like’,  ‘as  it  were’,  at  the 
end  of  a  Pada;  e.  g.  tayavo  yatha  (1.  502)  ‘like  thieves’. 

£.  nd  ‘not’,  when  followed  by  hi  ‘for’1,  the  two  particles  being  treated 
as  one  word;  e.  g.  nahi  tva  .  .  .  invatah  (1.  io8)  ‘for  the  two  do  not 
restrain  thee’;  similarly  when  combined  with  the  particle  nu  ‘now’  :  na-nu 
‘certainly  not’. 


1.  Accentuation  of  Nominal  Stems. 

86.  A.  In  primary  derivation  no  general  law  for  the  accentuation  of 
nominal  suffixes  can  be  stated;  but  there  is  a  tendency,  when  -a,  -ana,  -as, 
-an,  -ma?i  are  added,  to  accent  the  root  in  action  nouns,  and  the  suffix  in 
agent  nouns;  and  in  nouns  formed  with  -as  and  -man  difference  of  gender 
is  to  some  extent  accompanied  by  difference  of  accent. 

1.  Root  stems  when  reduplicated  or  compounded  with  prepositions  as 
a  rule  retain  the  accent  on  the  radical  syllable;  e.  g.  juhd-  ‘tongue’  and 
‘ladle’,  yavT-yudh-  ‘eager  to  fight’;  pra-neni-  ‘guiding  constantly’.  In  stems 
formed  with  intensive  reduplication,  however,  the  reduplicative  syllable  is 
sometimes  accented;  thus  jdgii-  ‘singing  aloud’,  vdmvan-  ‘desiring’,  ddridra- 
(VS.)  ‘roving’.  The  prefix  is  accented  in  ava-sa-  ‘deliverance’,  upa-stu-t-  ‘in¬ 
vocation’,  pdri-jri-  ‘running  round’2. 

2.  When  the  suffix  -a  is  added,  the  root  is  accented  in  action  nouns, 
but  the  suffix  in  agent  nouns;  e.  g.  ved-a-  ‘knowledge’,  sisndth-a-  ‘perforation’; 
but  cod-d-  ‘instigator’,  cacar-d-  ‘moveable’ 3.  When  there  is  a  verbal  prefix,  the 
final  syllable  is  as  a  rule  accented;  e.  g.  sam-gam-a-  m.  ‘coming  together’.  In 
a  few  of  these  compounds,  however,  the  root  is  accented,  as  ut-pdt-a-  (AV.) 
‘portent’,  a-sres-a -  (AV.)  ‘plague’;  and  in  some  others  (mostly  agent  nouns) 
the  prefix:  d-bhag-a-  ‘sharing’,  prdti-ves-a-  ‘neighbour’,  vy-os-a-  (AV.)  ‘burning’, 
sam-kas-a-  (AV.)  ‘appearance’. 

3.  The  suffix  -ata  is  always  accented  on  the  final  syllable;  e.  g.  dars- 
atd-  ‘visible’,  pac-atd-  ‘cooked’,  yaj-atd-  ‘to  be  adored’. 

4.  Of  the  participial  suffixes  -at  and  -ant  the  former  is  never  accented 
when  the  sense  is  verbal;  e.  g.  ddd-at-  ‘giving’,  dds-at-  ‘worshipping’.  A  few 
old  participles,  however,  which  have  become  substantives,  have  shifted  the 
accent  to  the  suffix:  vah-dt-  ‘stream’,  vegh-at-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘barren  cow’,  vagh-at- 
‘sacrificer’,  srav-at-  ‘stream’,  sasc-dt-  ‘pursuer’.  The  suffix  -ant  is  accented  in 
the  present  participle  of  the  second  (450)  and  sixth  (429)  classes  and  of 
the  denominative  (562),  e.  g.  ad-dfit- ,  tud-ant -,  aghay-dnt-;  in  the  future  (537), 
e.  g.  dasy-dnt-  (AV.);  in  the  root  aorist,  e.  g.  bhid-ant-  and  sometimes  in  the 
(2-aorist,  e.  g.  vrdh-dnt-\  also  in  the  old  present  participles  which  have  become 
adjectives,  rh-dnt-  ‘weak’,  brh-ant-  ‘great’,  and  (with  lengthened  vowel)  mah- 
dnt-  ‘great’. 

5.  The  suffix  -an  is  generally  accented;  e.  g.  uks-an-  m.  ‘bull’,  ud-dn-  n. 
‘water’.  The  radical  syllable  is,  however,  not  infrequently  accented;  e.  g. 
rdj-an -  m.  ‘king’,  fldh-an-  n.  ‘udder’. 

6.  Stems  formed  with  -ana  predominantly  accent  the  root;  e.  g.  kdr-ana- 
n.  ‘act’,  cod-ana-  (AV.)  ‘impelling’.  The  final  syllable  is,  however,  accented 
fairly  often;  e.  g.  kar-ana-  ‘active’,  kros-ana-  ‘yelling’,  ksay-ana-  (VS.)  ‘habitable’, 
tvar-ana-  (AV.)  ‘hastening’,  roc-ana-  ‘shining’  (AV.),  n.  ‘light’,  svap-ana-  (VS.) 
‘sleepy’.  The  penultimate  is  also  accented  in  several  words:  the  substantives 


1  The  SB.,  however,  accents  both  particles; 
cp.  Leumann,  KZ.  31,  22. 


2  Cp.  Whitney  1147  g- 

3  Cp.  Whitney  1148;  Lindner  p.  34. 


III.  Accent.  Accentuation  of  Nominal  Stems.  83 

kir-ana-  m.  ‘dust’,  krp-ana-  n.  ‘misery’  (but  krp-ana-  ‘miserable’  AV.),  dams- 
dna-  n.  ‘great  deed’,  vrj-ana-  n.  ‘enclosure’,  ves-dna-  n.  ‘service’;  and  the 
adjectives  tur-ana-  ‘hastening’,  doh-ana-  ‘milking’,  bhand-dna-  (VS.  TS.) 
‘rejoicing’,  man-ana-  ‘considerate’,  mand-ana-  ‘joyful’,  saks-dna-  ‘overcoming’. 
When  the  stem  is  compounded  with  a  verbal  prefix,  the  root  is  nearly  always 
accented;  e.  g.  sam-gamana-  ‘gathering  together’;  but  the  final  syllable  is 
accented  in  vi-caksand-  ‘conspicuous’,  upari-sayand-  (AV.)  ‘couch’. 

7.  The  suffix  - ana ,  whether  forming  the  feminine  of  adjectives  in  -ana 
or  f.  action  nouns,  is  always  accented  either  on  the  penultimate  or  the  final 
syllable;  e.  g.  tur-ana-  ‘speeding’,  spand-and-  (AV.)  ‘kicking’;  arh-dna-  ‘merit’, 
jar-anti-  ‘old  age’.  The  word  prt-anti-  ‘fight’  is  irregularly  accented  on  the 
radical  syllable. 

8.  The  suffix  -ani  is  always  accented,  either  on  the  final  or  the  pen¬ 
ultimate  syllable;  e.  g.  dyot-ani-  ‘brilliance’;  as-dni-  ‘missile’. 

9.  The  suffix  -am  being  the  feminine  form  of  action  and  agent  nouns 
in  -ana,  is  similarly  accented;  e.  g.  pes-ani-  (AV.)  ‘beautiful’  ( pes-ana -).  The 
accent  is,  however,  sometimes  shifted  to  the  final  syllable;  e.  g.  tap-ani-  ‘heat’ 
( tap-ana -). 

10.  Stems  formed  with  the  suffix  -as  accent  the  root  if  they  are  action 
nouns,  but  the  suffix  if  they  are  agent  nouns;  e.  g.  dp-as-  n.  ‘work’,  but  ap-ds- 
‘active’.  There  are  also  some  masc.  substantives  with  the  accent  on  the  suffix; 
e.  g.  raks-ds-  m.  beside  rdks-as-  n.  ‘demon’. 

11.  The  suffix  -a,  forming  action  nouns  from  roots  and  secondary  con¬ 
jugation  stems,  is  invariably1  accented;  e.  g.  nind-ti-  (AV.)  ‘blame’;  jigTs-ti- 
‘desire  to  win’;  gamay-ti-  (AV1.)  ‘causing  to  go’;  asvay-ti-  ‘desire  for  horses’. 

12.  The  suffix  -ana,  forming  middle  participles,  is  normally  accented  on 
the  final  syllable;  e.  g.  ad-tind-  ‘eating’.  Reduplicated  stems,  however,  regularly 
accent  the  first  syllable;  e.  g.  ddd-ana-  ‘giving’,  johuv-tina-  ‘invoking’.  A  few 
others  accent  the  root;  e.  g.  cit-ana-  (AV1.)  ‘shining’,  dyut-tina-  (RV1.)  ‘beaming’ 
(beside  the  usual  dyut-tind-) 2.  There  are  also  a  few  adjectives  and  substantives 
ending  in  -tina  in  which  the  primary  character  of  the  suffix  or  the  derivation 
of  the  word  is  doubtful.  These  also  accent  the  first  syllable;  e.  g.  vdsav-ana- 
‘possessing  wealth’,  pars-tina-  m.  ‘abyss’3. 

13.  No  general  rule  can  be  stated  regarding  the  suffix  -/,  either  the 
suffix  or  the  root  being  accented  with  about  equal  frequency;  e.  g.  tij-l-  ‘race’, 
grtih-i-  ‘seizure’.  Action  nouns  used  as  infinitives,  however,  regularly  accent 
the  suffix;  e.  g.  drs-dye  ‘to  see’.  Reduplicated  derivatives  tend  to  accent  the 
initial  syllable;  e.  g.  cakr-i-  ‘active’;  while  stems  compounded  with  a  preposition 
usually  accent  the  final  syllable;  e.  g.  para-dad-i-  ‘delivering  over’. 

14.  Stems  formed  with  the  superlative  suffix  -istha  regularly  accent  the 
root;  e.  g.  ydj -istha-  ‘sacrificing  best’.  The  only  exceptions  are  jyesthd-  when 
meaning  ‘eldest’  (but  jyestha-  ‘greatest’)  and  kan-isthd-  ‘youngest’  (but  kdn- 
istha-  ‘smallest’,  TS.  B).  When  the  stem  is  compounded  with  a  preposition 
the  latter  is  accented;  e.  g.  ti-gam-istha-  ‘coming  best’. 

15.  The  suffix  -is  is  nearly  always  accented;  e.  g.  arc- is-  ‘flame’.  The 
exceptions  are  tim-is-  ‘raw  flesh’,  jyot-is-  ‘light’,  and  vydth-is-  ‘course’ (?). 

16.  The  few  action  and  agent  nouns  formed  with  the  suffix  -r,  are 
accented  either  on  the  root  or  the  suffix;  e.  g.  deh-i-  ‘rampart’,  sac-T- 
‘power’. 

1  If  jangha -  ‘leg’  is  formed  with  this  !  3  See  below,  Nominal  stem  formation, 

suffix,  it  is  the  only  exception.  under  - ana -  (130). 

2  See  Lindner  p.  54,  top. 

6* 


84 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


17.  Stems  formed  with  the  comparative  suffix  -lyams  invariably  accent 
the  root;  e.  g.  jav-Tyams -  ‘swifter’.  When  the  stem  is  compounded  with 
a  preposition  the  latter  is  accented;  e.  g.  prati-cyav-Tyams-  ‘pressing  closer 
against’. 

18.  The  suffix  -u  is  usually  accented;  e.  g.  nr-u-  ‘wide’,  pad-u-  m.  ‘foot’. 
The  radical  syllable  is,  however,  not  infrequently  accented;  e.g.  tdk-u- ‘speeding’, 
ds-u-  m.  ‘life’.  The  suffix  is  regularly  accented  in  adjectives  formed  from 
desiderative,  causative,  and  denominative  stems;  e.  g.  dips-u-  ‘wishing  to  harm’, 
bhavay-u-  ‘cherishing’,  aghay-u-  ‘malignant’. 

19.  Substantives  formed  with  the  suffix  -us  regularly  accent  the  root 
(excepting  jan-us-  ‘birth’);  e.  g.  dhan-us-  ‘bow’.  But  a  few  adjectives  which 
are  never  used  as  substantives  accent  the  suffix;  e.  g.  jay-us-  ‘victorious’,  but 
tdp-us-  both  ‘hot’  and  ‘heat’. 

20.  The  suffix  -u  forming  independent  feminine  substantives  is  regularly 
accented;  as  cam-ti-  ‘dish’,  vadh-tt-  ‘bride’. 

21.  When  the  suffix  -ta  forms  past  passive  participles  it  is  invariably 
accented;  e.  g.  ja-ta-  ‘born’,  raks-i-td-  ‘protected’.  But  a  few  ordinary  nouns 
formed  with  this  suffix  accent  the  radical  syllable:  e-ta-  ‘variegated’;  m. :  gdr-ta- 
‘car-seat’,  mar-ta -  ‘mortal’,  vdi-ta-  ‘wind’,  hds-ta -  ‘hand’;  n. :  ds-ta-  ‘home’, 
?idk-ta-  ‘night’. 

22.  Stems  formed  with  the  suffix  -tar  generally  accent  the  root  when 
the  meaning  is  participial,  but  the  suffix  when  it  is  purely  nominal;  e.  g. 
dd-tar-  ‘giving’  (with  acc.),  but  dd-tar-  ‘giver’. 

23.  Stems  formed  with  the  suffix  -ti  accent  the  root  more  frequently 
than  the  suffix;  e.  g.  is-ti-  ‘offering’,  ksi-ti-  (AV.)  ‘destruction’,  dhfc-ti-  m.  ‘shaker’, 
but  is-ti-  ‘desire’,  ksi-ti-  ‘abode’,  jna-ti-  m.  ‘relative’,  rd-ti-  ‘gift’.  Reduplicated 
derivatives  seem  to  have  accented  either  the  first  syllable  or  the  suffix;  e.  g. 
didhi-ti-  ‘devotion’  and  carkr-ti-  ‘fame’.  When  these  stems  are  compounded 
with  prepositions,  the  latter  are  nearly  always  accented;  e.  g.  d-hu-ti-  ‘offering’; 
the  only  exceptions  are  a-sak-ti-  ‘pursuit’,  d-su-ti-  ‘brew’  and  ‘enlivening’,  and 
abhi-s-ti-  m.  ‘helper’  beside  abhi-s-ti-  f.  ‘help’. 

24.  Derivatives  formed  with  the  suffix  -fig  with  some  half  dozen 
exceptions,  accent  the  root  (invariably  when  they  are  used  as  infinitives);  e.  g. 
tan-tu-  ‘thread’,  but  ak-tu-  ‘ray’. 

25.  The  suffix  -tnu  is  always  accented;  e.g.  ha-tnu-  ‘deadly’,  jigha-tnu- 


‘harming’. 

26.  Derivatives  formed  with  the  suffix  -fra  generally  accent  the  root; 
e.  g.  mdn-tra-  ‘prayer’,  but  ksa-trd-  ‘dominion’. 

27.  Gerundives  formed  with  the  suffix  -tva  regularly  accent  the  root; 
e.  g.  kdr-tva-  ‘to  be  made’,  vak-tva-  ‘to  be  said’,  bhdv-i-tva-  ‘future’. 

28.  Derivatives  formed  with  the  suffix  -tha  generally  accent  the 
latter;  e.  g.  uk-thd-  n.  ‘saying’.  Sometimes,  however,  the  root  is  accented; 
e.  g.  ar-tha-  ‘goal’.  When  the  suffix  is  added  with  the  connecting  vowel  -a-, 
the  latter  is  generally  accented;  e.  g.  uc-d-tha-  n.  ‘praise’. 

29.  The  suffix  -na  when  forming  past  passive  participles  is  invariably 
accented;  e.  g.  bhin-nd-  ‘split’.  When  forming  ordinary  nouns,  whether 
adjectives  or  masc.  substantives,  it  is  usually,  accented;  e.g.  r-nd-  ‘guilty’, 
ghr-iid-  m.  ‘heat’;  but  a  few  masculines  accent  the  root,  as  kdr-na-  ‘ear’, 
var-na-  ‘colour’,  svdp-na-  ‘sleep’.  Neuters  (except  su-nd-  ‘welfare’)  and  feminines 
{-no)  accent  the  root;  e.  g.  dn-na -1  ‘food’,  tf-na-  ‘grass’,  trs-nd-  ‘thirst’. 


1  Originally  a  past  participle  of  ad-  ‘eat’. 


III.  Accent.  Accentuation  of  Nominal  Stems.  85 

30.  Derivatives  formed  with  -ni  accent  either  the  root  or  the  suffix; 
e.  g.  yo-ni-  m.  ‘receptacle’,  but  ag-?il-  m.  ‘fire’. 

31.  The  suffix  -nu  is  almost  invariably  accented;  e.  g.  vag-nu -  ‘sound’. 
An  exception  is  vis-na- T,  N.  of  god. 

32.  Derivatives  formed  with  the  suffix  -ma  accent  the  suffix  more  than 
twice  as  often  as  the  root;  e.  g.  tig-md-  ‘sharp’,  ghar-ma-  ‘heat’,  dhu-md- 
‘smoke’,  but  fi-ma-  ‘friend’,  so-ma -  ‘Soma’. 

33.  Derivatives  formed  with  -man  regularly  accent  the  root  in  neuter 
substantives;  e.  g.  kdr-man-  ‘action’,  jdn-man-  ‘birth’,  nd-man -  ‘name’.  There 
are,  however,  several  masculine  agent  nouns  which  accent  the  suffix;  e.  g. 
dar-mdn-  ‘breaker’.  In  several  instances  the  accent  varies  in  the  same  word 
according  to  the  gender  and  meaning;  e.  g.  brdh-man-  n.  ‘prayer’,  brah-m bu¬ 
rn.  ‘one  who  prays’;  sdd-man-  n.  ‘seat’,  sad-mdn-  m.  ‘sitter’.  These  stems  when 
compounded  with  prepositions  nearly  always  accent  the  latter;  e.g.  prd-bharman- 
n.  ‘presentation’. 

34.  The  participial  suffix  -mana  is  never  accented  except  in  the 
anomalous  perfect  participle  sasr-mand-  (RV1.)  =  sasr-ana-  ‘speeding’.  The 
accent  of  these  derivatives  is  regularly  on  the  same  syllable  as  in  the  tense- 
stem  to  which  the  suffix  is  added;  e.  g.  ydja-mana-  ‘sacrificing’,  icchd-mana- 
‘desiring’,  idhyd-mana-  ‘being  kindled’,  yaksyd-mana-  ‘about  to  sacrifice’. 

35.  Gerundives  formed  with  the  suffix  -ya  invariably  accent  the  root; 
e.  g.  hdv-ya-  ‘to  be  invoked’. 

36.  The  suffix  -ra  is  usually  accented;  e.g.  ak-rd-  m.  ‘banner’,  rud-rd -, 
m.  N.  of  a  god,  abh-rd-  n.  ‘cloud’.  The  root  is,  however,  accented  in  a  good 
many  words;  e.  g.  gfdh-ra-  ‘greedy’,  dj-ra-  m.  ‘field’,  ind-ra -,  N.  of  a  god, 
dg-ra-  n.  ‘point’. 

37.  Derivatives  formed  with  the  suffix  -ri  accent  the  root  oftener  than 
the  suffix;  e.  g.  bhd-ri-  ‘abundant’,  but  also  sn-ri-  m.  ‘patron’. 

38.  Derivatives  formed  with  the  suffix  -va  accent  the  suffix  rather 
oftener  than  the  root;  e.  g.  rk-vd-  ‘praising’,  but  also  fbh-va-  ‘skilful’. 

39.  The  root  is  regularly  accented  in  derivatives  formed  with  the  suffix 
- van ;  e.  g.  kr-t-van-  ‘active’,  pat-van-  ‘flying’,  yaj-van-  ‘sacrificing’.  This  is  the 
case  even  when  the  stem  is  compounded  with  a  preposition;  e.  g.  vi-mrg-van- 
(AY.)  ‘cleansing’. 

40.  The  suffixes  - t/ana }  - vanu ,  -vani  are  always  accented,  the  first 
two  on  the  final,  the  last  on  the  initial  syllable;  e.  g.  vag-vand-  ‘talkative’, 
vag-vanu-  m.  ‘noise’,  bhur-vdni-  ‘restless’. 

41.  Derivatives  formed  with  the  suffix  -vara  chiefly  accent  the  final 
syllable  when  they  are  masc.  nouns,  but  the  root  when  they  are  neuter 
substantives ;  e.  g.  i-t-vard-  ‘going’,  is-vard-  (AY.)  ‘able’,  but  kdr-vara-  n.  ‘deed’, 
gdh-vara-  (AY.)  n.  ‘thicket’.  The  suffix  appears  with  /  instead  of  r  in  the 
adjective  vid-vald-  ‘cunning’. 

42.  The  suffix  -vdms  of  the  perfect  participle  is  always  accented,  even 
in  the  reduced  form  -us  appearing  in  the  weak  cases;  e.  g.  cakr-vdms-  and 
cakr-us-  ‘having  made’. 

43.  Derivatives  formed  with  the  suffix  -vi  from  the  simple  root 
accent  the  radical  syllable,  but  the  first  syllable  of  the  reduplicated  root; 
thus  ghrs-vi-  ‘lively’,  but  jdgr-vi-  ‘watchful’. 

1  This  word  may,  however,  be  differently  altindischen  Sprache,  Amsterdam  1898;  cp. 
derived;  possibly  vi-snu -  ‘der  in  die  Weite  Bloomfield,  AJPh.  17,  427  fi,  ‘crossing  the 
strebende’,  according  to  Uhlenbeck,  Kurz-  back  (of  the  world)’, 
gefasstes  etymologisches  Worterbuch  der 


86 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache  .  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


44.  Derivatives  formed  with  the  suffix  -sa  sometimes  accent  the  root, 
sometimes  the  suffix;  e.  g.  grt-sa-  ‘adroit’,  ut-sa-  m.  ‘fountain’,  but  prk-sa- 
‘dappled’,  ghram-sd-  m.  ‘sun’s  heat’. 

45.  The  suffix  -snu  is  always  accented;  e.  g.  ji-snu-  ‘victorious’,  vrdh-a- 
snu-  ‘joyful’,  car-i-snu-  ‘wandering’,  ni-sat-snu-  ‘sitting  down’,  tapay-i-snu- 
‘tormenting’,  abhi-socay-i-snu-  (AY.)  ‘causing  torments’. 

B.  In  secondary  derivation  five  groups  of  stems  may  be  distinguished 
with  regard  to  accentuation:  a.  those  which  accent  the  suffix,  being  formed  with 
-ayand,  - dyl ,  -dyya,  -in,  - iya ,  -Jna,  - iya ,  -enl,  - enya ,  -ta,  - tav-ya ,  -tv a,  - tvd-ta , 

- tv  and ,  -md,  - mdya ,  -min,  -mnd,  -yin,  -vd,  -vdt,  -vald,  -vin ;  b.  those  in  which 
the  suffix  is  not  accented,  being  formed  with  -taya,  -tara,  -ta,  -tat,  -tati,  -tya, 
- vya ;  c.  those  in  which  only  the  first  syllable  is  accented,  being  formed  with 
-i  and  -nf;  d.  those  in  which  either  the  first  or  the  last  syllable  is  accented, 
being  formed  by  means  of  Vrddhi  with  the  suffixes  -eya,  -a  or  -na  (the  last 
two  also  without  Vrddhi);  e.  those  in  which  the  accent  is  sometimes  on  the 
suffix,  and  sometimes  on  one  or  other  syllable  of  the  primitive  stem,  being 
formed  with  the  suffixes  -a,  -ani,  -ima,  -I,  -ka,  -tana  or  -tna,  - tama ,  - tha , 
-bha,  - mant ,  -ya,  -ra,  -la,  -van,  -vant,  -vaya,  -sa.  The  following  is  a  detailed 
account  of  the  accent  in  derivatives  formed  with  the  above  secondary  suffixes 
in  their  alphabetical  order. 

1.  Stems  formed  with  the  suffix  -a  and  Vrddhi  of  the  first  syllable 
from  primitive  stems  ending  in  -a  are  predominantly  accented  on  the  final 
syllable.  This  is,  however,  mostly  the  case  when  the  primitive  is  accented 
on  any  syllable  other  than  the  last;  e.  g.  amitra-  ‘hostile’  from  amitra-  ‘foe’, 
narasamsd-  ‘belonging  toNara-samsa’,  saucadrathd-,  patronymic  from  sucdd-ratha- 
‘having  a  shining  car’,  pavamand-  ‘relating  to  the  clear-flowing  ( pdvamana -) 
Soma’.  In  several  instances,  however,  the  primitive  stem  is  also  oxytone, 
e.  g.  kausikd-  ‘belonging  to  Kusika’.  On  the  other  hand,  stems  formed  with 
Vrddhi  sometimes  accent  the  first  syllable,  when  the  primitive  is  otherwise 
accented;  e.  g.  mddhyamdina-  ‘belonging  to  midday’  (■ madhyam-dina -),  sdubhaga- 
n.  ‘luck’  from  su-bhdga-  ‘lucky’,  vddhryasva-  ‘descendant  of  Vadhryasva’.  The 
derivative  ddivodasa-  ‘belonging  to  Divodasa’  is,  however,  formed  from  a  stem 
similarly  accented  ( divo-dasa -). 

A  similar  rule  prevails  in  the  accentuation  of  stems  derived  from  other 
primitives  by  means  of  the  suffix  -a  and  Vrddhi  of  the  first  syllable;  e.  g. 
dyas-a-  ‘made  of  metal’  (ay as-) ,  saumanas-d-  ‘benevolence’  from  su-mdnas- 
‘ well-disposed’;  also  sometimes  from  stems  similarly  accented,  as  paidv-d- 
‘belonging  to  Pedu’.  On  the  other  hand,  the  first  syllable  is  accented 
in  derivatives  from  primitives  mostly  accented  on  the  last ;  e.  g.  pdrthiva- 
‘earthly’  from  prthivl-  ‘earth’,  mdghona-  ‘belonging  to  the  bountiful  one' 
0 maghdvan -);  but  sometimes  also  from  stems  similarly  accented,  as  ndhus-a- 
‘neighbouring’  from  ndhus-  ‘neighbour’.  The  accentuation  is  similar  when  the 
secondary  -a  is  added  without  Vrddhi;  e.  g.  parus-d-  ‘knotty’  from  parus- 
‘knot’,  but  hdrit-a-  ‘fallow’  from  harit-. 

2.  The  suffix  -d  forming  feminines  to  masculines  in  -a  retains  the  accent 
on  the  same  syllable  as  in  the  masculine;  e.  g.  priyd-  beside  priyd-  ‘dear’. 

3.  Stems  formed  with  the  somewhat  rare  suffix  -dm  accent  one  of  the 
last  three  syllables;  e.  g.  indrani-  ‘wife  oflndra’,  mudgalam-  ‘wife  of  Mudgala’, 
purukutsam-  ‘wife  of  Purukutsa’,  usmdrani-  ‘queen  of  the  Uslnaras’. 

4.  The  only  example  of  the  patronymic  suffix  -ayana  in  the  RV. 
kanv-ayana-  ‘descendant  of  Kanva’  is  unaccented  (occurring  in  the  voc. 
only);  the  final  syllable  seems  to  have  been  accented  judging  by  daks-ayand- 


III.  Accent.  Accentuation  of  Nominal  Stems. 


87 


(VS.  AV.)  ‘son  of  Daksa’,  and  the  fem.  rdmdyani-  (AV.)  ‘daughter  of  the 
Black  one’.  The  derivative  uksanydyana -,  N.  of  a  man,  is  unique  both  in 
accentuation  and  absence  of  Vrddhi. 

5.  The  suffix  -ayT  occurs  accented  on  the  first  syllable  only  in  agn-dyT- 
‘wife  of  Agni’;  vrsakap-ayT-  (RV1.)  ‘wife  of  Vrsakapi’,  occurring  in  the  voc. 
only,  is  unaccented. 

6.  The  suffix  -dyya-  forming  gerundival  adjectives  is  always  accented 
on  its  first  syllable;  e.  g.  pan-dyya-  ‘to  be  admired’. 

7.  Derivatives  formed  with  the  suffix  -i  and  Vrddhi,  being  almost 
exclusively  patronymics,  always  accent  the  first  syllable;  thus  dgnives-i-  ‘son 
of  Agnivesa’,  pdurukuts-i-  ‘descendant  of  Purukutsa’,  prdtardan-i-  ‘descendant 
of  Pratardana’,  prdhrcid-i-  (AV.)  ‘son  of  Prahrada’,  sdmvaran-i-  ‘descendant  of 
Samvarana’.  Similarly  formed  and  accented  is  sdratk-i-  ‘charioteer’  (from 
sa-rdtha-m  ‘on  the  same  chariot’).  Two  other  words,  formed  without  Vrddhi, 
take  the  secondary  tdpus-i-  ‘burning’  ( tdpus -  ‘heat’)  and,  accented  on  the 
final  syllable,  sucant-i -,  N.  of  a  man. 

8.  The  very  frequent  suffix  -in  forming  possessive  adjectives  is  always 
accented;  e.  g.  asv-iti-  ‘possessing  horses’,  dhan-in-  ‘wealthy’;  mams-bi-  ‘wise’; 
abhimat-in-  ‘insidious’.  The  adjective  sdk-hi-  ‘powerful’  occurs  once  accented 
on  the  first  syllable:  sdk-T  (1.  518);  the  accentuation  of  this  form  and  of  the 
two  nominatives  (each  occurring  once)  ir-T  ‘violent’  and  sdr-T  ‘speeding’  is 
perhaps  due  to  error. 

9.  The  accentuation  of  the  suffix  -ima,  which  is  attached  to  three 
stems  in  -tra-  and  to  one  in  -ra,  varies:  khanitr-ima-  ‘made  by  digging’, 
krtr-ima-  ‘artificial’,  putr-ima-  (AV.)  ‘purified’;  agr-imd-  ‘foremost’. 

10.  The  suffix  -iya  is  regularly  accented  either  on  its  first  or  its  second 
syllable;  e.  g.  abhr-iya-  and  abhr-iyd-  ‘derived  from  the  clouds’  ( abhra -), 
ksatr-iya-  ‘having  authority’  ( ksatrd -),  amitr-iya -  ‘inimical’  {a  mi  tra-  ‘foe’);  agr- 
iyd-  ‘foremost’,  indr-iyd-  ‘belonging  to  Indra’.  The  only  exceptions  are  ftv-iya- 
(AV.)  ‘being  in  season’  (rtu-),  beside  rtv-iya -,  and  srctr-iya-  (AV.)  ‘learned’ 
(srdira-  ‘learning’). 

11.  Derivatives  with  the  feminine  suffix  -/'  commonly  accent  the  same 
syllable  as  the  corresponding  masculines  (except  oxytones);  e.  g.  bhdvant-T- 
‘being’,  m.  bhdvant-.  But  the  feminine  in  -1  from  masculines  in  -a  that  are 
not  accented  on  the  final  syllable  usually  accents  the  -T  (and  follows  the 
radical  z-  declension);  e.  g.  rath-i-  ‘charioteer’  (m.  f.)  from  rdtha-  ‘chariot’.  The 
-T  is  also  accented  when  it  forms  the  fem.  of  masc.  oxytones  in  - 11 ,  e.  g. 
prthv4-  ‘broad’  ( prth-u -);  in  -ant,  e.  g.  usat-i-  ‘desiring’  (us-dnt-) ;  in  -tar,  e.  g. 
avitr-i -  ‘protectress’  ( avi-tdr -);  in  -anc  taking  Samprasarana,  e.  g.  pratic-i- 
‘facing’  ( praty-dnc -).  The  fem.  in  -z  from  masc.  oxytones  in  - a  sometimes 
retains  the  accent  on  the  suffix,  e.  g.  devi-  ‘goddess’  ( deua -  ‘god’),  but  more 
usually  throws  it  back  on  the  first  syllable,  e.  g.  arus-T-  ‘ruddy’  ( arusd -). 

12.  The  suffix  -met  is  generally  accented  on  its  first  syllable,  rarely  on 
its  last;  e.  g.  apde-ina-  ‘western’,  sanivatsar-ina-  ‘annual’;  pratTc-Tnd-  ‘turned 
towards’.  The  suffix  is  unaccented  only  in  mdk-ina-  (RV1.)  ‘mine’. 

13.  The  suffix  -Tya  is  always  accented  on  its  first  syllable;  e.  g.  drjlk- 
iya-  a  kind  of  Soma  vessel,  d/iavan-zya-  (AV.)  ‘sacrificial  fire’,  grhamedh-iya- 
‘relating  to  the  domestic  sacrifice’,  parvat-iya-  (AV.)  ‘mountainous’.  Similarly 
in  the  ordinals  dvit-iya-  ‘second’,  trt-lya-  ‘third’,  tur-iya-  ‘fourth’. 

14.  The  suffix  -ena  is  accented  on  the  final  in  its  only  occurrence  in 
the  feminine  form  samidh-eni-  ‘relating  to  fuel’  ( samidh -). 

15.  The  suffix  - enya ,  nearly  always  forming  gerundives,  regularly  accents 


88  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


its  first  syllable;  e.  g.  drs-enya-  ‘worthy  to  be  seen’.  The  only  exception  is 
vdr-enya -  ‘desirable’.  Similarly  accented  are  the  ordinary  adjectives  vir-enya- 
‘manly’  ( vird -)  and  kirt-enya-  ‘famous’  {klrtl-  ‘fame’). 

16.  Derivatives  formed  with  the  suffix  -eya  and  Vrddhi  accent  the  final 
syllable  when  they  have  a  patronymic  sense,  but  otherwise  the  first;  e.  g. 
ars-eya-  ‘descendant  of  a  seer’  (fsi-),  but  paurus-eya-  ‘relating  to  man’  ( puntsa -). 
The  analogy  of  the  gerundive  from  roots  ending  in  -a,  which  is  formed  with 
-eya  (e.  g.  deya-  ‘to  be  given’),  is  followed  by  didrks-Sya-  ‘worth  seeing’ 

( didrksd -)  and  sabh-eya-  ‘fit  for  an  assembly’  ( sabhd -). 

17.  Derivatives  formed  with  -ka  are  variously  accented.  Those  which 
have  a  diminutive  sense  regularly  accent  the  suffix;  e.  g.  arbha-kd-  ‘small’, 
kanma-kd-1  ‘youth’,  kumara-ka-  ‘little  boy’.  Otherwise  the  accent  sometimes 
remains  on  the  same  syllable  as  in  the  primitive;  e.  g.  anta-ka-  ‘making  an 
end’  (data-),  yusmd-ka-  ‘your’  (yusmd-) ;  or  it  shifts  to  the  suffix,  e.  g.  anya-kd- 
‘other’  ( anyd -),  sana-kd-  ‘old’  (sdna-);  or  to  the  first  syllable,  e.  g.  rdpa-ka-  (AV.) 
‘having  an  assumed  form’  (rupd-  ‘form’). 

18.  The  rare  suffix  -ta  is  regularly  accented:  eka-td-  (VS.)  ‘First’,  dvi-td- 
‘Second’,  tri-td-  ‘Third’  as  Proper  Names,  ava-td-  ‘well’,  muhur-td -  ‘moment’. 

19.  Derivatives  formed  with  the  suffix  -tana  or  its  syncopated  form  -tna 
are  variously  accented:  nfi-tana-  and  nu-tna-  ‘present’,  s ana-tana -  (AV.)  and 
sand-tna-  (AV.)  ‘lasting’,  pra-tnd-  ‘ancient’. 

20.  The  suffix  -tama  when  forming  superlatives  is  hardly  ever  accented2, 
the  primitive  nearly  always  retaining  its  original  accent;  e.  g.  tavds-tama -3 
‘very  strong’.  But  when  it  forms  ordinals  the  final  syllable  is  accented;  e.  g. 
sata-tamd -  ‘hundredth’. 

21.  A  few  adjectives  formed  with  -iaya  from  numerals  meaning  ‘consisting 
of  so  many  parts’,  accent  the  primitive:  cdtus-taya-  (AV.)  ‘fourfold’,  ddsa-taya- 
‘tenfold’. 

22.  The  suffix  -tara  forming  comparatives  is  hardly  ever  accented,  the 
primitive  retaining  its  original  accent;  e.  g.  rathi-tara-  ‘better  car-fighter’.  An 
exception  is  vrtra-tdra-  ‘a  worse  Vrtra’. 

23.  Derivatives  formed  with  -ta  regularly  accentuate  the  syllable  preceding 
the  suffix;  e.  g.  a-go-ta-  ‘want  of  cows’,  deva-ta -  ‘divinity’,  purusd-ta -  ‘human 
nature’.  The  only  exception  is  a-vira-ta-  ‘want  of  sons’. 

24.  Derivatives  formed  with  -tati  and  -tat  have  the  same  accentuation 
as  those  formed  with  -ta;  e.  g.  a-ristd-tati-  ‘security’,  derud-tati-  ‘divinity’,  sdm- 
tati-  ‘good  fortune’.  The  accent  is  exceptional  in  asta-tdti-  ‘home’  and  daksa- 
tati-  (AV.)  ‘cleverness’. 

25.  The  suffix  -tya:  forming  nouns  from  particles,  is  never  accented: 
dpa-tya-  n.  ‘offspring’,  amd-tya-  ‘companion’,  dvis-tya-  ‘manifest’,  ni-tya -  ‘own’, 
nis-tya-  ‘foreign’,  sdnu-tya-  ‘secret’.  When  attached  to  the  substantive  ap- 
‘water’  it  is,  however,  accented:  ap-tyd-  and  ap-tya-  ‘watery’. 

26.  The  suffix  -tv a  is  invariably  accented;  e.  g.  amrta-tvd-  ‘immortality’, 
pati-tvd-  ‘matrimony’. 

27.  The  very  rare  suffix  -tva-td  is  accented  on  its  first  syllable:  isita- 
tvata-  ‘excitement’,  purusa-tvata-  ‘human  nature’. 

28.  The  suffix  -tv ana  is  always  accented  on  its  final  syllable;  e.  g.  kavi- 
tvand-  ‘wisdom’,  pati-ivand-  ‘matrimony’,  sakhi-tvand-  ‘friendship’. 


1  Accented  kantnaka-  in  the  VS.  The  fem. 
in  the  RV.  is  kamnaka-  but  in  the  AV1. 
kantnika -. 

2  Except  puru-tama-  ‘very  many’  and  ut- 


tama-  ‘highest’,  sasvat-tamd -  ‘most  frequent’ 
(with  the  ordinal  accent). 

3  It  is  shifted  in  mrdayat-taina-  ‘showing 
great  compassion’  ( mrdayat-).  Cp.  below  89. 


III.  Accent.  Accentuation  of  Nominal  Stems. 


89 


29.  The  suffix  -Mar,  forming  ordinals  from  a  few  numerals  and  adjectives 
of  a  cognate  sense  from  pronominal  stems,  is  nearly  always  accented:  thus 
catur-thd-  (AV.)  ‘fourth’,  sas-tha-  (A V.  VS.)  ‘sixth’,  kati-thd-  ‘the- how-maniest’; 
but  saptd-tha-  ‘seventh’. 

30.  The  rare  derivatives  formed  with  the  suffix  -na  are  accented  either 
on  the  first  or  the  last  syllable:  strdi-na-  ‘feminine’  (stri-  ‘woman’),  visu-na- 
‘various’;  but  purd-iia- 1  ‘ancient’,  sama-na-  'like’. 

31.  With  the  suffix  -bha2 3  are  formed  the  names  of  a  few  animals  with 
one  exception  accented  on  the  final  syllable:  rsa-bhd-  and  vrsa-bhd-  ‘bull’, 
garda-bhd-  ‘ass’,  sai'a-bha-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘fabulous  eight-legged  animal’,  rAsa-bha- 
‘ass’.  This  suffix  also  occurs  once  in  the  adjective  sthula-bhd-  (AV.)  ‘big’. 

32.  The  suffix  -ma  is  regularly  accented,  whether  forming  superlatives ; 
e.  g.  ad/ia-md -  ‘lowest’,  madhya-md-  ‘middle-most’,  or  ordinals;  e.  g.  asta-md- 
‘eighth’.  An  exception  is  dnta-ma- 3  ‘next’. 

33.  Derivatives  formed  with  the  suffix  -manf  retain  the  accent  of  the 
primitive,  unless  the  latter  is  oxytone,  when  the  accent  in  the  great  majority 
of  instances  (about  three-fourths)  is  thrown  forward  on  the  suffix;  e.  g.  osadhl- 
mant-  (AV.)  ‘rich  in  herbs’,  asani-mant-  ‘bearing  the  thunderbolt’;  but  agni- 
mdnt-  ‘having  fire’  ( agni -). 

34.  The  suffix  -maya  is  always  accented  on  the  first  syllable;  e.  g.  ayas- 
indya-  ‘made  of  metal’,  go-mdya-  ‘consisting  of  cows’,  saka-mdya-  ‘arising  from 
excrement’. 

35.  The  suffix  - min  is  accented  (like  -in)  in  the  only  two  derivatives 
formed  with  it:  is-min-  ‘impetuous’,  and  rg-min-  ‘jubilant  with  praise’  (fc-). 

36.  The  rare  suffix  -mna  is  always  accented:  dyu-mna-  ‘brightness’,  nr-mnd- 
‘ manliness’,  ni-mna-  ‘depth’,  su-mna-  ‘welfare’. 

37.  Derivatives  formed  with  the  suffix  -ya  and  Vrddhi  accent  the 
initial  or  the  final  syllable  with  the  same  shift  as  appears  in  those  formed 
with  -a:  the  initial,  when  the  primitive  is  accented  on  the  final  (or  some¬ 
times  a  medial)  syllable,  but  the  final,  when  the  primitive  is  accented  on  the 
initial  (or  sometimes  a  medial  syllable);  e.  g.  ddiv-ya-  ‘divine’  (dev a-  ‘god’), 
Artvij-ya-  ‘office  of  priest’  ( rtvij -),  gArhapat-ya-  ‘position  of  a  householder’ 
( grhd-pati -);  but  adit-yd-  ‘son  of  Aditi’,  prajdpat-ya-  (AV.)  ‘relating  to  Prajapati’. 
In  a  very  few  instances  the  accent  remains  unchanged,  as  Adhipat-ya-  ‘lord- 
ship’  ( adhi-pati -  ‘lord’),  paums-ya-  ‘manliness’  (pirns-  ‘man’),  vdis-ya-  ‘man  of 
the  third  caste’  (vis-  ‘settler’),  sraisth-ya-  (AV.)  ‘superiority’  (sWstha-  ‘best’) ; 
while  in  several  instances  it  shifts  from  the  final  syllable  to  the  suffix  (instead 
of  to  the  initial  syllable) ;  e.  g.  kav-ya-  ‘descendant  of  Kavi’  (but  kAv-ya- 
‘endowed  with  the  qualities  of  a  sage’,  kavi-). 

a.  In  derivatives  formed  without  Vrddhi  the  accentuation  is  to  some 
extent  similar;  thus  a  final  accent  shifts  to  the  first  syllable;  e.  g.  in 
pitr-ya-  ‘belonging  to  the  fathers’  ( pitr -),  prdtijan-ya-  ‘adverse’  (prati-jand - 
‘adversary’  AV.);  or  from  the  first  to  the  last;  e.  g.  gram-yd-  ‘belonging  to 
the  village’  (grAma-) ;  or  it  remains  on  the  first  syllable ;  e.  g.  dv-ya-  ‘belonging 
to  sheep’  ( dvi -),  gdv-ya-  ‘derived  from  cows’  (go-) ;  or  it  shifts  from  the  final 
syllable  to  the  suffix  (instead  of  the  first  syllable);  e.  g.  kav-ya-  ‘wise’  (kavi-). 
But  here  the  accent  may  also  remain  on  or  be  shifted  to  a  medial  syllable; 
e.  g.  svarAj-ya-  ‘autocracy’  (svarAj-  ‘sovereign’),  visvddev-ya -  ‘belonging  to  all 
gods’  (visvd-deva-))  hiranyd-ya-  ‘golden’  (hiranya-  ‘gold’),  avyd-ya-  ‘derived  from 
sheep’  (beside  avya-ya-),  gavya-ya-  ‘derived  from  cows’  (beside  gdvya-). 


1  Cp.  BEL  28,  318,  bottom. 


2  Cp.  Prellwitz,  BB.  22,  74 — 1 14,  on  animal  names  in  -bha. 

3  But  antamebhi'i  (I.  1655). 


90 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


But  a  peculiarity  of  the  derivatives  formed  without  Vrddhi  is  that  the 
majority  of  them  have  the  Svarita  accent  on  the  suffix;  e.  g.  rajan-ya- 
‘belonging  to  the  royal  class’  (rdjan-);  dosan-yd-  ‘relating  to  the  arm’  (1 dosan -); 
vayav-ya-  ‘belonging  to  Wind’  (vdyb-);  - dundubh-ya -  (VS.)  ‘relating  to  a 
drum’  ( dundubhi );  budhn-ya-  ‘belonging  to  the  bottom’  ( budhna -).  The  suffix 
thus  accented  also  appears  in  the  gerundive  in  -tav-yd-  (twice  found  in  the 
AV.)  formed  from  an  infinitive  stem  in  -tu  (585,4). 

38.  The  rare  suffix  -yin  is  (like  -in)  always  accented:  dtatd-yin-  (VS.) 
‘having  one’s  bow  drawn’,  dhanva-yin-  (VS.)  ‘bearing  a  bow’,  mara-yin -,  N.  of 
a  man,  sr da-yin-  (VS.)  ‘having  a  spear’,  svadha-yin-  (VS.)  ‘owning  the  Svadha’. 

39.  Derivatives  formed  with  -ra  having  a  comparative  sense  (chiefly  from 
prepositions)  accent  the  initial  syllable:  ddha-ra-  ‘lower’,  dpa-ra-  ‘later’,  dva-ra- 
‘lower’,  dpa-ra-  ‘lower’,  dnta-ra- 1  ‘near’  ( dnta -  ‘end’).  Other  nouns  formed 
with  the  suffix  are  chiefly  accented  on  the  final  syllable;  e.  g.  a-srT-rd-  ‘ugly’, 
dhum-ra-  (VS.)  ‘dusky’  ( dhumd -  ‘smoke’),  pamsu-ra-  ‘dusty,  rath-i-ra-  ‘riding 
in  a  chariot’ ;  but  sometimes  otherwise ;  thus  dgnldh-ra-  ‘belonging  to  the  fire- 
kindler’  ( agnidh -),  medh-i-ra-  ‘wise’,  karmd-ra-  ‘smith’. 

40.  Derivatives  formed  with  -la  nearly  always  accent  the  suffix;  e.  g. 
a-slT-ld-  (AV.)  ‘ugly’,  jlva-ld-  (AV.)  ‘lively’,  bahu-ld-  ‘abundant’,  madhu-la- 
‘sweet’;  but  tilvi-la-  ‘fertile’,  seva-la-  (AV.)  ‘slimy’,  sisd-la-  ‘little  child’. 

41.  The  suffix  -va  is  regularly  accented:  arna-vd-  ‘billowy’,  kesa-va- 
(AV.)  ‘hairy’,  aiiji-va-  (AV.)  ‘slippery’,  santi-va-  (AV.)  ‘friendly’,  sraddhi-va- 
‘credible’. 

42.  The  fem.  substantives  formed  from  adverbs  or  prepositions  with  the 
suffix  -vat  always  accent  the  final  syllable:  arva-vat-  ‘proximity’,  a-vat-  (AV.) 
‘proximity’,  ud-vdt-  ‘height’,  ni-vat-  ‘depth’,  para-vat-  ‘distance’,  pra-vdt-  ‘height’, 
sam-vdt-  ‘region’. 

43.  Derivatives  formed  with  the  suffix  -van  may  have  the  accent  on 
any  syllable;  e.  g.  athar-van ,  ‘fire-priest’,  indhan-van-  ‘possessed  of  fuel’,  fgha- 
van-  ‘violent’;  rtd-van-  ‘regular’,  magha-van-  ‘bountiful’;  arati-van-  ‘hostile’, 
srustl-vdn-  ‘obedient’. 

44.  Derivatives  formed  with  -vant  generally  retain  the  original  accent 
except  in  oxytone  stems  (if  not  ending  in  a  or  d),  which  as  a  rule  throw  it 
on  the  suffix;  e.  g.  kesa-vant-  ‘hairy’,  putrd-vant-  (VS.)  ‘having  a  son’,  prajd- 
vant-  ‘having  offspring’,  dydvaprthivl-vant-  ‘connected  with  heaven  and  earth’; 
but  agni-vant-  ‘having  fire’  ( agm -),  asan-vaut  (AV.)  ‘having  a  mouth’.  The 
accent  is  anomalously  shifted  in  krsand-vajit-  ‘decorated  with  pearls’  ( krsana -) 
and  visu-vant-  ‘central’  iyisic-)  ‘in  both  directions’. 

45.  The  very  rare  derivatives  formed  with  the  suffix  -vaya  accent 
either  the  suffix  or  the  primitive:  dru-vaya-  (AV.)  ‘wooden  dish’  and  catur- 
vaya-  ‘fourfold’. 

46.  Derivatives  formed  with  the  rare  suffix  -va/a  accent  their  final  syllable: 
krsl-vala-  ‘peasant’,  nad-vald-  (VS.)  ‘reed  bed’. 

47.  The  suffix  -v/n  is  always  accented;  e.  g.  namas-vin-  ‘reverential’, 
yasas-vifi-  (AV.)  ‘beautiful’,  medha-vin-  (AV.)  ‘wise’,  dhrsad-vin-  ‘bold’. 

48.  The  very  rare  names  of  relationship  formed  with  the  suffix  -vya 
accent  the  first  syllable:  bhrdtr-vya-  (AV.)  ‘nephew’. 

49.  A  few  adjectives  and  substantives  formed  with  the  suffix  -sa 
accent  either  the  final  or,  less  often,  the  first  or  second  syllable:  arva-sd-  or 


1  This  word  may,  however,  be  derived  from  antdr-  ‘within’,  with  BR.  and  Whitney 
1209  i. 


III.  Accent.  Accentuation  of  Compounds. 


9* 


drva-sa-  ‘hasting’,  eta-sd-  or  eta-sa-  ‘variegated’,  babhlu-sa-  (VS.  MS.)  ‘brownish’, 
roma-sd-  ‘hairy’,  yuva-sd-  ‘youthful’,  anku-sd-  ‘hook’,  turva-sa -,  N.  of  a  man. 
Perhaps  also  kdsma-sa-  (AV.)  ‘stupefaction’ (?),  and  kald-sa-  ‘jar’. 


2.  Accentuation  of  Compounds. 

Aufrecht,  De  accentu  compositorum  Sanscriticorum,  Bonn  1847.  —  Garbe,  KZ. 
23,  470  f.  —  Reuter,  Die  altindischen  nominalcomposita,  ihrer  betonung  nach  unter- 
sucht,  KZ.  31,  157 — 232;  4S5— 612.  —  WACKERNAGEL,  Altindische  Grammatik  21, 
p.  40— 43,  etc. 

37.  The  rule  as  to  the  accentuation  of  compounds,  stated  in  the  most 
general  way,  is  that  iteratives,  possessives,  and  governing  compounds  place 
the  accent  on  the  first  member;  determinatives  and  regularly  formed  copula¬ 
tives  (with  one  accent)  on  the  last  member  and  to  a  large  extent  on  its  final 
syllable.  Speaking  generally  the  accent  of  a  compound  is  that  of  one  of  its 
members.  But  some  words  always  change  their  accent  when  compounded; 
thus  v'isva-  ‘all’  regularly  becomes  visvd-,  and  in  the  later  Samhitas  sdrva- 
‘all’  sometimes  becomes  sarva-.  Other  words  when  compounded  change  their 
accent  in  certain  combinations  only;  thus  some  paroxy tones  become  oxytone, 
as  ptirva-  ‘prior’  in  purvd-citti-  ‘foreboding’,  purva-plti-  ‘precedence  in  drinking’, 
purvd-huti-  ‘first  invocation’;  nema-  ‘one’  in  nema-dhiti-  ‘separation’;  medhci- 
‘sacrifice’  in  medha-pati-  ‘lord  of  sacrifice’,  and  medha-sati-  ‘receiving  the 
oblation’;  vrsan-  in  vrsd-kapi -,  N.  of  a  monkey;  on  the  other  hand  some 
oxytones  throw  back  the  accent,  as  khadi-  ‘bracelet’  in  khddi-hasta-  ‘having 
hands  adorned  with  bracelets’;  grivd-  ‘neck’  in  tuvi-griva-  ‘powerful-necked’; 
vira-  ‘hero’  in  puru-vira-  ‘possessed  of  many  men’  and  su-vira-  ‘heroic’;  dhuma- 
‘smoke’  in  saka-dhdma-  (AV.)  ‘smoke  of  cowdung’. 

An  adjective  compound  may  shift  the  accent  from  one  member  to  the 
other  if  it  becomes  a  substantive  or  a  Proper  Name;  thus  a-ksdra-  ‘im¬ 
perishable’,  d-ksara-  ‘speech’ ;  su-krta -  ‘well  done’,  su-krtd-  n.  ‘good  deed’ ; 
a-rdya-  ‘niggardly’,  a-rdya -,  N.  of  a  demon. 

88.  In  iteratives,  which  may  consist  of  repeated  nouns,  pronouns, 
adverbs,  prepositions,  or  particles,  the  first  member  alone  is  accented,  the 
two  words  being  separated  by  Avagraha  in  the  Pada  text,  like  the  members 
of  other  compounds.  Examples  are:  dhar-ahar  jay  ate  mdsi-masi  (x.  5  2 3)  ‘day 
after  day  he  is  born,  month  after  month’;  yad-yad  ydmi  tad  d  bhara  (vm.  6ib) 
‘bring  to  me  whatever  I  ask’;  yathd-yatha  matdyah  sa?iti  nr ndm  (x.  iii1)  ‘as 
are  the  desires  of  men  in  each  case’;  adyddyd  svah-sva  indra  trdsva  pare  ca 
nah  (vm.  6117)  ‘on  each  to-day,  on  each  to-morrow  protect  us,  Indra,  and 
in  the  future’.  The  prepositions  which  appear  as  iteratives  are  i'tpa ,  para , 
pra,  sd?n\  e.  g.  prdpra  pusnds  tuvijdtasya  sasyate  mahitvam  (1.  1381)  ‘forth 
and  again  the  greatness  of  the  mighty  Pusan  is  praised’1.  The  only  verbal 
iterative  occurring  is  piba-piba  (11.  n11)2  ‘drink  again  and  again’. 

89.  Governing  compounds  always  accent  the  first  member  when  it  is 
a  verbal  noun 3 ,  as  trasd-dasyu-  ‘terrifying  the  foe’,  N.  of  a  man.  When  the 
first  member  is  a  present  or  aorist  participle,  its  final  syllable  is  invariably 
accented,  whatever  the  original  accentuation  may  Have  been,  e.  g.  viddd-vasu- 
‘winning  wealth’,  tardd-dvesas-  ‘overcoming  ( tdrat -)  foes’. 


1  In  a  few  instances  the  repeated  2  Otherwise  a  repeated  verbal  form  is 
words  are  not  treated  as  a  compound  and  not  treated  as  an  iterative,  e.  g.  stuhi  stuhi 
are  both  accented,  as  nu  nu  ‘now,  now’,  (vm.  13°). 

iheha  (AV.)  ‘here,  here’,  sam  satn  (AV.).  3  Except  sikfd-nard •  ‘helping  men’. 


92  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

a.  When  the  first  member  is  a  preposition,  the  accentuation  is  much 
the  same  as  in  possessives:  either  the  first  member  is  accented  on  its  proper 
syllable,  as  abhi-dyu-  ‘directed  to  heaven’;  or  the  last  member  on  the  final 
syllable,  but  only  when  it  ends  in  the  compositional  suffix  -a,  or  when  as  a 
simple  word  it  is  not  accented  on  the  final  syllable;  e.  g.  adhas-pad-a-  ‘being 
under  the  feet’,  anu-kamd-  ‘according  to  wish’  ( kdma -).  The  accentuation  of 
api-prdna-  (f.  -T-)  ‘accompanying  the  breath’  is  quite  exceptional. 

90.  A.  Possessive  compounds  (Bahuvrlhis)  normally  accent  the  first 
member  on  the  same  syllable  as  the  simple  word,  e.  g.  rdja-putra-  ‘having 
kings  as  sons’  (but  rdja-putra-  ‘son  of  a  king’).  Other  examples  are: 
dn-abhimlata-varna-  ‘whose  colour  is  not  dimmed’,  iddhcigni-  ‘whose  fire  is 
kindled’,  indra-jyestha-  ‘having  Indra  as  chief’,  indra-sakhi-  ‘having  Indra  as 
a  friend’,  g/irtd-prstha-  ‘butter-backed’,  rusad-vatsa -  ‘having  a  bright  calf’, 
sahdsra-pad-  ‘thousand-footed’  \  Similarly  when  the  first  member  is  a  pre¬ 
position,  an  ordinary  adverb,  or  sa/id-  and  (chiefly  in  the  later  Vedas)  sa¬ 
in  the  sense  of  ‘accompanied  by’;  e.  g.  nir-hasta-  (AV.)  ‘handless’,  prd-mahas- 
‘having  pre-eminent  might’,  vi-griva-  ‘wrynecked’,  visvdto-mukha-  ‘facing  in  all 
directions’,  sahd-vatsa-  ‘accompanied  by  her  calf’,  sd-kama-  (‘accompanied  by’  —) 
‘fulfilling  desires’  (VS.),  sd-cetas-  ‘intelligent’2 *. 

a.  The  original  accent  of  the  first  member  is  sometimes  changed.  1.  The  adjective 
visva •  ‘all’  always,  and  (owing  to  its  influence)  sdrva-  ‘all’  sometimes  in  the  later  Sam¬ 
hitas,  shift  their  accent  to  the  final  syllable;  e.  g.  visva-pesas-  ‘having  all  adornment’, 
sarva-janman -3  (AV.),  sarva-suddha-vdla-  (VS.)  ‘having  a  completely  white  tail’,  sarvdyus - 
(VS.)  ‘having  all  life’4 *.  —  2.  Present  participles  in  several  instances  shift  the  accent  to 
their  final  syllable;  e.  g.  hranddd-isti-  ‘having  roaring  ( krandat -)  speed’,  dravdd-aiva- 
‘having  swift  (drdvat-j  steeds’.  Other  participles  with  this  shift  of  accent  are  arcat-  and 
bhandcit-  ‘shining’,  rapsdt-  ‘swelling’,  svancit-  ‘resounding’.  —  3.  There  are  also  a  few 
miscellaneous  examples  of  shift  of  accent  in  the  first  member :  abhisfi-dyumna-  ‘abounding 
in  aid’,  jyotT-ratha -  ‘whose  car  is  light’  ( jyotis dadrsa nd-pa vi-  ‘whose  felly  is  visible’ 
(< dddrsdna -),  avdkolba -  (AV.)  ‘surrounded  with  Avaka  plants’  idvaka-) ;  cdtur-ahga-  ‘four- 
membered’  ( catiir -),  khddi-hasta-  ‘having  hands  adorned  with  bracelets’  ( khddt -). 

B.  About  one  eighth  of  the  total  number  of  Bahuvrlhis  accent  the  second 
member,  and  in  the  majority  of  instances  on  the  final  syllable. 

a.  This  accentuation  is  common  when  the  first  member  is  a  dissyllabic 
adjective  ending  in  i  or  u.  It  is  invariable  in  the  RV.  after  the  very  frequent 
pun't-  ‘much’  and  the  less  frequent  krdhu-  ‘shortened’,  bahu-  ‘much’,  siti- 
■  white’;  e.  g.  puru-putrd-  ‘having  many  sons’,  puru-vdra-  ‘having  many 
treasures’,  krdhu-kdrna-  ‘having  short  ears’,  bahv-annd -6  ‘having  much  food’ 
(1 anna -),  siti-pad-  ‘white-footed’.  Examples  of  this  accentuation  after  other 
adjectives  ending  in  i  and  it  are:  dsu-hesas-  ‘having  swift  steeds’,  uru-ksdya- 
‘having  a  wide  abode’,  rju-krdtu-  ‘whose  works  are  right’,  tuvi-dyumnd-  ‘having 
great  glory’,  trsu-cydvas-  ‘moving  greedily’,  prthu-pdksas-  ‘broad-flanked’,  vibhit- 
krdtu-  ‘having  great  strength’,  vTlu-pdnl-  ‘strong-hoofed’,  hiri-siprd-  ‘golden¬ 
cheeked’7.  In  the  later  Samhitas  there  is  an  increasing  tendency  to  follow 


1  When  another  adjective  or  an  adverb 
precedes  the  first  member,  it  has  the  accent ; 
e.  g.  eka-siti-pcid-  (VS.  TS.)  ‘having  one  foot 
white’;  cp.  Wackernagel  21,  p.  291. 

2  There  are,  however,  a  few  exceptions 

in  which  the  final  member  is  accented,  as 
vi-sikhd-  ‘hairless’  (but  vi-sikha-  AV.),  puro- 

rathd-  ‘whose  car  is  foremost’,  sa-prathas-  ‘ex¬ 

tensive’,  sdj'igd-  (A V.) ‘together  with  the  limbs’. 

0  This  is  the  only  example  (occurring  beside 

visvd-janman-)  cf  this  shift  of  accent  in 


sdrva-  in  the  AV.,  where  sdrva-  as  first 
member  is  common. 

4  sdrva-  shows  this  shift  of  accent  in  the 
RV.  in  the  adverb  sarvd-tas  ‘from  all  sides’ 
and  in  the  derivative  sarvd-tbti-  ‘totality’. 

5  Plere  the  accent  may  be  affected  by 
that  of  the  adverb  dravdt  ‘swiftly’. 

6  After  bahu-  the  final  syllable  is  always 
accented,  even  in  the  later  Samhitas. 

7  Both  accentuations  occur  in  prthu- 
budJind-  and  prthu-budhna-  ‘broad-based’. 


III.  Accent.  Accentuation  of  Compounds.  93 


the  general  rule;  e.  g.  purit-ndman -  (AV.)  ‘many-named’,  siti-kakud-  ‘having  a 
white  hump’,  and  siti-bhasad-  ‘having  white  buttocks’  (TS.  v.  6.  141). 

b.  Bahuvrihis  beginning  with  did-  and  tri-  generally  accent  the  second 
member;  e.  g.  dvi-pdd-  ‘two-footed’,  dvi-dhdra-  ‘forming  two  streams’,  tri-tantu - 
‘having  three  webs’,  tri-ndbhi-  ‘having  three  naves’,  tri-vandhura-  ‘three-seated’  1. 
The  only  exceptions  to  this  rule  in  the  RV.  are  dvi-savas-  ‘having  twofold 
might’,  try-ambaka-  ‘having  three  mothers’  and  try-hsir-  ‘having  three  products 
of  milk’.  The  later  Samhitas  accent  did-  and  tri-  in  new  Bahuvrihis  as  often 
as  not.  In  a  few  possessives  beginning  with  other  numerals  the  second 
member  is  accented  on  the  last  syllable,  e.  g.  catur-aksd-  ‘four-eyed’2. 

c.  Possessives  beginning  with  the  negative  prefix  a-  or  an-  almost 
invariably  accent  the  final  syllable  irrespectively  of  the  original  accent  of  the 
second  member  (doubtless  in  order  to  distinguish  them  clearly  from  deter¬ 
minatives);  e.  g.  a-dant-  ‘toothless’,  a-phald-  ‘unfruitful’  ( phdla -),  a-bald-  ‘not 
possessing  strength’  ( bdla -).  A  very  few  accent  the  penultimate;  a-bhrdtr- 3 
(AV.)  ‘brotherless’,  a-vira -  ‘childless’,  a-sesas-  ‘without  offspring’.  On  the  other 
hand  a  good  many  (though  only  a  small  proportion  of  the  whole)  accent  the 
prefix  (like  determinatives),  especially  when  the  second  member  is  a  noun 
formed  with  the  suffix  -ti ;  e.  g.4  d-gu-  ‘kineless’,  d-jnas-  ‘kinless’,  d-dyu-  ‘not 
burning’,  dn-dpi-  ‘kinless’,  d-prajas-  (AV.)  ‘childless’,  d-mrtyu-  ‘deathless’,  d-hri- 
‘bold’,  d-ksiti-  ‘imperishable’5 6. 

d.  Possessives  beginning  with  dus-°  ‘ill’  or  sic-  ‘well’  regularly  accent  the 
second  member,  usually  on  the  original  syllable;  e.  g.  dur-mdnman-  ‘ill  disposed’, 
su-bhdga-  ‘well  endowed’.  There  is,  however,  a  tendency  to  throw  the  accent 
forward  on  the  final  syllable;  e.  g.  sv-ahguri-  ‘fair-fingered’  ( anguri -),  su-phald- 
(AV.)  ‘fruitful’,  su-bandhu-  (AV.)7  ‘closely  related’8.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
accent  is  in  a  few  instances  shifted  from  the  final  to  the  penultimate  syllable, 
as  su-vira-  ‘rich  in  heroes’  ( vira -),  and  su-gandhi-  ‘sweet-smelling’  beside  su- 
gandhi-  (from  gandha-  ‘smell’)  9. 

91.  Determinatives  as  a  rule  accent  the  last  member,  and  pre¬ 
vailingly  on  the  final  syllable. 

A.  1.  In  the  descriptive  type,  that  is,  those  in  which  a  substantive  is 
described  by  an  adjective  or  an  appositional  substantive  (Ivarmadharaya)  and 
those  in  which  a  verbal  noun  is  described  by  an  adverbial  word,  the  accent 
is  on  the  final  syllable;  e.  g.  krsna-sakuna-  (AV.)  ‘black  bird’,  maha-dhana- 
‘great  spoil’,  ajhata-yaksma-  ‘unknown  disease’,  yavayat-sakhd-  ‘a  protecting 
friend’,  raja-yaksmd-  (‘king’  — )  ‘royal  disease’10,  surya-svit-  ‘sun-bright’;  pura-etf- 
‘going  before’,  prathama-jd-  ‘first-born’,  prdtar-yuj- 11  ‘early  yoked’,  svayam-bhd- 
‘self- existent’,  dus-krt-  ‘acting  wickedly’,  su-pra-tdr-12  ‘victorious’,  a-ghdrin- 
(AV.)  ‘not  anointing’,  a-cit-  ‘senseless’,  a-jarayu -x3  ‘not  aging’,  a-jur-  ‘unaging’. 

1  But  astd-vandhura -  ‘having  eight  car-  8  For  other  examples  see  Wackernagel 

seats’.  21,  p.  294,  bottom. 

2  Cp.  Whitney  1300  c.  9  Op.  cit.  2*,  p.  295  7,  note. 

3  But  in  the  RV.  with  the  usual  accen-  1  10  Exceptions,  when  the  first  member  is 

tuation  a-bhrdtr-.  a  noun,  are  all  compounds  formed  with 

4  For  many  other  examples  see  Wacker-  visva-  ‘all’,  as  visvd-manusa-  ‘every  man’, 

NAGEL  2l,  1 14  note  (p.  293).  also  madhyarn-dina-  ‘midday’,  vrsa-kapi-  ‘male 

5  The  only  possessive  of  this  kind  in  ape’,  in  all  of  which  the  original  accent  of 
which  the  second  member  ends  in  -ti  and  the  first  member  is  shifted. 

accents  the  final  syllable  seems  to  be  11  adhri-gu-  ‘irresistible’  and  sadhd-stha- 

a-gavyuti-  ‘pastureless’.  ‘standing  together’,  are  exceptions. 

6  The  only  exception  in  the  case  of  dus-  {  12  sv-a-vrj *  ‘easy  to  acquire’  is  an  ex- 

is  dur-asir-  ‘ill-mixed’.  ception. 

7  The  RV.  retains  the  original  accent,  J3  But  d-mavisnu-  ‘immoveable’. 

su-phdla su-bandhu-. 


94 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


a-yoddhr-  Got  fighting’,  a-rajin-  ‘not  shining’,  a-pra-mrs-ya -1  ‘indestructible', 
a-budh-ya-  ‘not  to  be  wakened’,  an-aty-ud-yd-  (AV.)  ‘unspeakable',  an-adhrs-ya- 
‘unassailable’,  an-amayi-tnu-  ‘not  making  ill’. 

a.  When,  however,  the  second  member  ends  in  -van,  -man  or  -i,  or 
has  the  form  of  a  gerundive  used  as  a  neuter  substantive,  the  penultimate 
(radical)  syllable  is  accented;  e.  g.  raghu-pdtvan-  ‘swift-flying’,  pu?'o-ydvan-2 3 
‘going  in  front’;  su-tarman-  ‘crossing  well’,  vilu-pdtman-  ‘flying  mightily’,  raghu- 
ydman-  ‘going  swiftly’,  su-vdhman-  ‘driving  well’,  dur-grbhi-  ‘hard  to  hold’, 
rju-vani  ‘striving  forward’,  tuvi-svdni-  ‘roaring  mightily’,  purva-payya-  and  purva- 
pdya-  n.  ‘precedence  in  drinking’,  saha-seyya-  n.  ‘act  of  lying  together’,  amutra- 
bhiiya- 3  (VS.)  n.  ‘state  of  being  in  the  other  world’. 

2.  The  first  member  is,  however,  accented  under  certain  conditions, 
a.  It  is  generally  accented  if  it  is  an  adverbial  word  and  the  last  member  is 
a  past  participle  in  -ta  or  - 11a 4 5  or  a  verbal  noun  in  -ti\  e.  g.  ddmsu-juta- 
‘speeding  wondrously’,  dur-hita-  ‘faring  ill’,  sdna-sruta- 5  ‘famed  from  of  old’; 
puro-hiti-  ‘priestly  ministration’,  sadha-stuti-  ‘joint  praise’. — b.  The  privative 
particle  a-  or  an-  when  compounded  with  a  participle6 7 *,  adjective,  or  substantive 
is  nearly  always  accented;  e.  g.  dn-adant- 7  ‘not  eating’,  a-ditsant-  ‘not 
wishing  to  give’,  d-manyamana-  ‘not  thinking’,  d-himsana-  ‘not  injuring’, 
a-vidvams-  ‘not  knowing’,  d-krta- 8  ‘not  done’;  d-kr-a -9  ‘inactive’,  a-susv-i-  ‘not 
pressing  Soma’,  d-tandra-  ‘unwearied’,  d-kumara- 1 0  ‘not  a  child’;  a-citti-  ‘thought¬ 
lessness’.  The  particle  is  regularly  accented  when  it  negatives  a  compound; 
e.  g.  a-dus-krt-  ‘not  doing  ill’,  an-asva-da-  ‘not  giving  a  horse’,  d-pascad-daghvan - 
‘not  remaining  behind’;  d-punar-dlyamana- T 1  (AV.)  ‘not  being  given  back’, 
dn-agni-dagd/ia-  ‘not  burnt  with  fire’,  dn-abhi-sasta- 12  ‘blameless’. 

B.  1.  Dependent  determinatives  as  a  rule  accent  the  second 
member  and  that  mostly  on  the  last  syllable,  even  if  the  simple  word  is 
not  an  oxytone. 

a.  When  the  second  member  is  a  root13,  a  verbal  noun  in  -a,  an  ordinary 
substantive  (without  verbal  sense),  or  an  adjective  ending  in  -zVz14,  the  final 


1  This  is  the  regular  accent  of  the 
gerundive  with  the  negative  prefix,  which 
is,  however,  accented  in  some  half  dozen  in¬ 
stances:  d-gohya -,  a-jesya-,  a -dabby a-,  a-nedya-, 
d-yabhya -  (AV.)  and  a-ghnya-  beside  a-ghnyd-. 
Two  of  these  compounds  in  the  AV.  retain 
the  Svarita  of  the  simple  gerundive:  an- 
ativyddhya-  and  an-adharsya-. 

2  satyd-??iadvan -  ‘truly  rejoicing’  is  an  ex¬ 
ception. 

3  sadhd-s/utya-  n.  ‘joint  praise’,  is  an  ex¬ 
ception. 

4  Here  the  adverb  is  treated  like  a  pre¬ 
position  compounded  with  a  past  participle. 

5  There  are  a  good  many  exceptions  in 
which  the  original  accent  of  the  past  parti¬ 
ciple  remains  on  the  final  syllable;  e.  g. 
tuvi-jdtd-  ‘mightily  born’,  dus-krtd-  fill  done’, 
su-jatd -  (beside  su-jdta-).  This  is  the  regular 
accentuation  when  the  first  member  is puru-\ 
e.  g.  puru-sfutd-  ‘much  praised’. 

6  Not,  however,  when  the  second  member 
is  a  gerundive,  a  root,  or  a  noun  with  verbal 
meaning  ending  in  -yu,  ■ tnu ,  -snu,  -in,  -tr- ; 
see  examples  above  (A  1). 

7  But  a-sascdnt-  beside  a-sascant-  ‘not 

ceasing’,  a-coddni-  (v.  442)  and  as  substan¬ 


tives  a-rundhat-i-  (AV.)  a  name,  and  a-jarant-T- 
(VS.)  ‘unaging’. 

8  Exceptions  are  a-citta-,  a-drsta a-mfta- , 
a-yuta-  n.  ‘myriad’  but  (AV.)  d-ynta •  ‘undisturb¬ 
ed’,  a-turta-  (beside  d-turta -),  a-bhinnd-  (AV.) 
beside  d-bhinna-. 

9  There  are  also  some  verbal  derivatives 
in  -a  which  accent  the  second  member; 
e.  g.  a-ksdr-a-  ‘imperishable’,  a-jdr-a  *un- 
agmg’,  a-ddbh-a ■  ‘not-deceiving’,  a-trp-d- 
‘dissatisfied’,  a-vadh-d-  ‘inviolable’,  a-vrdh-d- 
‘not  furthering’,  cin-avrask-d  (AV.)  ‘not  falling 
off’;  cp.  Whitney  1283 — 88. 

10  There  are  also  several  ordinary  nouns 
which  are  accented  as  second  member;  e.  g. 
a-citrd-  ‘colourless’,  a-mitra-  ‘enemy’,  -a-vTra- 
‘unmanly’. 

11  But  a-nipddyamdna ■  (AW)  ‘not  going  to 
rest’  where  RV.  has  d-ni-padyamdna. 

12  But  an-a-sasta-  (RV1.)  ‘not  praised’, 
a-pra-sasta-  beside  d-pra- sasta-  ‘not  praised’. 

There  are  a  few  exceptions  when  deri¬ 
vation  from  a  root  is  not  clear,  as  in  osa- 
dhi-  ‘plant’;  otherwise  -dhi  from  dhd-  ‘put’ 
is  regularly  accented ;  e.  g.  isu-dhi  ‘quiver’. 

This  suffix  being  invariably  accented  in 
the  simple  word  (86  B.  8). 


III.  Accent.  Accentuation  of  Compounds. 


95 


syllable  is  regularly  accented;  e.  g.  gotra-bhld-  ‘opening  the  cowpens’,  g/irta- 
vrdh -  ‘delighting  in  ghee’,  divi-spfs-  ‘touching  the  sky’,  patain-gd-  ‘going  by 
flight’,  ‘flying’,  varuna-dhru-t-  ‘deceiving  Varuna’;  agnim-indh-d- 1  ‘fire-kindling’, 
hasta-grabh-d-  ‘hand-grasping’,  puram-dar-d-  ‘fort-destroying’;  uda-megha-  ‘shower 
of  water’,  go-saphd-  (VS.)  ‘cow’s  hoof’,  jiva-lokd-  ‘world  of  the  living’,  indra - 
send-  ‘Indra’s  missile’  ( send -),  krsnajind-  (AV.  TS.)  ‘hide  ( ajina -)  of  the  black 
antelope’,  deva-kosa- 2  (AV.)  ‘cask  (. kosa -)  of  the  gods’,  deva-mana-*  ‘abode 
( mdna -)  of  the  gods’;  uktha-sams-in-  ‘uttering  praise’,  bhadra-v ad-in-  ‘uttering 
auspicious  cries’. 

a.  The  word  pati-  ‘lord’  follows  this  rule  in  only  a  few  compounds  occurring  in 
the  later  Samhitas;  thus  in  the  AV.  :  apsard-patt-  ‘lord  of  the  Apsarases’,  vraja-pati-  ‘lord 
of  a  troop’  {vraja-pati-,  RV.);  in  the  VS.:  amhasas-pati-  ‘lord  of  perplexity’,  upa-pati- 
‘paramour’,  edidhisuh-pati-  ‘husband  of  a  younger  sister’,  nadi-pati-  ‘lord  of  rivers’;  in  the 
MS.:  ahar-pati-  ‘lord  of  day’,  cit-pati-  ‘lord  of  thought’,  vdk-pati-  ‘lord  of  speech’.  In  a 
few  determinatives  pati-  retains  its  own  accent  as  second  member,  as  nr-pati-  ‘lord  of 
men’,  rayi-pdti-  ‘lord  of  wealth’,  vis-pati-  ‘lord  of  the  tribe’,  also  the  f.  in  vasu-patni- 
‘mistress  of  wealth’,  vis-pdtni- 4  ‘mistress  of  the  tribe’;  in  the  VS.  ahar-pati -,  cit-pati-, 
vdk-pati- ;  in  the  AV.  rtu-pdti-  ‘lord  of  proper  seasons’,  pasu-pati-  ‘lord  of  animals’  (VS.), 
pusti-pati-  ‘lord  of  welfare’,  bhuta-pdti-  ‘lord  of  beings’,  stha-pdti-  5  ‘governor’.  In  compounds 
with  pati-,  however,  the  first  member  is  usually  accented,  there  being  22  cases  in  the 
RV.,  besides  10  with  patni -;  e.  g.  grhd-pati-  ‘lord  of  the  house’,  gd-pati-  ‘lord  of  kine’, 
pasu-pati-  ‘lord  of  creatures’,  medha-pati- 6  ‘lord  of  animal  sacrifice’  (: medha -),  vdsu-pati- 
‘lord  of  wealth’,  vdja-pati-  ‘lord  of  booty’,  svar-pati-  7  ‘lord  of  light’ ;  grha-patm-  ‘mistress 
of  the  house’,  deva-patni-  ‘wife  of  a  god’,  vaj  a-patni-  ‘queen  of  booty’.  In  the  AV.,  of 
15  new  masculines  ending  in  -pati-  more  than  half  accent  the  first  member  as  do  all  the 
8  new  ones  ending  in  patni- ;  e.  g.  dtithi-pati-  ‘entertainer  of  a  guest’.  In  the  other 
Samhitas  also  occur:  ksatrd-pati-  (VS.)  ‘lord  of  dominions’,  bhuva-pati-  (VS.)  ‘lord  of  the 
atmosphere’,  bhuvana-pati-  (VS.  TS.)  ‘lord  of  beings’,  bhii-pati-  (TS.)  ‘lord  of  the  world’, 
samvesa-pati-  (VS.)  ‘lord  of  rest’,  visnn-patni-  (VS.  TS.)  ‘Visnu’s  wife’8. 

b.  Determinatives  which  have  as  their  second  member  verbal  nouns  in 
-ana9,  adjectives  in  -i  and  -van,  as  well  as  action  nouns  in  -ya,  regularly  accent 
the  radical  syllable  of  the  second  member;  e.  g.  deva-mdd-ana-  ‘exhilarating 
the  gods’,  kesa-vdrdh-ana- 10  ‘causing  the  hair  to  grow’;  pathi-rdks-i-  ‘protecting 
the  road’;  soma-pd-van-  ‘somadrinking’,  talpa-si-van-  ‘lying  on  the  couch’, 
prdtar-i-t-van -11  ‘coming  early’;  ahi-hdt-ya-  ‘slaughter  of  the  dragon’,  deva- 
hfi-ya-  ‘invocation  of  the  gods’,  mantra-sru-t-ya-  n.  ‘listening  to  counsel’,  vrtra- 
tdr-ya-'12  ‘conquest  of  Vrtra’. 

2.  Dependent  determinatives,  however,  which  have  as  their  second 
member  past  passive  participles  in  -ta  and  -na  or  action  nouns  in  -ti  accent 


1  dugha-  retains  its  original  accent,  as 
madhu-dugha-  ‘yielding  mead’,  kdma-dugha- 
(AV.  VS.)  ‘yielding  desires’.  A  few  others 
have  the  original  accent  of  the  first  member: 
marud-vrdha-  ‘delighting  in  the  Maruts’, 
divi-cara-  (AV.)  ‘moving  in  the  sky’,  suti-kara- 
‘active  at  the  Soma  offering’.  Cp.  Whitney 
1278. 

2  A  few  accent  the  penultimate  syllable 
of  the  final  member  with  shift  of  the  original 
accent,  as  go  dJuima-  (VS.)  ‘wheat’,  saka- 
dhtima ■  (AV.),  yama-rcijya-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘Yama’s 
sway’  (rdjyd-);  cp.  Wackernagel  21,  p.  268, 
top,  note. 

3  But  deva-yana-  ‘going  to  the  gods’. 

4  Also  the  Karmadharaya  sa  patni-  ‘cowife’ 
and  the  Bahuvrlhi  su-pdtni-  ‘having  a  good 
husband’. 

5  Cp.  Bloomfield,  SBE.  42,  319. 

6  In  K.  medha-pati-. 


7  svd-pati-  ‘one’s  own  lord’  is  a  Karma¬ 
dharaya  ;  as  a  Bahuvrlhi  it  is  accented  sva- 
pad-  (AV.)  ‘having  an  own  consort’. 

8  On  doubly  accented  compounds  with 
-pati-  see  below  (3). 

9  Just  as  when  such  nouns  are  compounded 
with  prepositions. 

10  The  very  few  apparent  exceptions  to 
this  rule  are  due  to  these  words  losing  their 
verbal  character;  e.  g.  yama-sadand-  (AV.) 
‘Yama’s  realm’. 

11  In  matari-svan-  and  mdtari  bhvan-  the 
suffix  is  probably  -an-,  here  the  original 
accent  of  the  first  member  (if  it  is  the  loc. 
mdtari )  has  shifted,  perhaps  owing  to  the 
influence  of  words  like  prdtar-i-tvan-. 

12 3 4 5 6  An  exception  is  sadhd-stu-t-ya -  ‘joint 
praise’.  A  few  feminines  in  -ya ,  which  are 
closely  allied  to  these  neuters  in  -ya,  retain, 
their  accent  on  the  final  syllable,  as  deva- 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


the  first  member  (like  a  preposition);  e.  g.  indra-prasiita-  ‘incited  by  Indra’, 
deva-hita-  ‘ordained  by  the  gods’,  hasta-yata -  ‘guided  by  the  hand’1;  deva- 
huti-2  ‘invocation  of  the  gods’,  dhdna-sati -3  ‘winning  of  wealth’. 

3.  Double  accentuation.  A  certain  number  of  determinative  compounds, 
syntactical  in  origin,  which  have  a  genitive  case-form  in  the  first  member,  and 
nearly  always  -pati-  in  the  second,  are  doubly  accented.  Such  are  brhas- 
pdti-  and  brahmanas-pati- 4  ‘lord  of  prayer’,  gnds-pdti-  ‘husband  of  a  divine 
woman’  (with  the  anomalous  fern,  gnds-pdtnl-  ‘divine  wife’),  jds-pati- 5  ‘head 
of  a  family’.  The  compound  sddas-pdti-  ‘lord  of  the  seat’  ( sadas -)  probably 
stands  by  haplology  for  *sddasas-pdti -,  but  v ana-s -pati- 6  ‘lord  of  the  wood’ 
perhaps,  and  rdtha-s-pdti-  ‘lord  of  the  car’  ( rdtha -)  probably,  owe  their  s  to 
the  analogy  of  brhas-pdti- 7.  Though  without  case-ending  in  the  first  member, 
sacT-pdti-  ‘lord  of  might’  follows  the  analogy  of  the  above  compounds.  Other 
doubly  accented  compounds  with  case-form  in  the  first  member  but  not  ending 
in  -pati-  are  sunah-sepa-  ‘Dog’s  tail’,  N.  of  a  man;  dasyave-vrka-  ‘Wolf  to  the 
Dasyu’,  N.  of  a  man;  apdm-ndpat-  ‘son  of  waters’,  the  analogy  of  which  is 
followed  by  tdnu-ndpat-  ‘son  of  himself’  ( tand -)  though  it  is  without  case¬ 
ending  in  the  first  member;  ndra-sdmsa -8  ‘Praise  of  men’  (for  *naram-sdmsa-), 
the  analogy  of  which  is  followed  by  nf-sdmsa-.  The  name  ndbha-nedistha- 
seems  to  contain  an  old  locative  in  the  first  member,  while  the  uninflected 
stem  appears  in  ds-pdtra-  (TS.  11.  5.  93)  ‘vessel  for  the  mouth’. 

92.  1.  The  regular  class  of  copulatives,  which  have  only  one  accent, 
places  the  acute  on  the  final  syllable9  irrespective  of  the  accent  of  the 
uncompounded  word.  In  the  plural  occur:  ajavdyah  m.  ‘goats  and  sheep’, 
ukthcirkd  n.  ‘praises  and  songs’,  ahoratrdni  ‘days  and  nights’;  in  the  dual: 
rk-sdme  n.  ‘song  and  chant’,  satyanrtd  n.  ‘truth  and  untruth’,  sasananasa?ie  n. 
‘what  eats  and  does  not  eat’;  in  the  singular:  mlalohitdm  n.  ‘blue  and  red’10, 
ista-purtdm 1 1  n.  ‘what  is  sacrificed  and  presented’,  kesa-smasru-  (AY.)  n.  ‘hair 
and  beard’,  ahjanabhyahjandm  (AY.)  n.  ‘salve  and  ointment’,  kasipu-barhanam 
(AV.)  n.  ‘mat  and  pillow’,  krtakrtdm  (AV.)  n.  Svhat  is  done  and  undone’, 
cittakutdm  (AV.)  n.  ‘thought  and  desire’,  bhadra-papdm  (AV.)  ‘good  and  evil’, 
b/iuta-b/iaiydm  (AV.)  n.  ‘past  and  future’,  n.  pi.  priyapriydni  (AV.)  ‘things 


yaj-ya -  ‘worship  of  the  gods’,  beside  deva- 
yaj-ya-,  j  ata-vid-yd -  ‘knowledge  of  things’, 
musti-hatyd-  ‘hand  to  hand  fight’. 

1  There  are,  however,  a  good  many  ex¬ 
ceptions  in  which  the  final  syllable  is  accented 
!as  in  prepositional  determinatives),  e.  g. 
agni-tapta-  ‘glowing  with  fire’,  agni-dagdhd- 
‘burnt  by  fire’. 

2  The  original  accent  of  the  first  member 
is  shifted  in  nema-dhiti-  ‘putting  opposite’ 
‘fight’,  vana-dhiti-  ‘layer  of  wood’,  medhd- 
sati-  ‘receiving  of  the  oblation’. 

3  When  the  verbal  sense  is  lost  in  the 
second  member,  the  general  rule  of  final 
accentuation  applies;  e.g.  deva-suma/i-  ‘favour 
of  the  gods’,  deva-heti-  (AV.)  ‘weapon  of  the 
gods’.  This  analogy  is  followed  by  sama- 
jydni-  (AV.)  ‘loss  of  one’s  all’. 

4  Though  brahmanas-pati-  is  not  treated 
as  a  compound  in  the  Pada  text,  it  is  so  treated 
in  the  Dvandva  indrd-brahtnanaspatl  (11.  2412). 

5  Thus  accented  in  Book  vit,  but  jds-pati , 
in  Book  I.  The  latter  is  the  only  Tatpurusa 
in  the  RV.  in  which  double  accentuation 
does  not  take  place  when  -pciti-  is  preceded 


by  .r.  The  only  other  instance  in  the  RV. 
of  a  Tatpurusa  with  case-ending  in  the  first 
member  and  yet  singly  accented  is  dtvo- 
dasa-,  N.  of  a  king.  Elsewhere  occur  apsn- 
yoga-  (AV.)  ‘connecting  power  in  water’, 
amhasas-paii-  (VS.),  perhaps  matur-bhratrd- 
(MS.  1.  612)  ‘mother’s  brother’  (the  Mss.  read 
m  a  tur-bhrd  Ira  - ) . 

0  In  vdnas-pdti-  the  first  member  may  be 
the  gen.  sing,  of  vait-  ‘wood’  (gen.  pi.  van- 
arn ) ;  but  in  rdtha-s-pdti -  the  s  must  be  in¬ 
organic;  cp.  Garbe,  KZ.  23,490;  Richter, 
IF,  19,  17;  Bartholomae,  BB.  15,  15  note1; 
Wackernagel  21,  p.  247. 

7  The  only  new  instance  of  double  accen¬ 
tuation  of  a  compound  with  -pati-  after 
the  RV.  seems  to  be  nfms-pdti-  (MS.);  cp. 
WACKERNAGEL  2t,  p.  248  d. 

8  Cp.  Foy,  JAOS.  16,  clxxii— iv. 

9  The  two  or  three  exceptions  which  occur 
in  the  AV.  and  VS.  are  doubtless  due  to 
wrong  readings. 

10  The  adjectives  being  used  as  substan¬ 
tives. 

11  In  the  VS.  used  in  the  dual  also. 


III.  Accent.  Accent  in  Declension. 


97 


agreeable  and  disagreeable’;  and  as  adjectives  tamra-dhumra-  (A V.)  ‘tawny 
and  dark’,  daksina-savyd-  (AV.)  ‘right  and  left’,  saptamastamd -  (AV.)  ‘seventh 
and  eighth’. 

a.  The  very  few  adverbial  copulatives  which  occur  accent  the  first 
member:  dhar-divi  ‘day  by  day’,  sayam-pratar  (AV.)  ‘at  even  and  at  morn’. 

2.  The  class  of  Devata-dvandvas,  each  member  of  which  is  dual  in 
form,  and  which  in  the  RV.  is  about  thrice  as  frequent  as  the  regular  class, 
retains  the  accent  of  simple  words  in  each  member  of  the  compound1: 
thus  agfid-visnu  (AV.),  agni-sbmd,  indra-pusdna ,  indra-brhaspdti 2,  indra-varuna , 
indra-visnu ,  indra-sjma ,  usdsa-ndkta  ‘Dawn  and  Night’,  dydva-ksdma  ‘heaven 
and  earth’,  dydva-prthivi ,  dydva-bhdmi ,  naktosdsa ,  pdrjanya-vdta ,  prthivi-dyava , 
mitrd-vdruna ,  snrya-mdsa.  A  few  others  are  formed  in  the  same  way  from 
substantives  which  are  not  the  names  of  deities:  krdtu-ddksau  (VS.)  ‘under¬ 
standing  and  will’,  turvasa-yddu  (iv.  3017)  ‘Turvasa  and  Yadu’,  dhuni-cumuri 
‘Dhuni  and  Cumuri’,  matdra-pitara  (iv.  67)  ‘mother  and  father’. 

a.  A  certain  number  of  these  compounds  have  been  assimilated  to  the 
regular  class  of  copulatives  by  giving  up  the  accent  of  the  first  member: 
indragni ,  indra-pusdna ,  soma-pusdna ,  vata-parjanyd ,  surya-candramdsa ,  bhava- 
rudrdu  (AV.),  bhava-sarvau  (AV.) 3;  one  has  been  completely  assimilated  by 
giving  up  also  the  dual  form  in  the  first  member:  indra-vayu. 

a.  There  occurs  once  a  secondary  adjective  copulative  accented  on  both  members, 
being  formed  from  an  adverbial  Dvandva:  ahar-diva-  (VS.)  ‘daily5  (ahar-divi  ‘day  by  day’). 


3.  Accent  in  Declension. 

93.  The  vocative,  when  accented  at  all  (85,  2)  invariably  has  the  acute 
on  the  first  syllable;  e.  g.  pitar ,  N.  pitd  ‘father’;  dev  a,  N.  deva-s  ‘god’.  The 
regularly  accented  vocative  of  dyu-  (dydv-)  ‘heaven’  is  dyau-s 4,  that  is  diaus, 
but  the  nominative  form  dydus  is  also  used  in  its  stead. 

a.  Otherwise,  in  the  ^-declension  (f.  -a)  the  accent  always  remains  on 
the  same  syllable;  e.  g.  N.  deva-s ,  G.  devd-sya ,  pi.  devd-?iam.  This  rule  is 
also  followed  by  monosyllabic  pronominal  stems  in  - a ;  e.  g.  from  ma- : 
I.  mdy-a  ‘by  me’,  D.  md-hyam,  L.  mdy-i ;  from  td-  ‘that’,  G.  sing,  td-sya,  pi.  G. 
te-sam ,  I.  id -b his5. 

a.  An  exception  to  this  rule  is  formed  by  the  plural  cardinal  stems  ending  in  - a . 
They  regularly  accent  that  vowel  before  endings  with  initial  consonant,  and  throw  the 
acute  on  the  ending  of  the  genitive;  e.  g.  panca  ‘five’:  I .  fianca-bhis,  G.  pahcandm\  asta 
‘eight’,  however/  shifts  the  accent  to  the  endings  generally,  thus  I.  asta-bhis ,  D.  asta- 
bhyas  (TS.). 

94.  When  the  final  syllable  of  the  stem  is  accented,  the  acute  (except 
in  the  a- declension)  is  liable  to  shift  to  the  endings  in  the  weak  cases. 

1.  This  is  the  rule  in  monosyllabic  stems;  e.  g.  ndu -  ‘ship’:  A.  ndv-am , 
but  I.  nav-d,  pi.  I.  nau-bhis ,  L.  nau-sir,  ddnt-  m.  ‘tooth’:  I.  dat-d ,  pi.  A.  dat-ds6, 
I.  dad-bhis. 


1  The  double  accent  is  retained  even  in 
the  derivatives  mitra -vdruna-vant-  ‘accom¬ 
panied  by  Mitra  and  Varuna’,  and  dyava- 
prthivi-vant -  (AV.)  ‘accompanied  by  heaven 
and  earth’. 

2  Retaining  the  double  accent  of  the 
second  member. 

3  In  the  AV.  the  number  of  Devata- 

dvandvas  is  only  about  half  that  in  the  RV. 

(though  the  total  number  of  Dvandvas  is 

more  than  double);  about  one-half  of  these, 

Indo-arische  Philologie.  I.  4. 


again,  have  only  one  accent,  which  as  in 
the  regular  class  is  on  the  final  syllable. 

4  Retaining  the  ncm.  -s,  instead  of  *diau 
(Gk.  Z«C). 

5  An  exception  is  the  pronoun  a-  ‘this’, 
which  is  treated  like  a  monosyllabic  stem, 
e.  g.  G.  a-sya,  pi.  m.  e-scim,  f.  a-sam\  a  few 
times,  however,  the  accentuation  a-smai , 
ri-sya,  a-bhis  occurs;  cp.  Whitney  502  b. 

-  The  accusative  plural  is  treated  as  a 
weak  case  and  accented  on  the  ending  in 


98  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

a.  Exceptions  to  this  rule  are  the  rare  monosyllabic  steins  in  -d,  which  retain  the 
accent  on  the  stem;  e.  g.  gna-  ‘woman’:  pi.  I.  gnd-bhis,  L.  gna-su.  Individual  exceptions 
are  go-  ‘cow’,  dyb-  ‘sky’;  e.  g.  I.  gav-d,  pi.  G.  gciv-dm,  I.  go-bhis ;  L.  dydv-i,  pi.  I.  dyu- 
this.  Similarly  nr-  ‘man’:  D.  nar-e ,  pi.  I.  nr-bhis ,  L.  nf-su,  but  G.  nar- am  and  nr-nam ; 
ksam-  ‘earth’;  L.  ksam-i ;  tan-  ‘succession:  I.  I  an- a  (and  tan- at),  D.  tdu-e;  ran-  ‘joy’:  ran-e, 
pi.  L.  ram- sit ;  van-  ‘wood’:  pi.  L.  vdm-su  (but  G.van-am );  vip- ‘ rod’:  G.vip-as;  sir-  ‘star’ : 
pi.  I.  stf-bhis'y  svar-  ‘light’:  G.  sur-as  (but  D.  siir-e) ;  also  the  infinitives  bctdh-e  ‘to  press’, 
vah-e  ‘to  convey’.  In  some  words  the  irregular  accentuation  is  due  to  their  having 
originally  been  dissyllables;  such  are  dru-  ‘wood’,  snii-  ‘summit’,  svan -  ‘dog’,  yiin-  weak 
stem  of  yuvatu  ‘young’;  e.  g#  I.  dru-nd ;  pi.  L.  snu-su ;  I.  sitn-d ,  pi.  iva-bhis ;  I.  yun-d *  l. 

2.  When  the  accented  vowel  of  the  final  syllable  in  polysyllabic  stems 

disappears  either  by  syncope  or  by  changing  to  a  semivowel,  the  acute  is 
thrown  on  endings  with  initial  vowel  in  the  weak  cases;  thus  from  mahiman- 

‘greatness’,  I.  mahimn-d ;  from  murdhdn -  ‘head’,  D.  murdhn-e\  from  agnl-  ‘fire’, 

G.  du.  agny-os;  from  dhemi-  ‘cow’,  I.  sing,  dhenv-d ;  from  vadhd-  ‘bride’, 
D.  vadhv-di  (AV.);  from  pitf -  ‘father’,  I.  pitr-d. 

a.  Polysyllabic  stems  in  -/,  -//,  and  in  the  RV.  usually  those  in  -I, 
throw  the  acute  on  the  ending  of  the  G.  pi.  also,  even  though  the  vowel 

retains  its  syllabic  character  in  this  case;  e.  g.  agm-ndm,  dhenii-ndm ,  datr-nd in ; 

bahvT-ndm 2. 

3.  Present  participles  in  -at  and  -ant  throw  the  acute  on  the  endings 
with  initial  vowel  in  the  weak  cases;  e.  g.  from  iud-dnt -  ’striking’;  I.  sing. 
tud-at-d  (but  tud-dd-bhis ).  This  rule  is  also  followed  by  the  old  participles 
?nah-dt-  ‘great’  and  brh-dt  ‘large’,  e.  g.  mahat-d  (but  mahdd-lhis )P 

4.  In  the  RV.  derivatives  formed  with  accented  -ahc  throw  the  acute 
on  endings  with  initial  vowel  in  the  weak  cases  when  contraction  to  T  and  u 
appears  in  the  final  syllable;  thus  from  praty-dnc-  ‘turned  towards’,  I.  sing. 
pratic-d  (but  L.  pi.  pratydk-su) ;  from  anv-dnc-  ‘following’;  G.  anuc-ds  (but 
from  prdfic-  L.  sing,  prdc-i).  The  other  Samhitas,  however,  generally  retain 
the  accent  on  the  stem4. 


4.  Verbal  Accent. 

95.  As  regards  personal  endings,  those  of  the  singular  active  in  all 
tenses  and  moods  are  always  unaccented  except  the  2.  imperative  -dhi  or  -hi 
Others  may  be  accented;  if  dissyllabic,  they  have  the  acute  on  the  first  syllable, 
as  -anti,  -mdhi. 

When  the  tense  stem  ends  in  -a  in  the  present,  in  the  future,  in  the 
unaugmented  imperfect  and  aorist,  and  throughout  the  subjunctive,  the  accent 
is  never  on  the  ending,  as  it  remains  on  the  same  syllable  of  the  stem 
throughout. 

96.  All  tenses  formed  with  the  augment  invariably  accent  the  latter, 
if  the  verb  is  accented  at  all  (85,2  j3);  e.  g.  impf.  d-b/iara-t,  plupf.  a-jagan , 
aor.  d-bhu-t ,  conditional  a-bharisya-t.  If  the  augment  is  dropped,  the  accen¬ 
tuation  is  as  follows.  In  the  imperfect  the  acute  is  on  the  same  syllable 
as  in  the  present;  e.  g.  b/idra-t ,  pres,  bhara-ti.  The  pluperfect,  if  regularly 


hardly  more  than  one  third  of  the  stems 
occurring;  see  Whitney  390  a;  cp.  Lanman 
494,  499,  5°4  top,  505. 

1  When  a  monosyllable  becomes  the  final 
member  of  a  compound,  it  loses  its  mono¬ 
syllabic  accent;  e.  g.  su-dhi-  ‘wise’,  G.  pi. 
su-dhindm .  On  the  other  hand  pres-  ‘pressing 
on’  though  a  compound  (_ pra-is -)  is  accented 
like  monosyllables  in  the  I.  sing,  pres-d. 

2  This  regularly  takes  place  in  the  G.  of 


the  plural  cardinals  in  -a:  as  pdnca  ‘five', 
pancd-narh,  ddsa  ‘ten’,  dasd-ndm. 

3  The  accent  is,  however,  not  shifted  in 
the  old  participle  vdghdt-  m.  ‘worshipper’; 
nor  in  the  two  forms  a-codat-e  ‘not  urging’ 
(from  odd- ant-)  and  rathirdyat-am  ‘speeding’; 
cp.  Lanman  p.  505  —  6  (top). 

4  Thus  the  f.  stem  prattc-T-  (AV.),  but  RV. 
pratlc-i-  (once  in  the  A.  praticim ). 


III.  Accent.  Verbal  Accent. 


99 


formed,  accents  the  root,  as  3.  sing,  cakan  (  y  ban-),  3.  sing,  varan  (  Y  ran-), 

1.  sing,  ciketam  (j/V/A);  when  formed  with  thematic  -a,  it  accents  that  vowel, 
as  3.  pi.  cakrpa-nta.  The  aorist  if  formed  with  -sa,  accents  that  syllable, 
e.  S-  3-  pl-  dhuk-sd-n ,  dhuk-sa-nta  (from  duh-  “milk’);  if  formed  with  -s,  it 
accents  the  root,  as  may  be  inferred  from  1.  sing,  vdm-s-i  (from  van-  Svin’), 
the  only  accented  example  occurring;  if  formed  with  -is-,  it  accents  the  root, 
e.  g.  1.  sing,  sanis-is-am 1 .  If  formed  from  the  root,  it  accents  the  radical 
vowel  in  the  singular  active,  but  the  endings  elsewhere,  as  3.  sing,  vdrk  (  Yvrj-)T 
but  2.  sing.  mid.  nut-thds  ( y?iud-).  If  formed  from  the  root  with  thematic  -a, 
it  usually  follows  the  analogy  of  the  present  tf-class,  e#  g>  ruha-m ,  bhuja-t , 
vidd-t ,  budha-nta ;  in  several  instances,  however,  it  accents  the  root,  as  dra-nta 
(r-  ‘go’);  sdra-t  ( sr -  ‘how’);  sdda-tam  (sad-  ‘sit’);  sdna-t  {san-  ‘gain’)  but  opt. 
san/ma;  vdca-t  {vac-  ‘speak’)  but  opt.  voceyam.  The  reduplicated  aorist  usually 
accents  the  reduplicative  syllable,  as  2.  sing,  didharas ,  ninasas,  3.  sin <g.  pipar at, 
sisvap,  jijanat,  pl.  jijanan ;  but  sometimes  the  root,  as  2.  sing,  sisrdthas ,  3.  sing. 
pip  drat,  sisndthat.  Passive  aorists  accent  the  root,  e.  g.  dhd-y-i ,  srdv-i ,  ved-i , 
jan-i,  pad-i ,  sad-i. 

97.  Present  system.  —  1.  Throughout  the  present  system  of  the 
^-conjugation  the  accent  remains  on  the  same  syllable  of  the  stem  in  all 
moods;  on  the  radical  syllable  in  verbs  of  the  first  and  fourth  classes;  e.  g> 
bhava-ti  from  bhu-  ‘be’,  ndh-ya-ti  from  nah-  ‘bind’;  on  the  thematic  -a  in  the 
sixth  class ;  e.  g.  tuda-ti  from  tud-  ‘strike’. 

2.  In  the  second  or  graded  conjugation,  the  singular  indicative  active, 
the  whole  of  the  subjunctive,  and  the  3.  sing,  imperative  active2  accent  the  stem, 
while  all  other  forms  accent  the  endings3.  In  the  strong  forms  the  radical 
syllable  is  accented  in  the  second  class;  generally  the  reduplicative  syllable, 
but  sometimes  the  root,  in  the  third  class;  the  suffix  in  the  fifth,  eighth, 
seventh,  and  ninth;  e.  g.  3.  sing.  ind.  ds-ti,  subj.  ds-a-t,  impv.  ds-tu,  from  as- 
‘be’,  2nd  cl.;  3.  sing.  ind.  bi-bhar-ti  from  bhr-  ‘bear’,  3rd  cl.;  3.  sing.  ind.  kr-nd-ti, 
subj.  kr-ndv-a-t ,  2.  pl.  impv.  kr-no-ta ,  and  kr-nd-tana  from  kr-  ‘make’,  5th  cl.; 
3.  sing.  subj.  mau-dv-a-te  from  man-  ‘think’,  Sthcl.;  1.  sing.  ind. yu-nd-J-mi,  3. sing, 
subj .  yu-nd-j-a-t  from  yuj-  ‘join’,  7th  cl.;  3.  sing.  ind.  grbh-nd-ti,  2.  sing.  subj. 
grbh-nd-s  from  grabh-  ‘seize’,  9th cl.;  but  2.  sing.  impv.  ad-dh'i ,  3.  pl.  opt.  ad-yur 
from  ad-  ‘eat’,  2nd  cl.;  1.  pl.  ind.  bi-bhr-mdsi ;  1.  sing.  ind.  mid.  kr-nv-e,  2.  sing, 
impv.  kr-nu-hi ;  1.  pl.  opt.  van-u-ydma ,  3.  pl.  impv.  van-v-antu  from  van-  ‘win’, 
8th  cl;  3.  sing.  mid. yunk-te,  2.  sing.  impv.  mid.  yimk-sva ;  1.  pl.  ind.  gr-nT-mdsi, 

2.  sing.  impv.  gr-m-hi  from  gr-  ‘praise’,  9t}l  cl. 

a.  Irregularities.  In  the  second  or  root  class,  several  verbs  accent  the  radical 
syllable  throughout4:  si-  ‘lie’  does  so  besides  taking  Guna;  e.  g.  1.  sing,  say-e,  2.  sing. 
se-se  etc.  5  Occasional  accentuation  of  the  root  in  weak  forms  appears  in  2.  sing.  impv. 
jan-i-sva^  {\/j’au-)y  vial-sva  (\/maci-),  yak-sva  (\/jyaj-),  sak-sva  and  sctk-sva  {\Zsah-)y  rdh-a-t ,  subj. 

(  rdh-  ‘thrive’],  3*  pl.  impv.  svdp-antu  (AV.)  and  svds-anlu  (AV.)7.  A  few  roots  of  the  third 
class  accent  the  root  instead  of  the  reduplicative  syllable  in  the  strong  forms.  These 
are  ci-  ‘note’,  mad-  ‘exhilarate’,  yu-  ‘separate’,  hu-  ‘sacrifice’;  e.  g.  2.  sing,  ci-ke-si  (AV.); 

3.  sing.  subj.  ma-mad-a-t,  3.  sing,  imp v.  ma-mdl-lu;  3.  sing.  subj.  yu-yav-a-l,  2.  pl.  impv.T^V'd- 
lana ;  3.  sing,  ju-hd-ti.  Occasional  forms  thus  accented  are  2.  sing,  iy-ar-si  (RV1.)  from 


1  Of  the  Tr- aorist  no  accented  forms  occur. 

2  The  2.  pl.  impv.  active  often  accents 
the  stem,  which  is  then  strong,  as  e-ta, 
e-tana  from  i-  ‘go’;  this  is  sometimes  also 
the  case  with  the  2.  du.  in  - tain . 

3  The  final  syllable  of  the  ending  of  the 
3.  pl.  middle  is  regularly  accented  in  several 
verbs,  as  ri-/iate,  duh-ate ;  see  WHITNEY  613, 

685,  699;  Delbruck,  Verbum  73. 


4  These  are  as-  ‘sit’,  Id-  ‘praise’,  Ir-  ‘set 
in  motion’.  Is-  ‘rule’,  cads-  ‘see’,  tabs-  ‘fashion’, 
trd-  ‘protect’,  nims-  ‘kiss’,  vas-  ‘clothe’,  su- 
‘bring  forth’. 

5  See  Whitney  628  and  629. 

6  Op.  cit.  631  a. 

7  Op.  cit.  630. 


I  oo 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Serache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


r-  ‘go’,  2.  sing.  mid.  dhdt-se  from  dbd-  ‘put’,  and  bi-bhar-ii  (RV1.  AV2 *.)  beside  the  usual 
bi-bbar-ti.  Both  types,  when  the  ending  begins  with  a  vowel,  throw  the  accent  back  on 
the  reduplicative  syllable;  e.  g.  3.  pi.  juhv-ati  and  bibhr-ati ,  but  2.  pi.  jufm-tha  and  bibhr- 
tha.  The  subjunctive  here,  as  usual,  follows  the  accentuation  of  the  strong  indicative; 
its  stem  from  the  same  two  roots  would  be  juhav-a-  and  btbhar-a-.  In  the  optative  middle 
the  accent  is  thrown  back  on  the  reduplicative  syllable  because  the  modal  affix  begins 
with  a  vowel;  e.  g.  1.  sing,  dddh-tya  etc.  beside  1.  sing.  act.  dadh-yam  etc.1  The  RV., 
however,  once  has  dadbi-tci  beside  dddfu-ta  (3  times).  In  the  imperative,  endings  with 
initial  consonant  are  accented  in  the  weak  forms,  otherwise  the  reduplicative  syllable; 
e.  g.  2.  sing,  de-h'i,  2.  du.  dat-tam,  but  3.  mid.  pi .  jihatdm.  The  strong  3.  sing.  impv.  act. 
follows  the  strong  ind.,  e.  g.  dadhatu,  pipartu ;  the  2.  pi.  is  often  strong;  e.  g.  juhota, 
dddhata.  The  participle  regularly  accents  the  reduplicative  syllable;  e.  g.  juhv-at,  juhv- 
ana,  except  only  pipdnct-  (pa-  ‘drink’).  —  In  the  seventh  class  the  root  bints-  ‘injure’ 
(originally  perhaps  a  desiderative  of  ban-  ‘strike’)  accents  the  radical  syllable  in  weak 
forms,  as  3.  sing,  b'uns-te ,  pi.  hints- anti,  part,  hims-dna-.  —  In  the  fifth  and  eighth  classes 
the  RV.  has  several  instances  of  irregular  accentuation  of  the  final  syllable  in  the  3.  pi. 
mid.:  kr-nv-atc,  vr-nv-aic,  spr-nv-ate ;  tan-v-ate ,  man-v-ate.  —  In  the  ninth  class  the  irregular 
accentuation  of  the  3.  pi.  mid.  occurs  in  pu-n-a-ie.  and  ri-n-ate  (id-  ‘How’).  The  ending 
-ana,  which  is  here  added  in  the  2.  sing.  impv.  act.  to  a  few  roots  with  final  consonant, 
is  accented  on  the  last  syllable:  grh-dna,  badb-dnct  (AV.),  slabh-dna  (AV.). 

98.  The  perfect.  —  The  singular  indicative  active  and  the  whole  sub¬ 
junctive2  accent  the  radical  syllable;  all  other  forms  of  the  indicative,  as 
well  as  the  whole  imperative  and  optative  accent  the  endings;  e.  g.  ind.  3.  sing. 
cakdr-a ,  pi.  cakr-ur ,  1.  pi.  mid.  cakr-mdhe ;  subj.  sing.  2.  paprdth-a-s,  piprdy-a-s ; 
3 .  jabhdr-a-t,  piprdy-a-t ,  mumoc-a-t ;  dad/idrs-a-ti ,  vavart-a-ti\  pi.  1.  cakdn-cima, 
susav-ama,  3.  paprdth-a-n ;  opt.  sing.  1.  vavrt-ydm ,  2.  susru-yds ,  3.  tutuj-ydt , 
du.  2.  susru-ydtam ;  pi.  3.  vavrj-yur\  mid.  sing.  2.  vavrdh-T-tkds,  3.  sisrT-td  (Jri- 
‘resort’);  impv.  sing.  2.  pipri-hi,  mumug-dhi  (Y muc-),  du.  2 .  jajas-tdm ;  mid.  sing.  2. 
dadhi-sva h  The  participle,  both  active  and  middle,  accents  the  suffix;  e.  g. 
cakr-vdms -;  cakr-and-. 

99.  The  aorist. — The  accentuation  of  the  unaugmented  forms  of  the 
indicative  has  already  been  stated  (96).  With  regard  to  that  of  the  moods, 
the  following  notes  may  be  added. 

1.  The  root  aorist  accents  the  radical  syllable  in  the  subjunctive;  e.  g. 
sing.  2.  kdr-a-s ,  3.  kdr-a-t ,  du.  3.  srdv-a-tas ,  pi.  3.  gdm-a-nti ,  mid.  sing.  3.  bhdj- 
a-te;  in  the  injunctive,  the  radical  syllable  in  the  singular,  but  the  ending 
elsewhere;  e.  g.  sing.  1.  ndm-s-i,  pi.  3.  dabh-ur ,  mid.  sing.  2.  mr-thds;  in  the 
optative,  the  endings  throughout;  e.  g.  act.  sing.  1.  as-ydm ,  2.  bhft-yds,  mid. 
pi.  1.  as-imd/ti;  in  the  imperative,  the  root  in  the  3.  sing,  act.,  but  the  ending 
elsewhere;  e.  g.  sing.  3.  srd-tu,  but  2 .  kr-dhi,  du.  2.  ga-tdm,  pi.  2.  bhu-td 4,  mid. 
sing.  2.  kr-sva\  in  the  participle,  the  suffix  is  accented  in  the  active,  e.  g. 
bhid-dnt -,  and  generally  in  the  middle,  e.  g.  budh-and -,  but  in  several  instances 
the  root;  e.  g.  dyut-ana-. 

2.  In  the  a-aorist  the  accentuation  follows  that  of  the  unaugmented 
indicative;  thus  the  subjunctive  sing.  3.  viddt\  the  injunctive  sing.  1.  ddrsa-m 
ruhd-m ,  3.  ruha-t ,  vidd-t,  sdna-t ,  pi.  3.  vidd-nta ;  optative,  sing.  1.  vidcyam , 
sandy  am,  pi.  1.  sakema ,  sancma  and  sdnema\  the  imperative,  sing.  2.  sdna, 
sara ,  du.  2.  ruha-tam ,  sdda-tam ,  pi.  2.  khyd-ta.  The  participle  usually  accents 
the  thematic  - a ,  but  sometimes  the  root;  e.  g.  trpa-nt -,  but  sdda-nt- ;  guhd- 
mana -,  but  ddsa-mana -. 


1  Cp.  Whitney  645  a,  668  a,  669. 

2  When  the  primary  endings  are  added, 
the  reduplicative  syllable  is  almost  always 

accented  ;  e.  g.  jttjosasi ;  some  others,  which 
take  secondary  endings,  but  do  not  strengthen 

the  root,  also  accent  the  reduplicative 
syllable,  as  dcidhrsanta\  see  below  490. 


3  A  few  forms  accent  and  strengthen  the 
radical  syllable,  du.  2.  mumdc-a-iam,  pi.  2.  mu- 
mbc-a-ta,  mid.  sing.  2.  piprcty-a-sva. 

4  But  the  root  is  strong  and  accented  in 
several  forms,  bar-ia  etc.,  of  the  2.  pi.  im¬ 
perative. 


III.  Accent.  Verbal  Accent. 


io  I 


3.  In  the  reduplicated  aorist  the  only  accented  form  in  the  subjunctive 
seems  to  be  vdcati;  in  the  injunctive,  either  the  reduplicative  syllable  or  the 
root  is  accented;  e.  g.  sing.  2.  nhias-as,  sisrdthas ,  3.  piparat  and  piparat ;  in 
the  optative,  the  thematic  vowel  or  the  ending;  e.  g.  pi.  1.  vocdma,  cucyuv-l- 
mdhi ;  in  the  imperative,  the  thematic  vowel  or  the  ending;  e.  g.  du.  2.  jigr-tam, 
\A.  jigr-td,  susudd-ta  (AV.). 

4.  The  s-aorist  accents  the  root  in  the  subjunctive;  e.  g.  dar-s-a-t  {dr- 
‘split’),  ydk-s-a-t  ( yaj -  ‘sacrifice’),  du.  2.  pdr-s-a-thas  (pr-  ‘take  across’);  the 
root  in  the  injunctive  as  far  as  can  be  judged  from  the  extremely  few  accented 
forms,  as  mid.  sing.  1.  vam-s-i  {van-  ‘win’);  the  ending1  in  the  optative,  as 
mid.  sing.  1.  bhak-s-T-yd  ( ]P bhaj-),  pi.  dhuk-s-i-mdhi  {duh-  ‘milk’);  in  the  imperative 
no  accented  forms  occur;  the  participle  accents  the  root  in  the  active,  as 
ddk-s-ant-  {dak-  ‘burn’),  but  in  the  irregularly  formed  middle2  nearly  always  the 
suffix,  as  arc-a-s-dnd-,  but  6h-a-s-dna-  (527). 

5.  The  /5-aorist  accents  the  root  in  the  subjunctive;  e.  g.  sing.  3.  bddh- 
is-a-t;  the  root  in  the  injunctive,  e.  g.  sing.  2.  mdth-Ts ,  but  once  the  ending  in 
pi.  3.  tar-is-ur  (AV.);  the  ending  in  the  optative;  e.  g.  sing.  1.  edh-is-iyd  (AV.); 
the  ending  in  the  imperative;  e.  g.  sing.  2.  av-id-d/i! ,  du.  2.  av-is-tdm. 

6.  In  the  s/is-aorist  no  accented  forms  occur  except  one  in  the  imperative, 
where  the  ending  has  the  acute,  du.  2.  ya-sis-tdm. 

7.  The  sa-aorist  accents  that  syllable  in  the  injunctive,  as  pi.  3.  dhuk-sd-nta 
(but  once  sing.  3.  d/idP-sa-ta),  and  in  the  imperative,  as  sing.  2.  dhuk-sd-sva 
( \d  du/i-).  No  subjunctive  or  optative  forms  occur. 

100.  The  future. — The  accent  in  all  forms  of  this  tense  remains  on  the 
suffix  -syd-  or  -i-syd;  e.  g.  sing.  3.  e-syd-ti  (AV.)  ‘he  will  go’  (j /V-);  sing.  1. 
stav-i-sydmi  ‘I  shall  praise’  ( | Pstu-)}  3.  kai'-i-sydti  ‘he  will  do’  ( ]/ kr-) ;  participle 
kar-i-sydnt-  ‘about  to  do’. 

101.  Secondary  conjugations.  —  All  these,  except  the  active  form  of 
the  intensive,  accent  the  same  syllable  of  the  stem  throughout.  They  are 
the  causative,  the  denominative,  the  passive,  the  secondary  form  of  the 
intensive,  and  the  desiderative,  the  stem  of  all  of  which  ends  in  -a.  The 
causative  accents  the  penultimate  syllable  of  the  stem;  e.  g.  krodh-dya- 
‘enrage’. — The  passive,  the  secondary  form  of  the  intensive,  and  the 
denominative,  accent  the  suffix  -yd;  e.  g.  pan-ya-te  ‘is  admired’;  rerih-yd-te 
‘licks  repeatedly’;  gopa-ydnti  ‘they  protect’.  A  certain  number  of  unmistakable 
denominatives,  however,  have  the  causative  accent;  e.  g.  mantrd-ya-te  ‘takes 
counsel’.  —  The  desiderative  accents  the  reduplicative  syllable;  e.  g.  piprT- 
sa-ti.  —  The  primary  form  of  the  intensive  agrees  in  accentuation  with  the 
third  or  reduplicating  class  of  verbs,  that  is,  it  accents  the  reduplicative 
syllable  in  the  strong  forms,  but  the  endings  with  initial  consonant  in  the 
weak  forms  of  the  indicative  active;  e.  g.  sing.  3.  johav-T-ti,  du.  3.  jar-bhr-tds, 
pi.  3.  vdr-vrt-ati.  In  the  middle  indicative,  however,  the  reduplicative  syllable 
is  more  often  accented  than  not;  e.  g.  tc-tik-te  and  nenik-te.  In  the  subjunctive 
the  reduplicative  syllable  is  regularly  accented;  e.  g.  sing.  3.  jaiighan-a-t,  but 
once  the  root  in  sing.  1.  janghdn-ani;  mid.  pi.  3.  jdnghan-anta,  but  once  the 
ending  in  du.  3.  tantas-dite.  No  accented  form  of  the  optative  occurs.  In 
the  imperative  the  ending  is  accented;  e.  g.  sing.  2.  jdgr-hi,  car-kr-tdt.  In  the 
participle,  both  active  and  middle,  the  reduplicative  syllable  is  regularly 
accented;  e.  g.  cdkit-at -,  cekit-dna-;  there  are,  however,  two  exceptions  in  the 
middle:  badbadh-and-  and  marmrj-and-  (548a). 

1  Once  the  root  is  accented  in  the  irregular  participles  irregularly  formed  with  -mafia. 

form  du.  2.  tra-s-T-tham.  j  ha-s-a-mana-  and  dhi-s-a-mdna -. 

2  The  root  is  accented  in  two  middle  i 


io2  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  Vedic  Grammar. 


5.  Accent  of  nominal  verb  forms. 

102.  The  accentuation  of  participles  formed  from  tense  and  conjugation 
stems  has  already  been  stated.  When  these  are  compounded  with  pre¬ 
positions,  they  retain  their  accents;  thus  the  present  and  perfect  participles  of 
a  pa-gam-  ‘go  away’  would  be  apa-gdcchant -,  apa-gdcchamana- ;  apa-jaganvdms-, 
apa-jagmana-.  The  preposition  is,  however,  not  infrequently  found  separated 
from  the  participle  by  another  word  or  is  placed  after  it,  when  it  is  treated 
as  independent  and  accented,  e.  g.  prd  smdsru  dodhuvat  (x.  231)  ‘shaking  his 
beard’;  dpa  drlhdni  ddrdrat  (vi.  175)  ‘bursting  strongholds  asunder’;  d  ca  para 
ca  pathibhis  cdrantam  (1.  16431)  ‘wandering  hither  and  thither  on  (his)  paths’, 
mddhu  bibhrata  upa  (1.  1662)  ‘bringing  sweetness  near’;  tanvdnta  d  rajah 
(iv.  452)  ‘extending  through  the  air’.  The  preposition  is  occasionally  found 
independently  accented  immediately  before  the  participle,  as  abhi  ddksat  (11.  \1) 
‘burning  around’;  vi  vidvdn  (1.  1897)  ‘distinguishing’  (probably  in  distinction 
from  vividvdn,  perfect  participle  of  vid-  ‘find’). 

a.  When  there  are  two  prepositions,  either  both  are  compounded  and 
unaccented,  as  vi-pra-ydntah  (ix.  22s)  ‘advancing’,  pary-a-vivrtsan  (vii.  63s) 
‘turning  round’;  or  one  is  compounded  and  the  other  independent  and 
accented,  as  abhi  a-cdrantih  (vm.  9615)  ‘approaching’;  ava-srjann  upa  tmdna 
(1.  14211)  ‘bestowing  indeed’;  prd  vaydim  uj-jihanah  (v.  i1)  ‘flying  up  to  a 
branch’. 

b.  Participles  in  -tar  generally  accent  the  root,  as  kdr-tar  ‘making’, 
but  when  compounded  the  suffix.  But  ni-cetar-  ‘observing’  occurs  beside 
ni-cetdr-  ‘observer’. 

103.  The  past  passive  participle  regularly  accents  the  suffix;  e.  g. 
ga-td-  ‘gone’,  pat-i-td-  (AV.)  ‘fallen’,  chin-nd-  ‘cut  off’  {j\f chid-').  But  when 
this  participle  is  compounded  with  prepositions,  the  latter  are  as  a  rule 
accented.  In  several  instances,  however,  the  accent  of  the  simple  participle 
is  retained,  as  apa-krT-td-  (AV.)  ‘bought’,  ni-ci-td -  ‘seen’,  nis-kr-td-  ‘prepared’, 
ni-sat-td-  ‘seated’,  ni-va-td-  (AV.)  ‘uninjured’,  pra-jah-i-td-  ‘given  up’  (from  jah-> 
a  secondary  form  of  ha-  ‘leave’),  pra-sas-td-  ‘celebrated’,  sam-skr-td-  ‘prepared’ 
(beside  sdm-skr-ta -),  sam-hi-td-  (VS.)  ‘variegated’  h  The  preposition  may  be 
separated  from  the  participle  by  another  word,  as  pari  soma  siktd/i  (ix.  97 15) 
‘poured,  O  Soma,  around’.  When  there  are  two  prepositions,  the  first 
remains  unaccented,  as  apd-vrktah  (viii.  80s)  ‘removed’  ( apa-di -),  sam-d-kr-tam 
(x.  847)  ‘accumulated’;  or  it  may  be  separated  and  independently  accented, 
as  prd  ydt  samudrd  d-hitah  (ix.  6419)  ‘when  despatched  forth  to  the  ocean’; 
t>dri  gdbkir  d-vrtam  (ix.  8627)  ‘encompassed  round  by  streams  of  milk’. 

104.  Of  the  gerundives,  those  in  -ya  (or  -t-ya)  and  -tva  accent  the 
root;  e.  g.  cdks-ya-  ‘to  be  seen’,  sru-t-ya-  ‘to  be  heard’,  car-kr-t-ya-  ‘to  be 
praised’,  vdk-tva-  ‘to  be  said’;  those  in  -ayya,  - etiya ,  -amya  (AV.)  accent  the 
penultimate;  e.  g.  pan-dyya-  ‘to  be  admired’,  Tks-cnya-  ‘worthy  to  be  seen’, 
while  those  in  -tavya  accent  the  final  syllable,  as  jan-i-tavya-  (AV.)  ‘to  be 
born’2.  When  compounded  with  prepositions3,  gerundives  nearly  always 
leave  the  accent  unchanged;  e.  g.  pari-cdks-ya-  ‘to  be  despised’;  with  Svarita 
on  the  final  syllable  in  the  RV.  only  a-kay-ya-  ‘desirable’  and  upa-vak-yd - 


1  Such  compounds  are  also  thus  accent-  only  begin  to  appear  in  the  AV.,  where 

ed  when  turned  into  substantives,  as  nis-  two  examples  of  each  occur  (581  a,  b). 
kr-td-  n.  ‘rendezvous’,  upa-siuta-,  N.  of  a  3  The  preposition  is  here  always  inse- 
man.  parable. 

2  The  gerundives  in  -anlya  and  -tavya 


III.  Accent.  Accent  of  Nominal  Verb  Forms. 


103 


‘to  be  addressed’;  abhy-a-yams-dnya -  ‘allowing  oneself  to  be  drawn  near’; 
a-mantr-aniya-  (AV.)  ‘to  be  addressed’. 

105.  Infinitives  are  as  a  rule  accented  like  ordinary  nominal  cases 
formed  from  the  same  stems. 

a.  The  dative  infinitive  from  root  stems  accents  the  ending;  e.  g.  drs-c 
‘to  see’,  but  when  compounded,  the  root;  e.  g.  sam-idh-e  ‘to  kindle’,  abhi-pra- 
cdks-e  (1.  1136)  ‘to  see’.  Those  formed  from  stems  in  -as  generally  accent 
that  suffix,  but  sometimes  the  radical  syllable;  e.  g.  car-ds-e  ‘to  fare’,  but 
cdks-as-e  ‘to  see’.  Those  formed  from  stems  in  -i  and  -ti  accent  the  suffix; 
e.  g.  drs-dy-e  ‘to  see’,  pl-tdy-e  ‘to  drink’.  Those  from  stems  in  -tu  accent 
the  root,  as  bhdr-tav-e\  also  those  from  stems  in  - tava ,  but  with  a  secondary 
accent  on  the  final  syllable,  as  gdn-tavdi.  When  these  two  forms  are  com¬ 
pounded  with  prepositions,  the  latter  are  accented;  e.  g.  prd-vantave 1  ‘to 
win’,  dpa-bhartavdi  ‘to  be  taken  away’,  the  latter  retaining  its  final  accent  as 
well.  When  there  are  two  prepositions,  the  first  may  be  independent  and 
accented  as  well;  e.  g.  vi prd-sartave  (vnr.  6 7 1 2 )  ‘to  spread’.  Infinitives  formed 
with  -dhyai  generally  accent  the  preceding  a  of  the  verbal  stem,  but  sometimes 
the  root;  e.  g.  iyd-dhyai  ‘to  go’,  but  gama-dhyai  ‘to  go’.  Those  formed  from 
stems  in  -man  accent  the  root;  e.  g.  dk-man-e  ‘to  give’,  except  vid-man-e  ho 
know’;  from  stems  in  -van  there  are  da-van-e  ‘to  give’,  tur-vdn-e  ‘to  excel’, 
but  dhUr-van-e  ‘to  injure’  ( \f  d/ivr-) 1  2. 

b.  The  accusative  infinitive  if  formed  from  a  radical  stem  accents  the 
root  even  when  compounded  with  a  preposition;  e.  g.  subh-am  ‘to  shine’, 
a-sdd-am  ‘to  sit  down’;  if  formed  from  a  stem  in  -tu,  it  accents  the  root  in 
a  simple  stem,  but  the  preposition  in  a  compounded  stem;  e.  g.  dd-tum  ‘to  give’, 
pra-bhar-tum  ‘to  present’,  amt  prd-volhum  ‘to  advance’3. 

c.  The  ablative-genitive  infinitive,  if  formed  from  radical  stems,  which 
here  occur  only  in  combination  with  prepositions,  accents  the  root;  e.  g.  ava- 
pdd-as  ‘(from)  falling  down’;  if  formed  from  a  stem  in  -tu,  the  root  in  a 
simple  stem,  but  the  preposition  in  a  compound  stem;  e.  g.  gdn-tos  ‘going’, 
?i!-dha-tos  ‘putting  down’. 

d.  The  locative  infinitive  if  formed  from  radical  stems  accents  the 
ending  in  the  simple  form,  but  the  root  in  the  compounded  form;  e.  g.  budh-i 
‘at  the  waking’,  but  sam-drs-i  ‘on  seeing’.  The  one  locative  infinitive  formed 
from  a  stem  in  -tar,  and  those  from  stems  in  -san  accent  the  suffix;  e.  g. 
dhar-tar-i  ‘to  bestow’,  ne-sdn-i  ‘to  lead’. 

106.  Uncompounded  gerunds  formed  with  -tin,  -tvd,  tvdya  accent  the 
suffix,  while  the  compounded  gerunds*  formed  with  -yd  or  -tya  accent  the 
root;  e,  g.  ga-tvz  ‘having  gone’,  bhu-tvd  ‘having  become’,  ga-tvdya  ‘having  gone’; 
sam-grbh-yd  ‘gathering’,  upa-sru-tya  (AV.)  ‘having  overheard’. 

107.  Case-forms  used  as  adverbs  frequently  show  a  shift  of  accent. 
This  appears  oftenest  in  the  accusative  neuter.  Thus  drav-dt  ‘quickly’,  but 
drav-ant-  ‘running’,  probably  also  drah-ydt 5  ‘stoutly’;  apardm  ‘later’,  but 
dparam  as  neuter  adjective;  a-vyus-am  (AV.)  ‘till  dawn’6;  and  the  adverbs 
in  -vat,  as  angiras-vdt  ‘like  Angiras’,  manus-vdt  ‘as  Manus  did’,  pur  aria-vat, 


1  The  infinitive  from  stems  in  -tu  in  all 
its  cases  accents  the  preposition ;  e.  g.  sdm- 
hartum  ‘to  collect’,  dpi-dhatave  ‘to  cover  up’, 
ava-gantos  ‘of  descending’. 

2  A  preposition  is  occasionally  uncom¬ 
pounded  with  or  separated  from  the  infinitive, 
when  both  are  accented,  as  prd  ddvane  j 
(iv.  32^;  v.  653);  prd  ads  use  datave  (IV.  2011).  , 

3  When  there  are  two  prepositions,  the  j 


first  is  independent  and  therefore  also 
accented. 

4  The  preposition  is  here  always  in¬ 
separable. 

5  Which  seems  to  be  formed  from  an 
irregular  present  participle  of  drh-  ‘be  firm’. 

6  The  ordinary  A.  of  vy-us-  ‘dawn’  would 
be  vyus-am. 


I.  Allgemeines  uxd  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


purva-vdt ,  prataa-vdt  ‘as  of  old’,  which  are  accusative  neuters  of  the  adjective 
suffix  -va?it 1  (unaccented);  and  some  adverbs  from  the  comparative  in  - tara , 
ut-tardm  (A V.)  ‘higher’,  but  vt-tara-  as  adjective;  similarly  ava-tardm ,  paras- 
taram  and  para-tardm  ‘farther  away’,  vi-tardm  ‘more  widely’1 2 3  sam-tardin  (AV.) 
‘still  farther’.  Similarly  the  instrumental  diva  ‘by  day’,  but  divd  ‘through 
heaven’;  and  the  dative  apardya  ‘for  the  future’,  but  d par  ay  a  ‘to  the  later’; 
and  the  ablatives  apakdt  ‘from  afar’  {dp aka-  ‘far’),  amdt  ‘from  near’  {dma-  AV. 
‘this’),  sandt  ‘from  of  old’  (sdna-  ‘old’)  3. 


6.  Accent  in  Sandhi. 

108.  1.  When  two  vowels  combine  so  as  to  form  a  long  vowel  or 
diphthong,  the  latter  has  the  Udatta  if  either  or  both  of  the  original  vowels 
had  it4;  e.  g.  nudasvdtha  for  nudasva  d/ha;  tdvet  for  tdva  it;  kvdt  for  kvd  it5; 
dgat  for  d  agat;  pitdva  for  pita  iva,  said  for  said  u;  ndntaras  (vi.  63  s)  for 
nd  dntaras. 

The  contraction  of  /+  i  is,  however,  accented  7, 6  the  (dependent)  Svarita 
having  here  (in  it)  ousted  the  preceding  Udatta7;  e.  g.  diviva  (RV.  AV.)  for 
divi  Iva.  This  is  the  praslisia ,  ‘contracted’,  Svarita  of  the  Pratisakhyas8. 

2.  When  1  and  fi  with  Udatta  are  changend  to  y  and  v,  a  following 
unaccented  vowel  receives  the  Svarita;  e.  g.  vy  hnat  for  vi  anat. 

The  uncontracted  form  with  Udatta  must,  however,  almost  invariably 
be  read  in  the  RV.  This  is  the  ksaipra 9  Svarita  of  the  Pratisakhyas8.  Here 
the  enclitic  Svarita  assumes  the  appearance  of  an  independent  accent. 

3.  When  d  is  elided,  it  throws  back  its  Udatta  on  unaccented  e  or  0; 
e.  g.  sundve  ‘ gne  for  sundve  dg?ie;  vo  ’ vasah  for  vo  dvasa/i.  But  when  un¬ 
accented  a  is  elided,  it  changes  a  preceding  Udatta  to  Svarita;  e.  g.  so  ’ dhamdh 
for  so  adhamdh.  This  is  the  abhinihita  Svarita  of  the  Pratisakhyas8.  Here 
also  the  enclitic  Svarita  (in  d  a)  has  ousted  the  preceding  Udatta  (as  in  diviva)  io. 

7.  The  Sentence  Accent. 

Haskell,  Vocative-Accent  in  the  Veda,  JAOS.  11,  57.  —  Bohtlingk,  ein 
erster  Versuch  iiber  den  Accent  im  Sanskrit  (Memoires  de  1’Acadernie  imp.  de  St.  Peters- 
bourg  1843)  p.  38  ff.  — Whitney,  JAOS.  5,  193  ff.,  387  ff.  —  Aurel  Mayr,  Beitrage  aus 
dem  Rigveda  zur  Accentuirung  des  verbum  finitum  (Sitzungsberichte  der  phil.-hist.  Classe 
der  kaiserlichen  Akademie  der  Wissenschaften,  Wien  1871,  p.  219  ff.).  —  Weber,  IS.  13, 
7off.  —  Bohtlingk,  Sanskrit-Chrestomathie2  p.  356.  —  Whitney,  Sanskrit  Grammar  591  ff.  — 
Delbruck,  Altindische  Syntax  (Halle  1888)  21 — 29.  —  Oldenberg,  Die  Verbalenklisis 
im  Rgveda,  ZDMG.  60,  707—740. 

iog.  The  vocative.  —  a.  The  vocative,  which  whether  it  consist  of  a 
single  word  or  a  compound  expression,  is  invariably  accented  on  the  first 
syllable,  retains  its  accent  only  at  the  beginning  of  a  sentence  or  Pada11; 


1  Cp.  Whitney  1107  a. 

2  See  op.  cit.  1119. 

3  Cp.  op.  cit.  1114  a. 

4  Cp.  Benfey,  Vollstiindige  Grammatik  64. 

5  But  when  a  Svarita  is  followed  by  an 
unaccented  syllable,  it  of  course  remains; 
e.  g.  kveyatha  for  kva  iyatha  (Vlll.  1 7). 

6  Except  in  the  Taittiriya  texts  which 
follow  the  general  rule  {diviva). 

7  This  also  takes  place  in  siidgdta  (TS.) 
for  su-udgata  ‘a  good  Udgatr’  (TS.  vil.  1. 
Si  :  B.). 

8  Cp.  IlAUG  75. 


9  So  called  because  ‘uttered  with  a 
quick’  {ksipra-)  pronunciation,  the  semivowel 
replacing  the  vowel. 

10  Cp.  WACKERNAGEL  I,  251,  b  a;  BrUG- 
MANN,  IvG.  45,  2. 

1 1  This  applies  to  the  second  as  well  as 
the  first  Pada  of  a  hemistich  (as  some  of  the 
above  examples  show),  thus  indicating  the 
independent  character  of  these  Padas,  which 
is  obscured  by  the  way  in  which  the  re¬ 
dactors  of  the  Samhitas  apply  the  rules  of 
Sandhi  and  mark  the  dependent  Svarita. 


III.  Accent.  Accent  in  Sandhi.  Sentence  Accent.  105 

that  is  to  say,  when,  having  the  full  force  of  the  case,  it  occupies  the  most 
emphatic  position;  e.  g.  dgne  supayand  bhava  (1.  i9b)  ‘O  Agni,  be  easy  of 
access’;  fir  jo  napat  sahasavan  (x.  ii5Sa)  ‘O  mighty  son  of  strength’;  hotar 
yavistha  sukrato  (iv.  4Ild)  ‘O  most  youthful,  skilful  priest’.  This  rule  also  applies 
to  doubly  accented  dual  compounds,  as  mitrdvaruna  (1.  i56b)  ‘O  Mitra  and 
Varuna’  (N.  mitrd-vdruna). 

a.  Two  or  more  vocatives  at  the  beginning  of  a  Pada  are  all  accented;  e.  g.  adife, 
mitra ,  varuna  (II.  27I4a);  urjo  napdd,  bhadrasoce  (viu.  7I3b)  ‘O  son  of  strength,  O  propitiously 
bright  one’ I. 

b.  The  vocative,  when  it  does  not  begin  the  sentence,  loses  its  accent, 
being  unemphatic  as  referring  only  incidentally  to  a  person  already  invoked; 
e.  g.  rtena  mitrdvarundv  rtavrdhav  rtasprsd  (1.  28)  ‘through  Law,  0  Mitra  and 
Varuna,  lovers  and  cherishers  of  Law’;  vpci  tvajigne  dive-dive ,  ddsa-vastar 
dhiyd  vayd/n  |  .  .  .  emasi  (1.  17)  ‘to  thee,  O  Agni,  day  by  day,  O  illuminer 
of  darkness,  with  prayer  we  come’;  a  raj  and 2  rnaha  rtasya  gopd  (vn.  642) 
‘hither  (come),  O  ye  two  sovereign  guardians  of  great  order’;  ydd,  indra 
brahmanas-pate ,  abhidrohdm  cardmasi  (x.  1644)3  ‘if,  O  Indra,  O  Brahmanas- 
pati,  we  commit  an  offence’4. 

a.  The  vocative,  whether  at  the  beginning  of  or  within  a  sentence,  not  being 
regarded  as  part  of  it,  does  not  interfere  with  the  normal  accentuation  of  the  sentence. 
Hence  a  verb  ‘at  the  beginning  of  a  sentence,  following  a  vocative,  is  accented  as  the 
first  word  of  the  sentence;  while  a  verb  within  a  sentence,  following  a  vocative,  remains 
unaccented;  e.  g.  dev  a,  jivata  (AV.XIX.701)  ‘O  gods,  live’ ;  as  me  u  sit,  vrsand ,  madayetham 
(1.  1842)  ‘beside  us,  ye  two  heroes,  enjoy  yourselves’. 

no.  The  verb. — A.  The  finite  verb  in  a  principal  sentence  is 
unaccented  except  when  it  is  the  first  word;  e.  g.  agnim  tie  purdhitam  (1.  i1) 
V  praise  Agni,  the  domestic  priest’;  but  lie  agni  in  vipascitam  (in.  27  s)  ‘I  praise 
Agni  the  wise’.  This  rule  and  its  exception  must,  however,  be  understood 
with  the  following  restrictions: 

1.  A  sentence  is  regarded  as  capable  of  having  only  one  verb.  Hence 
all  other  verbs  syntactically  connected  with  the  subject  of  the  first,  are 
accented  as  beginning  new  sentences  (a  subject  or  object  coming  between 
two  such  verbs  being  generally  counted  to  the  first);  e.  g.  tesdm  pa/ii ,  srudht 
hdvam  (1.  21)  ‘drink  of  them,  hear  our  call’;  asmdbhyam  jesi  yotsi  ca  (1.  1324) 
‘conquer  and  fight  for  us’;  tardnir  ijjayati ,  kseti,  pusyati  (vn.  32°)  ‘the  energetic 
man  conquers,  rules,  thrives’;  jahi  prajdm  ndyasva  ca  (AV.  1.  83)  ‘slay  the 
progeny  and  bring  (it)  hither’. 

2.  The  verb,  though  not  beginning  a  sentence,  receives  the  accent  if 
it  coincides  with  the  beginning  of  a  Pada  (which  is  treated  as  the  beginning 
of  a  new  sentence);  e.  g.  dtha  te  dntamdnam  |  vidydma  sumatindm  (1.  q3). 

3.  Since  a  vocative  (or  vocatives)  at  the  beginning  of  a  sentence  is 
treated  as  extraneous  to  it,  the  verb  which  immediately  follows  it  becomes 
the  first  word  of  the  sentence  and  is  accordingly  accented;  e.  g.  dgne,  jitsdsva 


1  Here  bhadrasoce  is  treated  as  an  in¬ 
dependent  vocative;  it  would  lose  its  accent 
if  intended  to  form  a  compound  expression 
with  urjo  napat  ==  ‘O  propitously  bright  son 
of  strength’,  as  is  the  case  in  hotar  yavistha 
sukrato. 

2  When  the  first  word  of  a  compound 
vocative  is  an  adjective  (not  a  genitive),  it 
retains  its  accent  within  a  Pada;  thus  visve 
devasah  ‘O  All-gods’,  would  appear  within  a 
Pada  as  well  as  at  the  beginning. 

3  This  is  an  example  of  two  distinct 


vocatives.  The  preceding  example  may 
contain  two  also,  as  the  accent  of  two  as 
well  as  of  one  vocative  would  be  lost  within 
a  Pada;  but  if  raj  ana  stood  at  the  beginning 
of  a  Pada,  the  accentuation  would  be  reijand 
mdha  rtasya  gopd ,  supposing  two  vocatives 
were  intended. 

4  The  very  rare  exceptions  to  the  rules 
given  above  (a,  b)  are  doubtless  due  to 
errors  on  the  part  of  the  editors  or  of  tra¬ 
dition. 


io6  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


no  havih  (hi.  281)  ‘O  Agni,  enjoy  our  sacrifice’.  Thus  the  following  sentence 
of  six  words  contains  three  accented  verbs  as  well  as  three  accented  vocatives: 
indr  a,  jiva,  stirya,  jiva ,  dev  a,  jivata  (AY.  xix.  701)  ‘O  Indra,  live;  O  Surya, 
live;  O  gods.  live’. 

4.  There  are  some  instances  in  the  RV.  of  the  verb  when  emphatic, 
even  though  not  placed  at  the  beginning  of  the  sentence,  being  accented 
before  the  particle  id,  and  even  before  cand 1 ;  e.  g.  ddha  smd  no  maghavah 
carkrtdd  id  (1.  1045)  ‘then  be  mindful  of  us,  bounteous  one’;  net,  deva , 
bhasdthas  cand  (vi.  59*)  ‘(him)  0  gods,  ye  two  never  consume’2. 

B.  The  accent  always  rests  on  the  verb  of  a  subordinate  clause 
(which  is  almost  invariably  introduced  by  the  relative  ya-  and  its  derivatives, 
or  contains  the  particles  ca  and  edd  ‘if’,  ned  ‘lest’,  hi  ‘for’,  kuvid  ‘whether’); 
e.  g.  yam  yajham  paribhfir  dsi  (1.  i4)  ‘what  offering  thou  protectest’;  grhdn 
gaccha  grhapdtiu  ydthajdsah  (x.  85  s5)  ‘'go  to  the  house,  that  thou  be  lady 
of  the  house’;  indras  ca  mrldydti  no,  na  nah  pas'edd  aghdm  nasat  (11.  41 1!) 
‘if  Indra  be  gracious  to  us,  no  hurt  will  thereafter  reach  us’;  vi  ced  ucchdnty, 
asvind ,  usdsah,  prd  vain  brdhmani  kardvo  bharante  (vii.  72+)  ‘when  the  dawns 
shine  forth,  O  Asvins,  the  singers  offer  their  prayers  to  you’;  md  drain 
tanutha  dpa/i ,  net  tvet  .  .  tdpdti  sfiro  arcisa  (v.  799)  ‘do  not  long  delay  thy 
work,  lest  the  sun  burn  thee  with  his  beam’;  tv  dm  hi  baladd  dsi  (in.  5318) 
‘for  thou  art  a  giver  of  strength’;  tdm,  indra ,  madam  d  ga/ii,  kuvin 3 *  nv  dsya 
trpndvah  (hi.  42s)  ‘come  to  this  gladdening  drink,  O  Indra,  (to  see)  whether 
thou  mayst  enjoy  it’. 

1.  When  the  first  of  two  clauses,  though  in  form  a  principal  one,  is 
virtually  subordinate  in  sense  (being  equivalent  to  one  introduced  by  ‘if’ 
or  ‘when’),  its  verb  is  occassionally  accented;  e.  g.  sdm  dsvaparnas  car  anti 
no  ndro ,  ’ smdkam ,  indra ,  rathino  jayantu  (vi.  4731)  ‘when  our  men  winged 
with  steeds  come  together,  may  the  car-fighters  of  our  side,  O  Indra,  win 
the  victory’. 

2.  Similarly,  but  much  more  frequently,  the  verb  of  the  first  of  two 
clauses  which  are  antithetical  in  sense,  is  accented4.  The  occurrence  of 
correlative  words  like  anyd-anyd ,  cha-cha,  vd-vd ,  ca-ca,  often  makes  the 
antithesis  obvious;  e.  g.  prd prajanyc  y anti,  pdry  anyd  asatc  (in.  9 >)  ‘ (while) 
some  go  on  and  on,  others  sit  about’;  sdm  cajdhdsva^agne,  prd  ca  bodhayajenam 
(VS.  xxvii.  2)  ‘both  be  kindled,  O  Agni,  and  waken  this  man’s  knowledge’:  ud 
va  sihcddhvam  up  a  vet  prnadhvam  (vii.  1611)  ‘either  pour  out  or  fill  up'.  If 
the  verb  of  both  clauses  is  the  same,  it  usually  appears  (as  is  natural  in  the 
circumstances)  in  the  first  only;  e.  g.  dvipdc  ca  sdrvam  no  rdksa ,  cdtuspad 
ydc  ca  nah  svdm  (AV.  vi.  1071)  ‘protect  both  every  biped  of  ours  and  whatever 
quadruped  is  our  own’. 

3.  The  second  clause,  on  the  other  hand,  accents  the  verb  if  it  contains 
an  imperative  (with  a  final  sense),  and  follows  a  clause  with  an  imperative 
of  i-,  gam-  or  yd-  ‘go’;  e.  g.  eta,  dhiyam  krndvama  (v.  456)  ‘come,  let  us 
(=  that  we  may)  make  prayer’;  tdyam  d  ga/ii,  kdnvesu  sded  piba  (vm.  41) 
‘come  quickly,  beside  the  Kanvas  drink  thy  fill’. 

in.  Verbal  prepositions. — A.  The  preposition,  which  generally  precedes, 
but  sometimes  follows  the  verb,  being  often  separated  from  it  by  other  words, 


1  Cp.  Delbrucic  23,  3,  4;  26,2;  Whitney 
59§a.  In  the  SB.  hanta  regularly  accents 
the  verb. 

2  Cp.  Grassmann,  Wb.  under  id  and  cand. 

3  There  are  only  two  passages  in  the  RV. 

(v.  3lo>  363)  in  which  kuvid  does  not  accent 


the  verb;  cp.  Grassmann,  sub  verbo;  Del- 
bruck  550,  end. 

4  This  accentuation  is  more  strictly  applied 
in  B.  than  in  V.,  and  among  the  Samhitas 
least  strictly  in  the  RV. ;  cp.  Whitney  597  a. 


IV.  Nominal  Stem  Formation 


107 


is  regularly  accented  in  principal  sentences;  e.  g.  d  gamat  (1.  i5)  ‘may  he 
come’;  jayema  sam  ywlhi  sprdhah  (1.  83)  ‘may  we  conquer  our  foes  in  fight’; 
gayam  apa  vrajdm  vrdhi  (1.  107)  ‘unclose  the  stable  of  the  kine’;  gdmad 
vdjebhir  a  sd  nah  (1.  53)  ‘may  he  come  to  us  with  booty’. 

a.  When  there  are  two  prepositions,  both  are  accented  in  the  RV., 
being  treated  as  separate  words;  e.  g.  up  a  prd  ya/ii  (1.  826)  ‘come  forth’;  pari 
spdso  ni  sedire  (1.  2513)  ‘the  spies  have  sat  down  around’;  dp  a  prdyobhir  d 
gat  am  (1.  24)  ‘come  hither  with  refreshments’;  ague,  vi  pasya  brhatdjzbhi  raydi 
(in.  ~32)  ‘O  Agni,  look  forth  towards  (us)  with  ample  wealth’. 

«.  When  a  immediately  follows  another  preposition  (unless  it  ends  in  i),  it  alone 
is  accented,  both  being  compounded  with  the  verb;  e.  g.  iipcigahi 1  (1.  91 IO)  ‘come  hither’; 
samakrnosi  jivase  (x.  25^)  ‘thou  fittest  (them)  for  living’.  The  general  rule,  however,  is 
followed  if  the  preposition  preceding  a  ends  in  i;  e.  g.  praty  a  tanusva  (tv.  4+)  ‘draw 
(thy  bow)  against  (them)’ 2.  In  the  only  passage  in  which  it  has  been  noted  in  com¬ 
bination  with  another  preposition  preceding  it,  dva  is  treated  like  a:  updvasrja  (x.  11010) 
‘pour  out’ 3. 

B.  The  preposition  in  subordinate  clauses  is  generally  compounded 
with  the  verb,  when  it  is  regularly  unaccented;  e.  g.  ydd  .  .  nisidathah 4 
(vm.  921)  ‘when  ye  two  sit  down’.  It  is,  however,  often  separated  from  the 
verb,  and  is  then  accented  as  well  as  the  verb.  In  this  case  it  is  commonly  the 
first  word  of  a  Pada,  but  occasionally  comes  after  the  verb ;  e.  g.  vi yo  mame 
rdjasi(i.  1604)  ‘who  measured  out  the  two  regions’;  yds  tastdmbha  sdhasa  vi 
jmo  dntan  (iv.  501)  ‘who  with  might  propped  earth’s  ends  asunder’.  Occasionally 
the  preposition  is  separate  and  accented  even  when  immediately  preceding 
the  verb;  e.  g.  yd  dhutim  paid  veda  ndmobhih  (vi.  19)  ‘who  fully  knows  the 
offering  with  devotion’. 

a.  When  there  are  two  prepositions,  either  both  are  unaccented  and 
compounded  with  the  verb,  or  the  first  only  is  separate  and  accented;  e.  g. 
yuyarn  hi ,  devir, ,  rtaydgbhir  dsvaih  pariprayathd  (iv.  51s)  ‘for  ye,  O  goddesses, 
proceed  around  with  steeds  yoked  by  eternal  order’;  sam  yam  ay  anti  dhendvah 
(v.  61 2)  ‘to  whom  the  cows  come  together’,  ydtra  jab  hi  samndvamahe  (vm.  69s) 
‘where  we  to  (him)  together  shout’.  A  very  rare  example  of  two  independent 
prepositions  in  a  dependent  sentence  is  prd  ydt  stotd  .  .  .  upa  girbhir  life 
(m.  52s)  ‘when  the  praiser  pours  forth  laudation  to  (him)  with  songs’. 


IV.  NOMINAL  STEM  FORMATION. 

Grassmann,  Worterbuch  zum  Rig-veda  1687 — 1738  (list  of  nominal  stems  according 
to  alphabetical  order  of  the  final  letter).  —  Lindner,  Altindische  Nominalbildung.  Nach 
den  Samhitas  dargestellt.  Jena  1878.  —  Whitney,  Sanskrit  Grammar  1 136  — 1245;  Roots, 
Verb-forms,  and  Primary  Derivatives,  1885. 

112.  The  bare  root,  both  verbal  and  pronominal,  is  often  used  as 
a  declinable  stem.  But  much  more  generally  the  stem  in  declension 
is  formed  by  means  of  suffixes.  These  are  of  two  kinds:  primary,  or 


1  There  seems  to  be  an  exception  in 
dtas  dd,  indra,  na  upa  yahi  (vm.  921°)  ‘thence, 
O  Indra,  come  to  us’,  but  upa  here  coming 
at  the  end  of  a  Pada,  is  used  adnominally 
with  nah. 

2  The  treatment  of  two  prepositions  is 
on  the  whole  the  same  in  the  AV.  (cp. 
Whitney,  APr.  185  ff.)  and  the  TS.  (cp. 
Weber,  IS.  13,  62  ff.);  but  the  TS.  treats 
some  other  prepositions  like  d,  and  the  MS. 


goes  much  further,  apparently  making  accen¬ 
tuation  of  the  second  preposition  the  rule; 
cp.  Delbruck  p.  48. 

3  Cp.  Delbruck  p.  47,  end. 

4  It  is  not  clear  why  the  Pada  text 
analyses  forms  like  ny  asldat  (1.  1 4 3 1 ),  ny 
aslah  (VII.  1811),  vy  dsthai  (n.  47)  as  ni  asldat, 
ni  cist  ah,  vi  asthdt.  There  are  about  thirty 
instances  of  this;  cp.  Whitney  10S4  a. 


io8  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


those  that  are  added  directly  to  roots;  secondary,  or  those  that  are  added 
to  stems  already  derivative  (pronominal  stems  being  also  accounted  as  such). 
The  distinction  between  these  two  kinds  is,  however,  not  absolute.  Suffixes 
containing  a  secondary  element  sometimes  have  the  appearance  and  appli¬ 
cation  of  primary  suffixes  (as  -aniya  =  -an-iya).  Less  frequently  primary 
suffixes  come  to  be  used  as  secondary  ones;  thus  the  participial  suffixes  are 
added  not  only  to  the  root,  but  also  to  primary  and  secondary  conjugation 
stems  as  well  as  to  tense  stems.  These  nominal  suffixes  are  sometimes  added 
by  means  of  what  looks  like  and  may  conveniently  be  called  a  connecting 
vowel,  though  it  may  not  be  so  in  origin.  Primary  suffixes  are  also  added 
to  roots  compounded  with  verbal  prefixes1. 


I.  Primary  Nominal  Derivation. 

113.  As  regards  form,  the  root  when  used  without  suffix  usually  remains 
unchanged  in  respect  to  its  vowel2;  it  is  then,  however,  liable  to  modification 
in  two  ways:  always  adding  the  determinative  -t  if  it  ends  in  -i,  u,  or  -r, 
and  occasionally  appearing  in  a  reduplicated  form.  But  before  primary  suffixes 
the  root  usually  appears  in  a  strong  form:  either  with  Guna  of  medial  or 
final  vowels,  as  ve'd-a-  ‘knowledge’  from  ]P vid-,  sdr-ana-  ‘running’  from  J \dsr-; 
or  with  Vrddhi  of  final  -i,  -u,  -r  and  lengthening  of  medial  a,  as  kar-d-  ‘making’ 
from  Y kr-j  grabh-d-  ‘seizer’,  from  ~\f grabh -. 

a.  As  regards  meaning,  there  are  two  classes  of  primary  derivatives: 
the  one  expressing  abstract  action  nouns  (with  an  infinitival  character),  the 
other  concrete  agent  nouns  (with  a  participial  character)  used  as  adjectives 
or  substantives.  Other  senses  are  only  modifications  of  these  two;  as  that 
of  the  passive  participle,  which  expresses  an  agent  who  becomes  the  recipient 
of  an  action.  The  primary  suffixes  forming  action  nouns  can  also  nearly  all 
be  used  to  form  agent  nouns;  and  many  of  those  properly  forming  agent 
nouns  may  also  form  action  nouns.  Those  which  properly  form  action 
nouns  are:  -a,  -an,  -ana,  - ana ,  -ani,  - am ,  -as,  -a,  -i,  -is,  -I,  -Tka,  -ns,  - tas , 

-ti,  -tu,  - tna ,  - t/ia ,  - thu ,  -nas,  - ni ,  -nu,  -pa,  - ma ,  -man,  -mi,  -yu,  -van,  -sas. 

Those  which  properly  form  agent  nouns  are:  -aka,  -at  or  -ant,  -ata,  -aniya, 
-asi,  -dku,  -ana,  -in,  - ist/ia ,  -Tyanis,  -u,  -uka,  -u,  -uka,  -ka,  ■ ta ,  -tar,  -tna,  - ira , 
- tri ,  -tv a,  - t/ii ,  -na,  - mana ,  -min,  -ya,  - ra ,  -ri,  -ru,  - la,.-Ii ,  -In,  -va,  -vana,  -vani, 
-vanu,  -vara,  -vas,  - vams ,  -vi,  -sa,  -sani,  -sarn,  -sna,  -snu. 


Root  stems. 

114.  These  stems  are  used  both  as  action  nouns  (often  in  the  function 
of  infinitives)  and  as  agent  nouns,  either  substantives  or  adjectives. 

1.  Examples  of  the  simple  root  form  are:  dyut-  f.  ‘splendour’,  nrt-  (AV.)  f. 
‘gesticulation’,  biidh-  f.  ‘awaking’;  dd-  ‘giver’,  bhid-  f.  ‘destroyer’,  ynj-  m. 
‘companion’,  spas-  m.  ‘spy’;  mdh-  ‘great’,  vrdh-  ‘strengthening’.  —  2.  With  root 
determinative  -t:  mi-t-  f.  ‘pillar’,  stu-t-  f.  ‘praise’.  —  3.  With  reduplicated  root: 
cikii-  ‘wise’  (cii-  ‘observe’),  juhti-  f.  ‘sacrificial  spoon’  (/in-  ‘offer’),  juhfi-  ‘tongue’ 
(Jin-  ‘call’),  dadrh -3  ‘hearty’  (dr/i-  ‘be  firm’),  didyii-  m.  ‘missile’,  didyn-t-  f. 
‘missile’,  ‘lightning’,  sasydd-  f.  ‘running  stream’  (syand-  ‘run’)4  and  with  intensive 


1  Those  chiefly  thus  used  are  approxima-  2  That  is,  the  root  appears  in  the  -w  eak 
tely  in  the  order  of  their  frequency:  -a,  form,  in  which  it  is  usually  stated. 

-ana,  -ti,  -tar  and  -ira,  -in,  -ya,  -van  and  3  In  dadhfk  adv.  ‘heartily’. 

•man,  -i,  -u,  -as;  cp.  WiUTNEY  1 1 4 1  c.  1  4  Perhaps  also  gahga-  f.  ‘Ganges’  if 


IV.  Nominal  Stem  Formation.  Primary  Nominal  Derivation. 


i  09 


reduplication;  jdgu-  ‘singing  aloud’  (gu-  ‘sound’),  pra-ncnl-  ‘guiding  constantly’ 
(111-  ‘lead’),  yaviyudh-  ‘warlike’  ( yudh -  ‘fight’),  vdnivan-  ‘desiring’,  a-susfi-  (AV.) 
‘barren’  (‘not  bringing  forth’),  ddridra-  (VS.)  ‘roving’  (dra-  ‘run’)  is  a  transfer 
to  the  radical  ^-sterns1. 


-a  :  action  and  agent. 


115.  A  vast  number  of  derivatives  is  formed  with  this  suffix,  before  which 
the  root  is  generally  strengthened,  but  sometimes  remains  unchanged  or  is 
reduplicated.  Those  formed  with  Guna  are  more  than  twice  as  numerous  as 
all  the  rest  taken  together.  Medial  a  generally  remains  unchanged. 

1.  Examples  of  derivatives  with  Guna  are  the  following  action  nouns: 
dy-a-  m.  ‘course’  (i-  ‘go’)  hav-a-  m.  ‘invocation’  (hu-  ‘call’),  tdr-a-  m.  ‘crossing’ 
(tr-  ‘cross’);  vcd-a-  ‘knowledge’  (vid-  ‘know’),  jos-a-  ‘enjoyment’  (jus-  ‘enjoy’), 
sdrg-a-  ‘emission’  (srj-  ‘send  forth’);  agent  nouns:  plav-d-  m.  ‘boat’  ( pin -  ‘float’), 
megh-d-  m.  ‘cloud’  (uii/i-  ‘discharge  water’),  cod-d-  ‘instigator’  (cud-  ‘incite’).  With 
medial  a\  grdbh-a-  m.  ‘seizure’  (grabh-  ‘seize’),  srdm-a-  m.  ‘weariness’  (sram- 
‘be  weary’). 


a.  In  several  words  thus  formed  the  meaning  varies  according  as  the  root  is 
accented  or  the  suffix,  the  word  in  the  former  case  being  nearly  always  an  abstract 
substantive,  in  the  latter  regularly  an  adjective  or  an  agent  noun;  thus  drdh-  a-  m.  ‘side’, 
ardh-d-  ‘half’;  es-ci-  m.  ‘speed’,  es-ci-  ‘speeding’;  cod- a-  m.  ‘goad’,  cod-d -  m.  ‘instigator’;  var-a- 
m.  ‘choice’,  var-d-  m.  (‘chooser’)  ‘suitor’,  sas-a-  m.  ‘command’,  sds-a-  m.  ‘commander’, 
sok-a -  m.  ‘glow’,  sok-a-  (AV.)  ‘glowing’. 


2.  Vrddhi  of  final  vowels  and  lengthening  of  a2 3 4:  action  nouns  are 
dav-d-  (AV.)  ‘fire’  (du-  ‘burn’),  tdr-a-  (VS.)  ‘crossing’  (tr-  ‘cross’),  bhag-d- 
‘share’  (bhaj-  ‘divide’);  agent  nouns  are  ndy-a-  ‘leader’  (nl-  ‘lead’),  jdr-d-  ‘lover’, 
grdbh-a-  ‘seizer’. 

3.  Several  derivatives  are  formed  from  the  weak  form  of  the  root,  the 
suffix  being  accented 3;  thus  priy-d-  ‘dear’  (prT-  ‘please’),  sruv-d-  m.  ‘spoon’ 
(sru-  ‘flow’),  vr-d- 4  m.  ‘troop’  (vr-  ‘surround’),  tur-d -  ‘rapid’  (tr-  ‘cross’);  yug-d-  n. 
‘yoke’,  suc-d-  ‘bright’,  krs-d-  ‘lean’5. 

a.  Several  derivatives  of  this  type,  which  occur  almost  exclusively  at  the  end  of 
compounds,  are  made  from  various  tense  stems;  e.  g.  -d-saj-a-  ‘stopping  ’,  -tud-d-  (AV.) 
‘impelling’,  -pas-ya-  ‘seeing’,  - inv-d -  ‘urging’,  - pr-nd -  ‘bestowing’,  - indh-d -  ‘kindling’,  -bruv-d- 
(AV.)  ‘saying’,  • pib-a -  (AV.)  ‘drinking’,  -ej-aya-  ‘exciting’6;  je-s-a-  m.  ‘attainment’  (aor.  stem 
of  ji-  ‘conquer’),  ?iesa-  m.  ‘guidance’  (aor.  stem  of  nl -  ‘lead’). 


4.  A  considerable  number  of  derivates  are  formed  from  the  reduplicated 
root;  thus  cacar-a-  ‘movable’,  dadhrs-a-  ‘bold’,  vavr-d-  m.  ‘hiding’  (vr-  ‘cover), 
s'is'ay-d-  ‘strengthening’  (si-  ‘sharpen’),  sisndth-a-  ‘perforation’  (snath-  ‘pierce’), 
sasr-d-  ‘flowing’  (]Asr-).  They  are  more  usually  formed  directly  from  the 
intensive  stem  or  from  stems  analogously  reduplicated;  e.  g.  cdksm-d-  ‘gracious’ 
(ksam-  ‘forbear’),  rerih-d-  (AV.)  ‘continually  licking’  (rih-  ‘lick),  -rorud-d-  (AV.) 
‘shedding  tears’  (rud-  ‘weep’),  vcvij-d  ‘quick’  (vij-  ‘dart’);  card-car-d  ‘far- 
extending’,  cala-cal-d-  ‘unsteady’,  pani-spad-d-  (AV.)  ‘palpitating’  ( Y spand -), 
man-mrs-a-  (AV.)  ‘groping’  (mrs-  ‘feel’),  mali-mluc-d-  (AV.)  ‘moving  about  in 


from  gd -  ‘go’;  sisu-  m.  ‘child’,  if  from  su- 

‘grow’. 

1  jdgat-  ‘going’,  ‘living’,  is  an  old  parti¬ 
ciple  present  of  the  reduplicated  stem  of 
gd-  ‘go’;  Whitney,  however,  thinks  (1 147  e) 
that  it  is  made  from  the  reduplicated  form 
iaga-  (=  ja-garn •)  with  the  root  determina¬ 
tive  -l. 

2  In  these  words  the  suffix  is  almost  in¬ 
variably  accented  ;  kam-a-  ‘desire’  is  accented 


on  the  root  as  differentiated  from  kam-d-  ‘des¬ 

iring’;  similarly  sak-a-  ‘heljo’  and  sdk-d-  ‘help¬ 
ful’. 

3  See  Lindner  p.  33. 

4  According  to  Grassmann,  f.  vra-. 

5  Some  of  the  derivatives  of  this  type  are 
transitions  from  the  root  stems  to  the  ^-de¬ 
clension,  especially  at  the  end  of  compounds. 

6  See  below,  Determinative  Compounds, 
272. 


no  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


the  dark’,  a  kind  of  demon  ( ?nluc -  ‘set’,  of  the  sun),  varT-vrt-a-  (AV.)  ‘rolling' 
(vrt-  ‘turn’),  sani-syad-d-  (AV.)  ‘running’  ( \r  syand-),  sani-sras-d-  (AV.)  ‘decrepit' 
(s ranis-  ‘fall’),  sarT-srp-d -  ‘crawling’  ( ]A s/p-). 

a.  The  suffix  - a  is  by  far  the  most  frequent  one  used  in  forming  derivatives  from 
the  root  with  a  verbal  prefix,  being  nearly  always  accented  whether  the  noun  ex¬ 
presses  an  action  or  an  agent;  e.  g.  anu-kar-a -  (AV.)  ‘assistance’,  abhi-droh-a-  ‘enmity’, 
ud-a?i-d-  (VS.)  m.  ‘breathing  upwards’,  m-mes-d-  (VS.)  ‘wink’,  praty-d-srav-a -  ‘response’, 
sam-gani-d-  ‘assembly’;  ati-ydj-a-  ‘sacrificing  excessively’, ‘over-pious’,  adhi-cankram-d-  (AV.) 
‘climbing  over’,  d-dardir-a-  ‘crushing’,  ut-tud-a-  (AV.)  ‘rousing’,  pari-car-d-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘wan¬ 
dering’,  vi-bodh-a-  ‘wakeful’,  sam-gir-d-  (AV.)  ‘swallowing’,  sam-jay-d -  ‘victorious’ T. 

b.  There  are  many  words  which  have  the  appearance  of  ending  in  this  suffix, 
though  the  root  cannot  be  found  elsewhere.  They  include  several  nouns  of  plants  and 
animals.  Examples  are  ukhd- 2  (AV.)  ‘caldron',  krodd-  (VS.  AV.)  ‘breast’,  /child-  (AV.) 
‘waste  land’,  nakha-  ‘nail’,  paksd -  ‘wing’,  vanish-  ‘reed’ 3. 

-a-ka  :  agent. 

116.  This  suffix,  which  consists  of  the  primary  -a  with  the  secondary  -ka 
added,  is  in  a  few  words  used  as  a  primary  suffix  forming  agent  nouns  only: 
abhi-kr os-aka-  (VS.)  ‘reviler’,  piy-aka-  (AV.)  ‘abuser’,  a  class  of  demon,  vddh- 
aka-  (AV.),  a  kind  of  reed  (‘destructive’),  shy-aka-  n.  ‘missile’  (j/Az-);  also 
pav-akd-  ‘purifying’,  ‘bright’,  which  though  always  written  thus  is  invariably 
to  be  pronounced  pavakd -4. 

-ata  :  agent. 

117.  In  a  few  adjectives  the  primary  suffix  -a  with  -id  added  is  attached 
to  the  strong  form  of  the  root,  chiefly  with  the  sense  of  the  gerundive:  dars- 
atd-  ‘visible’,  pac-ata-  ‘cooked’,  bhar-atd-  ‘to  be  tended’,  yaj-atd-  ‘to  be  adored’, 
raj-ata- 5  ‘silvery’,  hary-atd- 6  ‘desirable’. 

-at  and  -ant  :  agent. 

118.  The  suffixes  -at  and  -ant  are  almost  restricted  to  the  formation  of 
active  participles.  The  former  appears  chiefly  in  the  formation  of  present 
participles  of  the  reduplicating  class,  as  ddd-at-  ‘giving’;  also  in  dds-at-  ‘wor¬ 
shipping’,  shs-at-  ‘instructing’,  and  the  aorist  participle  ddks-at-  and  dhdks-at- 
from  dak-  ‘burn’.  There  are  besides  a  few  substantives  originally  participles, 
which  have  shifted  their  accent,  formed  with  -at:  vah-dt-  f.  ‘stream’,  vegh-dt- 
(AV.  VS.)  f.  ‘barren  cow’,  vagh-dt-  m.  ‘sacrificed,  srav-dt-  f.  ‘stream’,  sasc-dt-  m  . 
‘pursuer’7.  The  suffix  -ant  is  used  to  form  the  active  participle  of  present 
stems  (excepting  those  of  the  reduplicating  class),  of  future  stems,  and  aorist 
stems.  Some  of  these  have  become  independent  adjectives:  rh-dnt-  ‘weak’, 
prs-ant-  ‘spotted’,  br/i-dnt-  ‘great’,  mah-dnt- 8  ‘great’,  ri'ts-ant-  ’brilliant’;  also 
the  substantive  d-dnt-  m.  ‘tooth’9.  dvay-ant-  in  d-dvay-ant-  (RV1.)  ‘not  double- 
tongued’  has  the  appearance  of  a  participle  of  a  denominative  stem  from 
did-  ‘two’.  With  the  same  suffix  are  formed  the  two  pronominal  stems  i-y-ant- 
‘so  great’  (‘making  this’,  /-)  and  ki-y-ant-  ‘how  great?’  (‘making  what?’  k/-). 

an-  :  action  and  agent. 

119.  Few  words  are  formed  with  this  suffix,  and  in  some  of  them  the 
root  is  doubtful. 


1  Cp.  Lindner  p.  35. 

2  Also  in  ukha-cchid-  (RV1.)  ‘fragile  as  a 
pot’,  f.  ukhd-. 

3  Cp.  Lindner  p.  33,  bottom. 

4  -aka-  also  appears  in  the  Proper  Name 
nabh-dka-. 

5  Probably  from  the  root  raj-  ‘colour’. 


6  Formed  from  the  denominative  stem- 
of  hari-  ‘bright’. 

7  See  below,  Participial  stems  in  • at , 

31 1  A. 

8  With  lengthened  vowel  in  the  strong 
cases. 

9  See  below,  Participles  in  -ant,  313. 


IV.  Nominal  Stem  Formation.  Primary  Nominal  Derivation. 


in 


The  only  action  nouns  are  the  following  neuters:  mah-an-1  ‘greatness’, 
raj -an-  (RV1.)  ‘guidance’,  gdmbh-an-  (VS1 3 4.)  ‘depth’.  The  infinitives  in  -s-dn-i 
(588c)  are,  however,  probably  locatives  of  action  nouns  formed  with  -an 
from  aorist  stems. 

Agent  nouns  are:  uks-dn-  m.  ‘ox’,  cdks-an-  (AV.)  n.  ‘eye’,  tdks-an-  m. 
‘carpenter’,  pus-dn-  m.,  N.  of  a  god,  pllh-an-  (VS.  AV.)  m.  ‘spleen’,  majj-dn-  m. 
‘marrow’,  murdh-an-  m.  ‘head’,  rdj-an-  m.  ‘king’,  vfs-an-  adj.  ‘virile’,  m.  ‘bull’, 
sdgh-an-  (TS.  in.  2.  il *)  ‘vulture’. 


a.  There  are  also  several  words  formed  with  -an  the  root  and  original  meaning  of 
which  are  mostly  doubtful:  1.  yu-v-an-  m.  ‘youth’,  yds- an-  f.  ‘maiden’,  sv-dn-  m.  ‘dog’; 
2.  defective  neuter  nouns;  aks-an -  ‘eye’,  ds-an-  ‘blood’,  asth-du-  ‘bone’,  dh-an-  ‘day’,  ds-an- 
‘face’,  ud-an- 2  ‘water’,  iidh-an-  udder’,  dadh-an-  ‘sour  milk’,  dos-dn-  (AV.)  ‘arm’,  yak-an- 
‘liver’,  sdk-an-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘dung’,  saklh-an -  ‘thigh’ ;  3.  stems  occurring  at  the  end  ot 
compounds  only:  -gm-an-  and  -jm-an-  (also  used  independently)  ‘course’,  -div-an- 1  ‘playing’; 
•bhv-an-  4  ‘being’,  -sv-an-  5  ‘growing’ (?) <3. 


-ana  :  action  and  agent. 

120.  With  the  suffix  -ana  are  formed  a  large  number  of  derivatives  with 
both  types  of  meaning.  The  root  generally  shows  Guna,  sometimes  Vrddhi, 
occasionally  no  change,  rarely  a  weakened  vowel.  These  derivatives  very 
often  appear  with  a  preposition,  such  verbal  compounds  coming  next  in 
frequency  to  those  formed  with  the  suffix  -a. 

1.  With  Guna  are  formed  neuter  action  nouns;  e.  g.  kdr-ana-  ‘deed’, 
cdy-ana-{ AV.)  ‘piling’,  dev-ana-  ‘play’,  bhdj-ana-  ‘enjoyment’,  vdrdh-ana-  ‘increase’, 
vcd-ana-  ‘possession’,  hav-ana-  ‘invocation’,  adhi-vi-kdrt-ana-  ‘cutting  off’;  also 
agent  nouns;  e.  g.  the  adjectives  kar-and-  ‘active’,  cet-ana-  ‘visible’,  cod-ana- 
(AV.)7  ‘impelling’,  vi-mcc-ana-  ‘releasing’;  from  a  duplicated  (intensive)  stem: 
i agar-ana-  (VS.)  ‘waking’  (  Y gr-). 

2.  With  Vrddhi8  or  lengthened  medial  a  are  formed  neuter  action 
nouns,  sometimes  with  a  concrete  sense;  e.  g.  nt-pdr-ana-  (AV.)  ‘transporting’, 
upa-vas-ana-  ( AV.)  ‘clothing’,  ‘dress ' ,  pra-vdc-ana-  ‘proclamation’,  sdd-ana-  ‘seat’; 
also  agent  nouns;  e.  g.  sain-srav-ana-  (AV.)  ‘flowing  together’;  -cdt-ana-  ‘driving 
away’,  mdd-ana-  ‘gladdening’,  -vdh-ana-  ‘conveying’,  -spds-ana- 9  (AV.)  ‘spying’; 
svdd-ana-  m.  ‘sweetener’. 

3.  With  unchanged  vowel  (final  -a  and  medial  a)  are  formed  neuter 
action  nouns;  e.  g.  ddna-  ‘giving’,  ud-ydna-  (AV.)  ‘going  out’,  ni-dhdna- 
‘receptacle’,  rdks-ana-  ‘protection’,  sdd-ana-  ‘seat’,  ava-pra-bhrdms-ana- 10  (AV. 
xix.  398)  ‘slipping  down’,  prdn-ana-  ‘breathing’  (Yan-))  anomalously  formed 
directly  from  a  preposition,  sdm-ana-  ‘meeting’;  also  agent  nouns;  e.  g.  tdp- 
ana-  ‘burning’,  a-krdm-ana-  (VS.)  ‘stepping  upon’,  sam-gam-ana-  ‘assembling’. 

4.  With  weak  vowel  are  formed  very  few  derivatives:  either  neuter 
action  nouns  partly  with  concrete  meaning:  krp-dna-  ‘misery’,  prs-ana- 
‘tenderness,  bhuv-ana-  ‘being’,  vrj-dna-  and  (once)  vrj-ana-  ‘enclosure’,  -suv- 
ana-  (A V.)  ‘procreation’;  or  agent  nouns:  krp-and-  (AV.)  ‘miserable’,  tur-dna- 


1  Used  in  the  instrumental  only. 

2  From  ud-  ‘be  wet’. 

3  From  dlv-  ‘play’  in  prati-ddv-an-  ‘adver¬ 
sary  at  play’. 

4  From  bhu-  ‘be’  in  v’l-bhvan-  and  vi-bkvdn- 

‘far-reaching’. 

5  In  the  Proper  Names  mdlari-iv-an-  and 

rji-iv-an- ,  cp.  Wackernagel  21,  p.  125, 

bottom,  and  above,  p.  95,  n.  1T. 

°  -banian-  in  ui-kdman-  ‘desirous’  is  a 

transition  form  for  the  cz-stem  m-kdma-. 


7  In  the  RV.  only  as  final  member  of 
compounds,  rsi-cddana-  etc. 

g  In  this  type  the  only  vowel  appearing 
in  the  radical  syllable  is  a. 

9  In  prati-spasana-  (AV.  vm.  511)- 

10  See  Whitney’s  note  on  navaprabhrdm- 
sana-  in  his  translation  of  AV.XIX.393  and 
Weber's  erroneous  interpretation  of  this  as 
‘descent  of  the  ship’. 


1 12  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


‘speeding’;  m.  ur-ana-  ‘ram’  (vr-  ‘cover’),  kir-ana-  m.  ‘dust’  (‘scattering’), 
vrs-ana-  (VS.)  ‘testicle’. 

-and  :  action  and  agent. 

121.  With  this  suffix  (accented  on  the  first  or  the  last  syllable)  are  formed 
some  feminine  action  nouns  (like  the  neuters  in  -ana)  which  sometimes  have 
a  concrete  meaning:  as-and-  ‘missile’,  jar-and-  ‘old  age’,  dyot-and-  ‘brilliance’, 
man-and-  ‘devotion’,  rodh-and-  (‘obstruction’)  ‘dam’,  svet-and-  ‘daybreak’,  bas-and- 
‘laughter’.  kap-and-  ‘caterpillar’  and  ras-and-  ‘rein’  have  the  appearance  of 
being  formed  with  this  suffix,  though  the  radical  parts  are  not  found  in 
independent  use.  Accented  on  the  penultimate  syllable:  arh-ana-  ‘merit’, 
jar-dna -  ‘dry  wood’(P),  barb-dud-  ‘might’,  bhand-dna-  ‘brilliance’,  mamh-dna- 
‘readiness’,  meh-and-  ‘abundance’,  vaks-dna-  ‘belly’,  vadb-dna-  ‘slaughter’,  van- 
dna-  ‘desire’.  The  formation  of  y os-ana-  (RV1 2.),  usually  yds-ana -,  ‘woman’  is 
obscure x.  With  the  suffix  -ana-  is  also  formed  (though  irregularly  accented  on 
the  radical  syllable)  pft-and- 2  ‘fight’  from  a  root  not  found  in  independent  use3. 
The  suffix  -ana  also  forms  feminine  agent  nouns  (adjectives)  corresponding 
to  masculines  in  accented  -ana-;  thus  tur-dna- 4  ‘speeding’,  tvar-and-  (AV.) 
‘hasting’,  spand-and-  (AV.)  ‘kicking’. 

a.  Derivatives  in  * ana  with  verbal  prefixes,  if  compounded  with  other  words,  form 
their  f.  in  - ana thus  an-apa-vac-ana-  (AV.)  ‘not  to  be  ordered  away’,  supa-vanc-ana-  and 
s  upa-s  arp-  ana  -  5  (AV.)  ‘easy  of  approach’,  sad-vi-dkaua-  ‘forming  an  order  ( vi-dhana -)  of  six’. 


-ani  :  action  and  agent. 

122.  This  suffix,  accented  either  on  the  first  or  the  last  syllable,  is  added 
to  either  the  strong  or  the  weak  form  of  the  root. 

1.  It  forms  feminine  action  nouns,  sometimes  with  concrete  sense;  thus 
as-dni-  ‘missile’,  is-dni-  ‘impulse’,  ksip-ani-  ‘blow’,  dyot-ani-  ‘brilliance’,  dhant-ani- 
‘piping’,  vart-an!-  ‘track’,  sar-dni-  ‘injury’;  also  jarani-  ‘noise’ (?)  in  the  compound 
jarani-prd-  ‘moving  with  noise’ (?). 

2.  It  forms  agent  nouns,  both  m.  f.  substantives  and  adjectives;  thus 
ar-dni-  f.  ‘fire-stick’,  caks-dni-  m.  ‘enlightener’,  car-ani-  ‘movable’,  ‘active’, 
tar-dni-  ‘swift’,  dhvas-dni-  ‘sprinkling’,  vaks-dni-  m.  ‘strengthener’;  also  in  the 
compounds  dn-ars-ani -,  N.  of  a  demon,  dj-ani-  (AV.)  f.  ‘stick  for  driving’ 
(■ d-aj -)  and  udani-mdt-  ‘abounding  in  waves’  ( ud-ani -  ‘undulating’  from  ud- 
‘be  wet’). 

a.  From  the  reduplicated  root:  papt-ani-  {pat-  ‘fly’)  in  su-papt-ani-  f. 
‘swift  flight’.  From  aorist  stems:  cars-ani-  ‘active’  {car-  ‘move’),  f.  pi.  ‘men’, 
pars-dni- ‘crossing’ (//'-‘cross’),  saks-dni-  ‘overcoming’ ( ]P sab-).  From  desiderative 
stems:  ruruks-dni-  ‘willing  to  destroy’  {ruj-  ‘break’),  sisas-ani-  ‘eager  to  win’ 
( ]/ sd-),  a-susuks-dni-  ‘gleaming  forth’  {sue-  ‘shine’). 


-am  :  action  and  agent. 

123.  This  suffix  is  the  feminine  form  corresponding  to  the  action  and 
agent  nouns  formed  with  -ana  from  the  strengthened  or  unreduced  root6, 
with  or  without  verbal  prefix;  thus  -cod-anT-1  ‘urging’  {cod-ana-),  pes-anT-  (AV.) 
‘well-formed’  (pcs-ana-),  proks-am-  (VS.  AV.)  f.  ‘sprinkling  water’,  pra-jhdm- 


1  Other  stems  with  the  same  meaning 
are  : yos-an-, yos-d-,yos-it-.  The  root  is  probably 
yu-  ‘unite’. 

2  The  suffix  -ana  never  otherwise  occurs 
when  the  root  is  accented. 

3  Only  as  a  nominal  stem  prt-  ‘fight’. 


4  This  is  the  only  example  of  such 
accentuation. 

5  That  is,  su-npa-v an c-ana -  and  su-npa- 
sarp-ana-. 

I  6  See  -ana,  120.  1  —  3. 

7  In  brahma-ebdam-  ‘stimulating  devotion’. 


IV.  Nominal  Stem  Formation.  Primary  Nominal  Derivation.  113 


(AV.)  ‘easily  known’,  spar-anT-  (AV.)  ‘preserving’;  abhi-sav-ant -  (AV.)  ‘pressing 
implement’,  vi-dhar-aiu-  (AV.)  ‘preserving’. 

a.  In  some  (partly  obscure)  words  the  accent  here  shifts  from  the  radical  vowel 
to  the  final  of  the  suffix:  ars-ani-  (AV.)  ‘piercing  pain’,  cet-ani •  (AV.)  ‘visible’  [cel-ana-', 
lap-ant-  ‘heat’  ( tap-ana -  ‘burning’),  led-ant-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘blood’,  prs-ani -  ‘tender’  ( pfs-ana • 
‘tenderness’),  vrj-ani -  ‘enclosure’  ( vrj-ana -  and  vfj-ana-'). 

-an-lya  :  gerundive. 

124.  This  is  a  new  compositive  suffix  beginning  to  be  attached  directly 
to  the  root  in  the  formation  of  the  gerundive.  It  is  based  on  the  primary 
suffix  -ana  of  neuter  action  nouns  extended  with  the  secondary  adjective 
suffix  -Tya.  There  are  two  examples  in  the  AV.:  upa-jlv-aniya-  ‘to  be 
subsisted  on’,  and  a-mantr-aniya-  ‘to  be  addressed’. 

-ar  :  agent. 

125.  This  suffix  is  found  in  a  very  few  words:  us-dr-  f.  ‘dawn’,  dev-dr-  m. 
‘husband’s  brother’,  na-nand-ar-  f.  ‘husband’s  sister’1. 

-as  :  action  and  agent. 

126.  This  suffix  forms  a  large  class  of  neuter  action  nouns  (which  some¬ 
times  acquire  a  concrete  sense)  accented  on  the  root,  and  a  small  class  of 
agent  nouns  (mostly  adjectives)  accented  on  the  suffix.  Some  words  belong 
to  one  class  or  the  other  according  to  the  accent.  The  root  generally  takes 
Guna,  and  medial  a  is  sometimes  lengthened,  while  the  vowel  is  reduced  in 
a  few  instances. 

1.  Examples  of  action  nouns  are:  with  Guna,  prdy-as-  ‘pleasure’  ( Y PrT~), 
srdv-as -  ‘fame’  (  Y sru-),  kdr-as-  ‘deed’  ( Y&P~)>  cet-as-  ‘brilliance’  ( "j/W/-),  tej-as- 
‘splendour’  (]////-),  doh-as-  ‘milking’  (Ydu7i-)2 3.  With  medial  a  unchanged: 
dv-as-  ‘aid’,  tap- as-  ‘heat’,  prdth-as-  ‘breadth’,  vdc-as-  ‘speech’;  and  with  partially 
or  wholly  concrete  meaning,  cdks-as-  ‘lustre',  ‘eye’,  vidn-as-  ‘thought’,  ‘mind’, 
sdr-as-  ‘lake’.  With  lengthened  a:  -vdc-as-^>,  vds-as-  ‘covering’,  ‘garment’, 
vdh-as-  ‘offering’,  -svad-as-  ‘flavour’  in  prd-svadas-  ‘agreeable’;  and  from  roots 
not  in  independent  use:  pdj-as-  ‘brilliance’  and pdth-as -4 *  ‘path’.  With  reduced 
vowel:  ur-as -  ‘breast)  juv-as-  ‘speed’  (beside  jdv-as -),  mrdh-as-  ‘contempt’, 
sir-as-  ‘head’;  also  vip-as-  ‘inspiration’  in  the  compounds  vipas-dt-  ‘inspired’ 
and  vipo-dhd-  ‘bestowing  inspiration’;  iras-  ‘anger’  in  the  denominative  iras-ya- 
‘be  angry’;  hur-as-  ‘deceit’  in  huras-dt-  ‘plotting  mischief’.  Perhaps  also  the 
adverbs  (with  shift  of  accent)  tir-ds  ‘across’  and  mith-ds  ‘mutually’. 

a.  To  roots  ending  in  - a  the  suffix  is  added  direct  in  bhas- 5  n.  ‘light’  [bha-  ‘shine’) 
and  -das-  5  ‘giving’ 6 * * *  (| /da-),  jhas-  ‘kinsman’  and  mas-  ‘moon’  are  probably  also  formed 
with  the  suffix  -as,  but  being  masculines  were  most  likely  agent  nouns  in  origin:  nia-as- 
=  ‘measurer’  pi  a-  ‘measure’).  The  suffix  seems  to  be  added  with  an  intervening  y  in 
-hdy-as  ‘agility’ 7  if  it  is  derived  from  ha-  ‘leave’ 8,  while  in  dhdy-as-  n.  ‘enjoyment’  and 
•gay- as-  ‘song’ 9  the  y  probably  belongs  to  the  root10. 


1  svdsar-  ‘sister’  in  probably  an  old  com¬ 
pound  in  which  -sar  represents  a  root;  cp. 
Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  8,  note. 

2  The  word  hes-as-  ‘missile’  is  perhaps 
formed  from  the  aorist  stem  of  hi-  ‘impel’. 

3  In  vi-vacas -  (AV.)  ‘speaking  variously’ 
and  sd-vacas-  (AV.)  ‘speaking  similarly’. 

4  According  to  Oldenberg,  ZDMG.  54,  607 

this  word  means  ‘home’  and  is  perhaps  formed 

with  a  suffix  -thas  from  pa-  ‘protect’;  accord¬ 

ing  to  Sieg,  Gurupujakaumudl  97,  it  means 

‘food’,  and  is  derived  from  pa-  ‘drink’. 

Indo-arische  Philologie.  I.  4.  \ 


5  Often  to  be  read  as  dissyllables,  bhaas- 
and  daas-. 

6  In  -das-  ‘giving’  and  -dhas-  ‘placing’  an 
-as  has  been  formed  probably  by  a  mis¬ 
understanding  of  the  N.  sing,  -ad-s  and  -dhd-s. 

I  In  vi-hayas-  ‘vigorous’  and  sai'va-hdyas- 
(AV.)  ‘having  all  strength’. 

8  But  it  may  be  a  derivative  of  hi- 
‘impel’. 

9  From  dhc-  ‘suck’  and  gai-  ‘sing’;  cp. 
above  27  a. 

10  In  pt-v-as-  n.  ‘fat’  {pi-  ‘swell’)  the  z'may 

8 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


1 14 


2.  Agent  nouns  in  -as,  mostly  adjectives,  correspond  in  several  instances 
to  action  nouns  accented  on  the  root.  These  are  ap-as-  ‘active’  ( dp-as -  ‘work’), 
tar-ds-  (VS1.)  ‘quick’  ( tar-as -  ‘quickness’),  tyaj-ds-  m.  ‘descendant’  ( tydj-as - 
‘abandonment’),  duv-ds -  ‘stirring’  ( di'tv-as -  ‘worship’),  mah-ds-  ‘great’  (mdh-as- 
‘greatness’).  The  derivative  tav-ds-  occurs  both  as  an  adjective  ‘strong’  and 
without  change  of  accent1  as  a  m.  substantive  ‘strength’.  A  few  others  have 
no  corresponding  action  noun:  tos-ds-  ‘bestowing’,  dhvar-ds-  ‘deceiving’,  yaj-ds- 
‘offering’,  vedh-ds-  ‘worshipper’,  ves-ds-  (AV.)  ‘neighbour’;  and  from  a  denomi¬ 
native  stem  mrgay-as-  (AV1.)  ‘wild  animal’2. 

a.  There  are  a  few  substantives  accented  on  the  suffix  and  seemingly 
never  neuter,  which  are  allied  to  the  neuter  action  nouns  in  meaning,  some 
being  abstract,  others  concrete  in  sense.  The  change  of  accent  may  be  due 
to  change  of  gender3.  Thus  raks-ds-  m.  occurs  beside  rdks-as-  n.  both 
meaning  ‘demon'.  There  also  occur  jar-ds-  m.  ‘old  age’,  bhiy-ds-  m.  ‘fear’, 
tves-ds -4  ‘impulse’,  hav-ds-  ‘invocation’;  us-ds-  f.  ‘dawn’  may  have  been  an 
agent  noun  originally;  dos-ds-  (AV1.)  f.  (?)  beside  dos-d-  ‘night’  may  be  due 
to  parallelism  with  us-ds-.  The  stem  upas-  ‘lap’  (the  gender  of  which  is 
uncertain,  as  it  occurs  only  in  the  locative  singular)  may  have  been  formed 
under  the  influence  of  upd-stha -5  m.  ‘lap’. 

a.  A  few  Proper  Names  are  formed  with  the  suffix  -as;  thus  nodh-as-;  arcananas- 
is  a  compound  of  anas-  ‘wain’,  possibly  also  bhalands-.  ap- sards- 6  f.  ‘nymph’  is  perhaps 
a  compound  (‘moving  in  the  waters’),  angiras-,  a  name  of  Agni,  has  the  appearance  of 
being  formed  with  this  suffix,  but  the  -s  is  perhaps  secondary;. 


- as i  :  action  and  agent. 

127.  This  suffix,  which  is  an  extension  of  -as  with  -i,  forms  a  couple 
of  action  nouns  with  concrete  sense,  and  a  few  agent  nouns:  dhasi-  m. 
‘drink’  (dhe-  ‘suck’)  and  dhasi-  f.  ‘abode’;  at-asi-  m.  ‘beggar’,  dharn-asi-  ‘strong’, 
sdn-as'i-  ‘victorious’. 

- a  :  action. 


128.  By  far  the  greatest  proportion  of  words  in  -a  consists  of  secondary 
feminine  adjectives  corresponding  to  masculines  and  neuters  in  -a. 

There  is,  however,  also  a  considerable  number  of  feminine  action  nouns 
of  an  independent  character,  formed  by  adding  -d  sometimes  to  the  root,  but 
usually  to  secondary  conjugation  stems  (desiderative,  causative,  denominative). 
Thus  Ts-d-  (AV.)  ‘dominion’,  ?iind-d-  (AV.)  ‘blame’;  jigJs-d-  ‘desire  to  win’, 
bhiks-d-  (AV.)  ‘begging’,  vJrts-d- 8  ‘desire  to  frustrate’;  gamay-d-9  (AVr.)  ‘causing 
to  go’;  asvay-d-  ‘desire  for  horses’,  apasy-d-  ‘activity’,  urusy-d-  ‘readiness  to 
help \  jivanasy-d-  (TS.  11.  3.  1023)  ‘desire  of  life’,  sukratuy-d-  ‘skill’. 

a.  This  suffix  has  the  appearance  of  being  added  to  a  reduplicated  stem  in  jdngh-d -  10 
‘leg’  and  jihv-d-  ‘tongue’;  it  may  also  be  contained  in  the  very  obscure  word  snsd-11  (AV1.). 


have  been  inserted  owing  to  the  influence 
of  pi-va7i-  adj.  ‘fat’. 

1  Whitney  1152,  2  e,  erroneously,  tdvas- 
‘strength’. 

2  The  suffix  is  probably  contained  in 
d-han-ds-  ‘wanton’,  but  the  derivation  is 
obscure,  Cp.  Frohde,  BB.  21,  321 — 330. 

3  The  dative  infinitives  from  stems  in  -as 
are  sometimes  accented  on  the  root,  but 
usually  on  the  suffix  (105  a).  This  may  indicate  a 
difference  of  gender,  the  former  being  neuter, 
the  latter  masculine. 

4  As  tves-ds -  and  hav-ds-  occur  in  the 
I.  sing,  only,  the  gender  is  uncertain, 


but  owing  to  the  accent  it  is  probably 
masc. 

5  According  to  Grassmann,  however, 
npdstha-  probably  =  upas-stha-;  cp.  81,  2  a. 

6  See  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology  47, 
note  3;  but  cp.  Pischel,  VS.  3,  197. 

7  Cp.  Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  p.  iSS. 

3  From  vi-Trtsa-  desiderative  of  rdh- 
‘prosper’. 

9  The  causative  stem  used  in  the  forma¬ 
tion  of  the  periphrastic  perfect. 

10  Cp.  Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  p.  106, 
top. 

See  Whitney’s  note  on  AV.  1,  it3. 


IV.  Nominal  Stem  Formation.  Primary  Nominal  Derivation.  i  i  5 

-dku  :  agent. 

129.  This  very  rare  suffix  seems  to  have  been  limited  to  the  formation 
of  agent  nouns.  It  appears  in  mrday-fiku -  ‘gracious’  (formed  from  a  causative 
stem),  pfd-aku-  (AV.  VS.)1  ‘adder’,  iksv-aku -,  N.  of  a  man. 

- ana  :  agent. 

130.  This  suffix  forms  a  middle  participle2 3 *  from  the  present  (455,  461, 
467,  473,  479),  the  perfect  (493)  and  (in  the  form  of  - s-dna )  from  the 
aorist  tense  stem 5  (527).  It  also  appears  in  the  formation  of  a  few 
adjectives  and  substantives,  a  preceding  u  always  taking  Guna.  Such  adjectives 
are:  tdkav-ana -  ‘speeding’  (beside  tdk-u-  and  tdk-va-),  bhrgav-dna-  ‘beaming’ 
(beside  bhrgu-  m.),  vdsav-ana-  ‘possessing  wealth’  (vdsu-),  urdhva-s-and -  ‘being 
erect’  (formed  like  an  aorist  participle  from  urdhvd -  ‘upright’). 

There  are  also  the  Proper  Names  dpnav-ana -,  cydv-ana -,  prthav-dna -; 
also  cydvat-ana -  which  looks  as  if  formed  by  adding  -ana  to  the  active 
present  participle  stem  of  cyu-  ‘fall’.  Of  doubtful  derivation  are  the  substantives 
pdri-ana-  m.  ‘abyss’  and  rujbnd- 4  f.  ‘river’  (1.  326). 


-/  :  action  and  agent. 

131.  With  this  suffix  are  formed  numerous  feminine  action  nouns,  agent 
nouns  (adjectives  and  masculine  substantives),  and  a  few  neuters  of  obscure 
etymology5. 

The  root  appears  in  various  forms:  sometimes  with  Guna,  Vrddhi  or 
lengthened  a ,  generally  with  unchanged  or  weak  vowel,  often  reduplicated. 
Before  the  suffix  a  final  radical  palatal  regularly  appears  (not  the  original 
guttural).  In  many  of  these  derivatives  the  root  is  not  traceable  elsewhere. 
The  accent  is  so  fluctuating  that  no  general  rule  can  be  stated.  The  meaning 
is  often  greatly  specialised. 

1.  Examples  of  action  nouns  are:  with  Guna,  rop-i  (AV.)  ‘pain’, 
soc-i  (AV.)  ‘heat’;  with  lengthened  a:  dj-i -  m.  f.  ‘race’,  grdh-i -  ‘seizure’, 
dhrdj-i-  ‘course’;  with  unchanged  vowel:  san-i-  ‘gain’;  with  weak  vowel: 
tvis-i-  ‘brilliance’,  krs-i-  ‘tillage’,  ruc-i-  (AV.)  ‘brightness’. 

2.  Examples  of  agent  nouns  are:  with  Guna,  ar-i-  ‘devout’,  arc-!-  m. 
‘beam’;  with  Vrddhi,  kdrs-i  (VS.)  ‘drawing’;  with  lengthened  vowel 
-jdni- 6  f.  ‘wife’,  sdr-i-  f.  ‘arrow’  (RV1.),  a  kind  of  bird  (VS.  TS.),  dUs-i-  (AV.) 
‘poisonous  matter’;  also  in  a  few  words  of  obscure  etymology,  drap-i-  m. 
‘mantle’,  ndbh-i-  f.  ‘navel’,  pan-!-  m.  ‘hand’,  ras-i-  m.  ‘heap’;  with  unchanged 
vowel:  krld-i-  ‘playing’,  granth-!-  m.  ‘knot’,  tndh-i-  ‘great’;  with  weak  vowel: 
siic-i-  ‘bright’,  grbh-i-  (AV.)  ‘container’,  b/inn-i-  ‘lively’  (beside  bhnn-!-  f.  ‘lively 
motion’).  From  the  reduplicated  root,  which  nearly  always  has  a  weak 
or  reduced  radical  vowel,  are  formed  with  ordinary  reduplicative  vowel: 
cikit-i-1  (SV.)  ‘understanding’,  cdkr-i-  ‘active’,  jdghr-i-  ‘sprinkling  about’  (g/ir-), 
pdpr-i-  ‘bestowing  abundantly’,  babhr-!-  ‘carrying’,  vavr-!-  m.  ‘covering’,  sdsr-i - 
‘speeding’,  susv-i-  ‘pressing’;  yuyudh-i-  ‘warlike’,  v!vic-i-  ‘appropriating’  (]/z yac-); 


1  It  occurs  in  the  RV.  only  as  the 
first  member  of  a  compound  in  pfdaku- 
sdnu -  ‘having  a  surface  like  that  of  a 
snake’. 

2  See  Lindner  p.  53—55. 

3  dpnZina-  seems  to  be  an  irregular  present 

participle  of  dp-  ‘obtain’  formed  from  the  stem 

up-nd-  instead  of  dp-7iu-. 


4  For  this  word  occurring  in  the  form  of 
1  rujanas  see  p.  59,  note  x. 

5  See  Grassmann,  Worterbuch  i7iSf. ; 
Lindner  p.  55  —  58. 

6  At  the  end  of  compounds  beside  the 
independent  jdni-. 

7  Various  reading  for  the  cikit-u-  of  the 
RV. 


1 1 6 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


jdgmi-  ‘hastening’  (gam-  ‘go’),  jdghii-i-  ‘striking’  ( \f  //an-),  sdsn-i-  ‘winning’ \jdgur-i- 
‘conducting’  ( tatur-i-  ‘victorious’  (] ft}'-),  pdpur-i-  and  pupur-i-  (SV.) 
‘bestowing  abundantly’  ( VpF~)  beside  pdpr-i\  with  lengthened  or  strong 
reduplicative  vowel:  tdtrp-i-  ‘gladdening’,  dddhrs-i-  ‘bold’,  vdvah-i-  ‘driving 
swiftly’,  sdsah-i-  ‘victorious’;  ttttuj-i-  ‘speeding’,  tutuj-i-  m.  ‘stimulator’,  ydyuv-i- 
‘driving  away’,  yfiyudh-i-  ‘warlike’;  jarbhdr-i-  ‘nourishing’1  (  ybhr-) l.  The  weak 
reduplicated  present  stem  appears  in  dad-i-  ‘giving’  and  dddh-i-  ‘bestowing’; 
from  similar  stems  (appearing  in  the  perfect)  are  formed  pap-i  ‘drinking’  ( ]/ pa-) 
and  yay-i  ‘speeding’  ( j Pyd-). 

a.  There  are  only  about  half  a  dozen  neuters  formed  with  the  suffix  -i, 
nearly  all  being  obscure  in  origin.  They  are  dks-i-  ‘eye’,  dsth-i-  (AV.  VS.) 
‘bone’,  dddh-i-  ‘sour  milk’,  sdm-i-  ‘toil’  (sam-  ‘work’);  and  with  Vrddhi  hdrd-i- 
‘heart’. 

b.  The  root  is  sometimes  compounded  with  verbal  prefixes  in  these 
derivatives,  the  suffix  being  then  usually  accented;  thus  d-jdn-i-  f.  ‘birth’, 
vi-vavr-i-  m.  ‘opening’,  sam-tan-i-  f.  ‘harmony’,  ‘music’,  a-yaj-i-  ‘bringing  near 
by  offerings’,  d-mur-i-  m.  ‘destroyer’,  ni-jaghn-i-  ‘striking  down’,  para-dad-i- 
‘delivering  over’,  vi-sdsah-i-  ‘victorious’,  vy-anas-i-2 3  ‘pervading’. 

c.  From  dhd-  ‘put’  is  derived  the  stem  -dhi-  which  is  used  in  forming 
many  m.  compounds;  e.  g.  antar-dhi-  (AV.)  ‘concealment’,  ud-dhi-  (AV.),  part 
of  a  car,  ni-dhi-  ‘treasure’,  pari- dhi-  ‘fence’.  From  stha-  ‘stand’  is  similarly 
formed  -sthi-  in  prati-sthi-  f.  ‘resistance’.  There  is  here  some  doubt  as  to 
whether  we  have  a  reduced  form  of  the  root  (as  in  dhi-ta-)  or  displacement 
of  the  radical  vowel  by  the  very  frequent  suffix  -i.  The  latter  alternative  is 
perhaps  the  more  probable  owing  to  the  almost  invariable  accentuation  of 
the  i  and  the  occurrence  of  a  stem  like  prati-sthi-  ‘resistance’  beside  prati- 
sthd-  ‘standpoint’. 


-in  :  agent. 

132.  The  very  frequent  secondary  suffix  -in  seems  sometimes  to  have 
the  value  of  a  primary  suffix,  exclusively,  however,  at  the  end  of  compounds; 
thus  -dd-ifi-  ‘ eating’ ,-es-in-  (AV .)  ‘seeking’,  -tod-in-  ‘piercing’,  a-nam-in-  ‘unbending’, 
-vyadh-in-  (AV.)  ‘piercing’;  from  a  present  stem  -as-nuv-in-  (VS.)  ‘reaching’; 
from  an  aorist  stem  -saks-in- 3  overpowering  (jPsah-);  from  a  reduplicated 
stem  -y ay-in-  ‘going’4. 


-istha  :  agent. 

tSS*  With  this  suffix  attached  to  the  root  is  formed  the  superlative 
with  an  adjectival  sense.  The  root  is  regularly  accented5,  1  and  z/  taking 
Guna,  while  a  remains  unchanged,  though  in  two  or  three  instances  it  is 
strengthened  with  a  nasal.  Roots  in  -d  combine  that  vowel  with  the  initial  -i 
of  the  suffix  to  <?,  which,  however,  is  usually  to  be  read  as  two  syllables. 
About  fifty  superlatives  formed  with  this  suffix  occur  in  the  Samhitas.  Examples 
are:  ndy-istha-  ‘leading  in  the  best  manner’  (m-  ‘lead’),  jdv-istha-  ‘quickest’ 
(ju-  ‘speed’),  ved-istha-  ‘procuring  most’  (vid-  ‘find’),  soc-istha-  ‘most  brilliant’ 
(sue-  ‘shine’);  ydj-istha-  ‘sacrificing  best’;  bdmh-istha-  ‘most  abundant’  ( bamh - 


1  The  words  bambhar-i-  (VS.)  m.,  a  soma-  4  In  ni-yay-in-  cpassing  over’.  Cp.  Lindner 
guarding  genius,  karkard-  f.  ‘lute’,  dundubhd- <  p.  59;  Whttney  1183  a. 

m.  ‘drum’  may  be  onomatopoetic  in  origin.  5  Except  two  or  three  times  jyestha -  and 

2  From  the  perfect  stem  an-as-  of  as-  kan-isthd-  (see  above  p.  83,  14);  and  when 

'attain’.  the  superlative  is  compounded  with  a  prefix, 

3  In  pra-saks-in-  ‘victorious’.  ;  which  then  has  the  accent. 


IV.  Nominal  Stem  Formation.  Primary  Nominal  Derivation.  117 


‘make  firm’),  mamh-istha-  ‘most  liberal’  ( mah -  ‘be  great’);  jyestha-  ‘greatest’ 
and  jyestha-  ‘eldest’  (jyd-  ‘overpower’),  dhestha -  ‘bestowing  the  most’  ( Ydhaj, 
yestha-  ‘going  fastest’  ( \jyd-). 

a.  In  many  instances  these  superlatives  attach  themselves  in  meaning 
to  derivative  adjectives,  being  formed  from  the  root  which  the  latter 
contain;  thus  os-istha -1  (TS.  1.  6.  12 3)  beside  dsa-m  ‘quickly’,  bdrh-istha- 
‘greatest’  beside  brh-dnt-  ‘great’,  vdr-istha-  ‘choicest’  (yr-  ‘choose’)  beside  vdr-a- 
‘choice’,  sddh-istha-  ‘straightest’  beside  sadh-u-  ‘straight’.  In  a  few  cases 
the  suffix  is  added  to  the  derivative  form  of  the  root  which  appears  in  the 
adjective;  thus  ds-istha-  (AV‘.)  ‘swiftest’  beside  as-u-  (from  as-  ‘reach’);  and 
in  ndv-istha-  ‘newest’  the  suffix  is  attached  to  the  radical  element  in  ndv-a-2 3 4 
‘new’  (and  not  directly  to  the  root  from  which  that  word  may  be  derived). 

b.  In  some  cases  the  root  is  compounded  with  a  verbal  prefix  or 
other  indeclinable;  thus  d-gam-istha-  ‘coming  best’,  d-sram-istha-  ‘never  tiring’, 
sdm-bhav-istha- 3  ‘most  beneficial’. 

a.  There  are  some  irregularities  in  the  formation  of  this  superlative.  Thus  bhu- 
retains  its  vowel  unchanged,  adding  the  suffix  with  an  intervening  -y:  bhu-y-istha-  4 
‘greatest’;  the  roots  prT-  and  srT-  are  treated  as  if  they  ended  in  -a:  prestha-  ‘dearest’, 
s resfha-  ‘most  glorious’;  par-s-isfha-  ‘taking  across  best’  is  made  from  an  aorist  stem  of 
pr-  ‘cross’.  The  abnormal  accentuation  of  jyestha-  ‘eldest’  is  doubtless  intended  to 
differentiate  its  meaning  from  jyestha -  ‘greatest’.  The  use  of  kan-isthd-  ‘youngest’  is 
parallel  to  that  of  the  former  5. 

-is  :  action. 

134.  This  suffix  forms  a  dozen  neuter  action  nouns,  mostly  used  in  a 
concrete  sense.  Though  the  root  takes  Guna,  the  suffix  is  accented  except 
in  three  instances.  The  words  thus  formed  are:  arc-is-  ‘flame’,  dm-is -6  ‘raw 
flesh’,  krav-is-  ‘raw  flesh’,  chad-is-  ‘cover’,  chard-is-  ‘protection’,  jyot-is-  ‘light’, 
barh-is-  ‘straw’,  roc-is-  ‘light’,  vart-Is-  ‘track’,  vydth-is-  ‘course’  (?),  soc-is-  ‘flame’, 
sarp-!s-  ‘melted  butter’,  hav-is-  ‘oblation’. 

a.  Besides  these  av-is-  appears  for  av-as -  ‘aid’  and  mah-is-  for  mdh-as- 
‘greatness’  in  a  few  derivatives:  avis-yant-  ‘helping  readily’,  avis-yd-  ‘desire’, 
avis-yu-  ‘desirous’;  mahis-vant-  ‘great’;  and  with  inorganic  tiim-s-  ‘might’, 
suci-s-  ‘flame’,  su-rabhi-s-  ‘fragrant’  for  tuvi -,  suci-,  surabhi-  in  a  few  derivatives: 
tuvis-mant-  ‘mighty’,  sucis-mant-  (only  voc.)  ‘brilliant’,  surabhis-tama-  ‘very 
fragrant’. 


-/ :  action  and  agent. 

135.  This  suffix,  besides  its  secondary  use  in  the  formation  of  feminines, 
chiefly  adjectives,  from  m.  and  n.  stems  in  -<7,  -u,  -r,  as  well  as  various 

consonant  stems  (201),  seems  to  be  primary  in  forming  a  few  independent 
feminine  action  and  agent  nouns.  Such  are  deh-Z-  ‘rampart’,  nad-z-  ‘stream’, 
nand-z-  ‘joy’,  pes-Z-  (RV1.)  ‘swaddling  clothes’ (?),  Tes-z-  ‘needle’,  sdc-T-  ‘power’, 
sdm-i-  and  siin-T-  ‘work’;  seemingly  from  an  aorist  stem  (jfvah-')  vaks-Z-  (RV1.) 
‘flame’.  There  are  also  about  a  dozen  masculines:  a/i-z-  ‘serpent’,  upav-Z- 
(VS.)  ‘encouraging’,  daks-i-  (RV1.)7  ‘flaming’,  prav-z-  ‘attentive’,  dus-prav-l - 


1  In  the  compound  osistha-ddvan-  ‘giving 
immediately’. 

2  Probably  from  a  demonstrative  root  nu- 
which  appears  in  nu  ‘now’,  nu-iana-  'present’. 

3  This  superlative  is  formed  under  the 
influence  of  the  positive  sam-bhu-  as  the  in¬ 
dependent  superlative  of  bhu-  is  bhu-y-istha-. 

4  The  regular  form  bhav-istha-  occurs  in 

combination  with  sam-. 


5  kan-istha-  ‘smallest’  appears  in  books  V 
and  VI  of  the  TS. 

6  This  word,  which  occurs  in  the  L.  sing, 
form  amis-i  only,  is  given  as  m.  in  BR.,  pw. , 
and  Grassmann,  but  why  it  should  not  be 
like  all  the  rest  a  neuter,  is  not  clear. 

7  Only  voc.  dahsi,  Pada  dhaksi-,  I.  [4D. 
Cp.  p.  1 19,  note  5. 


1 1 S  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


‘unfriendly’,  su-prav-i-  ‘very  attentive’,  rath-i-  ‘charioteer’,  d-rath-i-  ‘not  a 
charioteer’;  and  the  Proper  Names  nam-i-  and  prth-i- \ 

-ika  :  action  and  agent. 

136.  T  his  suffix  forms  a  few  neuter  substantives  and  some  adjectives: 
thus  dn-ika-  n.  ‘face’,  drs-lka-  n.  ‘aspect’,  mrd-tka-  n.  ‘grace’,  d-sar-ika-  (AV.)  n. 
‘rheumatic  pains’;  - rj-ika -1 2  ‘beaming’,  drbh-ika-  m.,  N.  of  a  demon,  vrdh- 
ikd-  m.  ‘increased,  vi-sar-ika-  (AV.)  m.,  a  kind  of  disease;  from  a  reduplicated 
stem:  par-phar-ika -  m.  ‘filler’. 

-Jydms  :  agent. 

137.  This  suffix  is  used  in  forming  comparatives,  being  added  to  the 
root  in  the  same  way  as  the  superlative  suffix  -istha  (133).  At  least  40  of 
these  derivatives3  occur  in  the  Samhitas.  Examples  are:  jav-Tydms-  ‘quicker’, 
mdmh-Iyams -  ‘more  liberal’,  ydj-Jyams-  ‘sacrificing  better’,  tcj-iyams-  ‘sharper’, 
vcd-Tyams-  ‘procuring  more’,  yddh-iyams-  ‘fighting  better’,  preyams -4  ‘dearer’ 
(l f prT-),  sreydms -s  ( ]/  srl-)  ‘more  splendid’,  -stkeyams-  ‘lasting’  ( \Pst/id-).  Connected 
in  sense  with  the  corresponding  positive  are  an-Tydms-  (AV.)  ‘smaller’, 
beside  dnu-  ‘minute’,  sds-Tyams-  ‘more  frequent’,  beside  sas-vant-  ‘constant’; 
and  from  a  derivative  form  of  the  root  tiksn-Tydins-  (AV.)5  ‘sharper’,  beside 
tiksnd-  ‘sharp’  {tij-  ‘be  sharp’). 

a.  Beside  the  usual  form  in  -Jydms-  there  appear  some  half  dozen 
comparatives  made  with  a  shorter  form  of  the  suffix  -yams:  tdv-yams-  beside 
tdv-Jyams-  ‘stronger’,  ndv-yams-  beside  nav-Tydms-  ‘new’,  pan-yams-  beside  p  an- 
Tydms-  ‘more  wonderful’,  bhn-ydms -6  ‘(becoming)  more’,  ‘greater’,  beside  bhdv- 
Tydms-  ‘more  plentiful’,  rdbh-yams-  beside  rdbh-Jyams-  (VS.)  ‘more  violent’, 
sdk-ydnis-  beside  sah-iyams-  ‘stronger’;  jyd-yams-  ‘greater’,  ‘older’,  and  san-ydms- 
‘older’  ( sdna -  ‘old’)  appear  without  an  alternative  form  beside  them. 

b.  With  verbal  prefixes  or  particles:  vi-kled-Tyams-  (AV.)  ‘moistening 
more’,  pdri-svaj-iyams-  (AV.)  ‘clasping  more  firmly’,  prdti-cyav-iydms-  ‘pressing 
closer  against’;  a-stheydms-  ‘not  enduring’. 

-u  :  agent. 

138.  T  his  suffix  forms  a  considerable  number  of  agent  nouns,  both 
adjectives  and  substantives.  The  latter  are  chiefly  masculines,  but  there  are 
also  several  feminines  and  neuters.  The  suffix  is  usually  accented.  The  root 
is  generally  weak,  but  sometimes  shows  Vrddhi,  least  often  Guna;  it  also 
occasionally  appears  in  a  reduplicated  form.  Medial  a  usually  remains 
unchanged,  but  is  sometimes  lengthened;  occasionally  it  is  nasalized  or  appears 
as  e.  Final  -d  adds  an  intervening  y ,  but  is  occasionally  dropped.  Gutturals 
only  (not  palatals)  appear  before  this  suffix. 

1.  Examples  of  adjectives  are:  ur-u-  ‘wide’,  rj-u-  ‘straight’,  prth-u- 
‘broad’,  nird-u-  (VS.)  ‘soft’,  vidh-u-  ‘solitary’;  jdy-u-  ‘conquering’  (]///-), 
dar-u-  ‘splitting’  (V dr-);  say-u-  ‘lying’  ( V si-),  cikit-u-  ‘shining’  (}/cit-), 
jigy-11-  ‘victorious’,  sisn-u-  ‘ready  to  give’  (' \f san -)7;  tab-?/-  ‘swift’,  tan-u-  ‘thin’, 


1  See  below  375  B;  Lindner  p.  So; 
Whitney  355  b. 

2  As  final  member  of  a  few  compounds, 
as  bhd-rjlka-  ‘light  shedding’. 

3  See  Lindner  p.  155;  Whitney  466  — 
47o. 

4  The  roots  prT-  and  srT-  being  treated  as 
ending  in  -a:  pra-iydms-  and  sra-iya?ns-  as 
in  the  superlative. 

5  In  the  TS.  pap-Tyams -  is  formed  directly 


from  the  adjective  stem  pbpci-,  the  radical 
element  of  which  is  uncertain. 

6  With  the  radical  vowel  unchanged  as 
in  the  superlative. 

7  Some  other  words  have  the  appearance 
of  being  reduplicated:  babhr-u -  ‘brown’, 
a-rdr-u-  ‘hostile’  (ra-  ‘give’);  malimlu-  (VS.) 
seems  to  be  a  mutilated  form  of  malimlnca- 
(AV.)  ‘robber’. 


IV.  Nominal  Stem  Formation.  Primary  Nominal  Derivation.  i  i  9 


tdp-u-  ‘hot’,  as-u-  ‘swift’  (as-  ‘reach’);  amh-u-  ‘narrow’;  ccr-u-  ‘active’  (car- 
‘move’);  dha-y-u -1  ‘thirsty’,  pa-y-u-  ‘protecting’;  y-u-  ‘going’  (]/yd-)2;  reku- 
‘empty’  (Y ric-). 

2.  Examples  of  substantives  are:  m.  grh-u-  ‘beggar’,  rip-u-  ‘cheat’; 
pipr-u -,  N.  of  a  demon;  as-u-  ‘life’,  man-u-  ‘man’,  pad-u-  ‘foot’,  bdh-u-  ‘arm’, 
ains-u-  ‘filament’,  va-y-it-  ‘wind’;  f.  is-u-  (also  m.)  ‘arrow’,  smdh-u -  (also  m.) 
‘river’,  dhdn-u-  ‘sandbank’,  pdrs-u-  ‘rib’,  hdn-u-  ‘jaw’;  n.  dy-u  ‘life’,  jdn-u- 
‘knee’,  tctl-u -  (VS.)  ‘palate’,  trdp-u-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘tin’,  ddr-u-  (also  m.)  ‘wood’, 
sdn-u  (also  m.)  ‘summit’;  with  syncope,  ks-u-  ‘food’  (ghas-  ‘eat’);  with  redu¬ 
plication,  ti-ta-u-  ‘sieve’. 

a.  In  a  few  of  these  derivatives  the  root  appears  with  a  prefix:  upd-y-u- 
(TS.  1.  1.  i1)  ‘approaching’,  ni-cer-u-  ‘gliding’,  pra-may-u-  (AV.)  ‘liable  to 
destruction',  pari-tatu-u -  (AV.)  ‘surrounding’,  sam-vas-u-  ‘dwelling  together’; 
abhis-u- 3 *  m.  ‘rein’,  vi-klind-u-  (AV.)  m.  a  kind  of  disease. 

139.  There  is  besides  a  large  class  of  agent  nouns  formed  with  -u 
not  directly  from  the  root  but  from  tense  or  secondary  conjugation  stems. 

1.  From  present  stems  are  formed:  tatiy-u-  ‘thundering’  ( tanya-ti  ‘roars’), 
b hind- it-  m.  ‘destroyer’  ( bhhid-dnti  ‘they  split’),  -vind-u- 4  ‘finding’  ( yindd-ti  ‘finds’); 
from  an  aorist  stem  ddks-u-5  and  dhdks-u-  ‘burning’. 

2.  From  desiderative  stems  are  formed  i-yaks-u-  ‘desirous  of  sacrificing’ 
(  Vyaj~)i  cikits-u-  (AV.)  ‘cunning’  (  y  c it-),  jigis-u  ‘desirous  of  winning’  (|//V-), 
jighats-u-  (AV.)  ‘greedy’  ( ghas -  ‘eat’),  titiks-u-  (AV.)  ‘patient’,  dits-u-  ‘ready  to 
give’  (  Y da~)  1  did f ks-u- 6  (vii.  863)  ‘eager  to  see’  (Ydrs-),  didhis-u-  ‘wishing 
to  obtain-  (  |A//a7-),  dips-u-  ‘wishing  to  harm’  ( ]/ dabh-),  ninits-u-  ‘wishing  to 
revile',  bibhats-u-  ‘feeling  disgust"  (Y^ad/i-),  mimiks-u-  ‘mingling’  ( ]/ mis-), 
mumuks-d-  ‘desiring  release’  (  Y muc~)'>  ririks-u-  ‘wishing  to  damage’  ( |/>A-), 
vivaks-u-  (AV.)  ‘calling  aloud’  ( Yvac~)>  sisas-u-  (AV.)  ‘eager  to  win’  ( j/Atz-). 

3.  From  causative  stems  are  formed:  dharay-u-  ‘streaming’,  bhdjay-u- 
‘liberal’,  bhdvay-ii-  ‘cherishing’,  mainhay-u-  ‘liberal’,  manday-u-  ‘joyous’,  sramay-u- 
‘exhausting  oneself’;  from  a  causative  denominative  mrgay-u-  (AV.VS.)  m.  ‘hunter’. 

4.  By  far  the  commonest  are  the  derivatives  from  regular  denominatives, 
of  which  nearly  80  occur  in  the  RV.,  and  at  least  half  a  dozen  additional 
cases  in  the  AV.  About  35  of  these  words  are  formed  from  denominative 
stems  in  actual  use7;  thus  aghay-u-  ‘malignant’,  aratly-u-  (AV.)  ‘hostile’,  vasuy-u- 
‘desiring  wealth’,  carany-u-  ‘mobile’,  inanasy-u-  ‘desirous’.  A  few  are  formed 
from  pronouns,  as  ahainy-u-  ‘selfish’,  asmay-u-  ‘favouring  us’,  kimy-u-  ‘desiring 
what?’,  tvay-u-  ‘loving  thee’,  yuvay-u-  and  yuvdy-u-  ‘desiring  you  two’,  svay-u- 
‘left  to  oneself’.  In  the  absence  of  an  accompanying  denominative,  there  is 
the  appearance  of  a  secondary  suffix  -yu  (with  the  sense  of  ‘desiring’  or  some 
more  general  adjectival  meaning)  attached  directly  to  nouns.  Thus  there  are 
derivatives  in  the  RV.  in  which  the  -as  of  noun  stems  is  changed  to  -0,  as 
if  the  suffix  were  actually  -yu:  amho-yu-  ‘threatening’,  duvo-yu-  ‘honouring’ 
beside  duvas-yu -,  and  d-skrdho-yu-  ‘not  niggardly’. 

-uka  :  agent. 

140.  This  suffix  probably  consists  of  the  primary  -u  extended  with  the 
secondary  -ka.  It  is  very  rare  in  the  Samhitas.  There  is  no  certain  example 


1  Here  the  y  really  belongs  to  the  root 
dhc-  ‘suck’. 

2  Also  in  the  reduplicated  form  yay-u- 

(VS.)  ‘swift’ ;  the  final-a  seems  also  to  be 

dropped  in  d-kh-u-  ‘mole’  phd-  ‘dig’)  and  in 

su-sth-u  ‘(standing)  well’  (A/za-  ‘stand’). 


3  Probably  from  abhi-\-Ts-  ‘rule’. 

4  In  go-vindu-  ‘searching  for  milk’. 

5  The  Pada  text  has  dhaks-u-.  Cp.  p.  1 1 7, 
note  7. 

6  With  irregular  accent. 

7  See  the  list  in  Lindner  p.  63. 


120 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


in  the  RV.,  but  san-ukd-  (RV1.)  ‘desirous  of  prey’  (ysan-)  and  the  Proper 
Name  per -uka-  (RV1.)  may  be  instances.  In  the  AV.  occur  ghdt-uka-  ‘killing’, 
vi-kas-uka-  ‘bursting’,  sdm-kas-uka-  ‘crumbling  up’,  a-pra-mdy-uka-  ‘not  dying 
suddenly’.  In  the  TS.  occurs  vas-ukd -,  but  the  meaning  and  derivation  are 
doubtful. 

-us  :  action  and  agent. 

141.  This  suffix  forms  neuter  action  nouns  which  have  mostly  a  concrete 
sense,  and  masculine  agent  nouns,  altogether  less  than  20  in  number. 
All  the  substantives  except  one  are  accented  on  the  root,  which  generally 
takes  Guna,  but  in  one  instance  Vrddhi.  Those  adjectives  which  also  appear 
as  substantives  have  the  same  accentuation;  but  those  stems  which  are  used 
solely  as  adjectives  accent  the  suffix. 

1.  The  neuter  substantives  are:  dr-us-  (AV.)  ‘wound’,  dy-us-  ‘life’,  cdks-us- 
‘light’,  tdp-us-  ‘heat’,  tdr-us-  ‘battle’,  dhdn-us-  ‘bow’,  pdr-us-  ‘knot’,  ydj-us- 
‘worship’,  vdp-us-  ‘marvel’,  sds-us-  ‘command’;  with  accent  on  the  suffix:  jati-us- 
‘birth’  (also  m.). 

2.  The  masculine  substantives  are:  ndh-us -  ‘neighbour’,  man-us-  ‘man’; 
adjectives  identical  in  form  with  neuter  substantives  are:  cdks-us-  ‘seeing’, 
tdp-us-  ‘glowing’,  vdp-us-  ‘wondrous’;  adjectives  without  corresponding  sub¬ 
stantives  are:  jay-us-  ‘victorious’,  van-us-  ‘eager’,  vid-us- 1  ‘heedful’;  also  daks-us- 
‘flaming’  from  the  aorist  stem. 


-u  :  feminine  substantives. 


142.  This  rare  suffix  chiefly  forms  feminines  corresponding  to  masculines 
and  neuters  in  - u 2 3.  Independent  feminine  substantives  are:  cam-TL-  ‘dish’, 
tan-fi-  ‘body’,  vadh-tt-  ‘bride’;  perhaps  pan-d -3  ‘admiration’.  There  are  also 
the  compounds  pums-cal-fi-  (VS.)  ‘courtesan’,  pra-jctn-fi-  (AV.)  ‘organ  of 
generation’. 

-uka  :  intensive  adjectives. 

143.  This  suffix  is  merely  the  lengthened  form  of  -uka  used  in  forming 
a  few  derivatives  from  the  reduplicated  intensive  stem.  It  appears  in  jagar- 
dka-  ‘wakeful’,  dandas-fika-  (VS.)  ‘mordacious’,  salal-nka-  (RV1.)  ‘wandering 
aimlessly’. 

-ka  :  agent. 


144.  This  is  a  very  common  secondary  suffix,  but  very  rarely  appears 
in  a  primary  character.  It  is  thus  used  in  dt-ka-  m.  ‘garment’,  su-me-ka- 
‘firmly  fixed’  {mi-  ‘fix’),  sus-ka-  ‘dry’,  sld-ka-  m.  ‘call’  {sru-  ‘hear’),  sto-ka-  m. 
‘drop’.  In  vfsc-i-ka-  m.  ‘scorpion’  the  suffix  is  added  with  connecting  -i-. 
The  feminine  form  of  the  suffix  appears  in  stu-kd-  ‘flake’,  ra-kd -,  N.  of  a 


goddess. 


-ta  :  agent. 


145.  This  suffix  is  employed  almost  exclusively  to  form  past  participles4, 
chiefly  with  passive,  sometimes  with  intransitive  meaning.  Its  more  general 
and  original  sense  is,  however,  preserved  in  some  words  used  as  adjectives 
or  as  substantives  with  concrete  meaning;  thus  trs-td-  ‘rough’,  drdhd-  ‘firm’, 
si-td-  ‘cold’,  vavd-ta -5  ‘dear’;  m.  du-td-  ‘messenger’,  su-td-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘charioteer’, 


1  With  weak  root;  the  only  instance  of  form  occurring  is  the  I.  sing,  panva . 

medial  vowel  other  than  %  in  the  radical  4  See  below,  Past  passive  participles,  572, 
syllable.  and  the  lists  in  Lindner  p.  70  f. 

2  See  below,  derivative  -ft  steins,  3S4.  5  From  a  reduplicated  form  of  va-  ‘win’, 

3  The  stem  may  be  pan-ft-,  as  the  only  and  with  unusual  accent. 


IV.  Nominal  Stem  Formation.  Primary  Nominal  Derivation.  121 


klstd- 1  ‘singer’,  bastd-1  ‘he-goat’;  n.  r-td-  ‘right’,  ghr-td-  ‘ghee’,  jd-ta-  ‘kind’, 
dyii-td-  (AV.)  ‘gambling’,  nrt-td -  (A V.)  ‘dance’,  pur-ta-  ‘reward’,  vra-td- 2 3 4 
‘ordinance’;  with  accented  and  strong  radical  syllable:  e'-ta-  ‘variegated’; 
m.  gdr-ta-  ‘car-seat’,  mdr-ta-  ‘mortal’,  vd-ta-  ‘wind’,  Zids-ta -  ‘hand’;  n.  ds-ta- 
‘home’,  tidk-ta-  ‘night’. 

a.  In  many  past  participles  the  suffix  is  added  with  connecting  -/-, 
as  raks-i-td-  ‘protected’.  Some  of  these  are  used  as  n.  substantives;  thus 
jiv-i-ta-  ‘life’,  cat -i-td-  ‘behaviour’.  Several  words  thus  formed  appear  as 
adjectives  only;  thus  tig-i-td- 5  ‘sharp’,  pal-i-td-  ‘grey’;  also  some  other  names 
of  colours  with  strong  and  accented  radical  syllable:  ds-i-ta-  ‘black’,  rdh-i-ta- 
‘red’,  loh-i-ta -  (AV.)  ‘red’,  hdr-i-ta-  ‘yellow’ ;  sye-td-  ‘white’  is  perhaps  anomalously 
formed  with  -it a-  from  syd- 4  ‘freeze’5. 


-tar  :  agent. 

146.  The  agent  nouns  formed  with  this  very  frequent  suffix6  are  often 
used  participially,  governing  an  accusative.  The  root  is  generally  accented 
when  they  have  this  verbal  force,  but  the  suffix,  when  they  are  purely  nominal 
(86 A  22).  The  root  regularly  has  Guna,  a  and  a  remaining  unchanged ;  thus 
ne-tar-  ‘leader’  ( ]/  m-),  hd-tar-  ‘priest’  (\dhu-),  kar-tdr-  ‘doer’  ( ]/  br),  bhet-idr- 
‘breaker’  (] fbhid-),  yok-tdr-  ‘yoker’  (\ryuj-);  yas-tdr-  ‘sacrificer’  ( l/j-v//'-),  da-tdr- 
‘giver’7.  With  weak  root:  us-tdr-  m.  ‘ploughing  bull’8. 

a.  Less  commonly  the  suffix  is  added  to  the  root  with  connecting 
regularly  when  the  root  ends  in  more  than  one  consonant9,  as  vand-i-tdr- 
‘praiser,  but  also  often  when  it  ends  in  a  single  consonant  and  sometimes 
when  it  ends  in  a  vowel,  as  cod-i-tdr -  ‘instigator’,  sav-i-tdr-  ‘stimulator’  (]/ su-). 

b.  The  suffix  is  combined  with  -T-  instead  of  -i-  in  grdbh-T-tar-  (AV.) 
‘seizer’,  prati-grah-l-tdr-  (AV.)  ‘receiver’,  sam-grah-i-tdr-  (VS.)  ‘charioteer’,  pra- 
tar-T-tdr-  ‘prolonger’,  d-mar-T-tdr-  ‘destroyer’;  with  -u-  in  tdr-u-tar-  ‘winning’ 
and  tar-u-tdr-  ‘conqueror’,  dhdn-u-tar-  ‘running  swiftly’,  sdn-u-tar-  ‘winning’; 
with  -u-  in  var-u-tar-  ‘protector’;  with  - 0 -  in  man-o-tar- 10  and  man-o-tdr- 
‘  inventor’. 

c.  These  derivatives  are  very  frequently  compounded  with  prepositions11; 
e.  g.  pura-e-tdr-  ‘leader’,  apa-bhar-tdr-  ‘taking  away’,  prdv-i-tdr-  ‘protector’ 
{av-  ‘favour’),  pra-sav-T-tdr-  ‘vivifier’. 

d.  They  are  very  rarely  formed  from  secondary  conjugation  or  from 
tense  stems,  as  coday-i-tdr-  ‘stimulator’12,  bodhay-i-tdr-  ‘awakener’,  ne-s-tar- 13 , 
a  kind  of  priest.  From  the  reduplicated  root  is  formed  vdvb-icir-  ‘ad¬ 
herent’. 

e.  Several  names  of  relationship  appear  to  be  formed  with  this  suffix. 
Being  all  very  old  words,  the  radical  syllable  is  obscure  in  meaning  or  irregular 
in  form.  They  are  jb-md-tar-  ‘son-in-law’,  duh-i-tdr-  ‘daughter’,  ndp-tar- 
‘grandson’,  pi-tar-  ‘father’,  bhrd-tar-  ‘brother’,  ma-tdr-  ‘mother’. 


1  These  two  words  are  of  doubtful  origin. 

2  If  derived  from  vr-  ‘choose’  with  ano¬ 
malous  form  of  radical  syllable;  but  accord¬ 
ing  to  Whitney  (1176  b)  it  is  to  be  ex¬ 
plained  as  vrat-d-  formed  from  vrt-  ‘turn’ 
like  vraj-d-  from  \vrj-. 

3  With  anomalous  guttural  before  -/-. 

4  Originally  perhaps  ‘rimy’,  cp.  si- /a-  ‘cold’. 

5  The  f.  of  these  adjectives  of  colour  is 
formed  from  other  stems:  enl-,  dsikm-, 
pdliknl rdhini-,  lohim-  (AV.),  syenJ-,  hdrim-. 

6  See  the  lists  in  Lindner  p.  72 — 75. 


7  -tui'  appear,  instead  of  -tar  in  yan-tur- 
beside yan-tar-  ‘guide’  and  in  stha-tur-  beside 
stha-tdr -  ‘stationary’. 

8  The  f.  of  these  words  is  formed  with 
-I  from  the  weak  stem,  i.  e.  in  •  irl. 

9  Except  dams-tdr-  (AV.)  ‘biter’. 

10  Connected  with  the  present  stem  mann-te 
etc.  of  man-  ‘think’. 

it  See  Lindner  p.  73  f. 

12  In  the  f.  coday-i-tr-i-. 

13  From  the  aorist  stem  of  nl-  ‘lead’. 


i22  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


-tas  :  action. 

147.  This  suffix  is  identical  in  meaning  with  -as,  being  used  to  form 
neuter  action  nouns  which  have  acquired  a  concrete  meaning.  It  is  very 
rare,  occurring  only  in  re-tas-  ‘semen’  (ri-  ‘flow’)  and  sro-tas-  ‘stream’,  ‘current’ 
(sru-  ‘flow’). 


~ti  :  action  and  agent. 


148.  This  suffix  is  used  to  form  a  large  number  of  feminine  action 
nouns;  it  also  appears  in  a  few  agent  nouns  employed  either  as  adjectives 
or  masculine  substantives1.  The  root  generally  has  the  same  weak  form  as 
appears  before  the  -ta  of  the  past  passive  participle2;  it  is,  however,  more 
often  accented  than  the  suffix.  In  a  few  words  the  suffix  is  added  with  the 
connecting  vowels  -a-,  -i-  or  -T-. 

1.  Action  nouns.  With  accent  on  the  suffix  are  formed  e.  g.  is-ti- 
‘desire’  (is-  ‘seek’),  u-ti-  ‘aid’  ( \f  a  v-),  klr-ti-  ‘praise’  (kr-  ‘commemorate’), 
dhau-ti -  ‘stream’  (dhav-  ‘flow’),  pT-ti-  ‘draught’  (pa-  ‘drink’),  pur-ti-  ‘reward’ 
(pr-  ‘fill’),  bhak-ti-  ‘distribution’  (b/iaj-  ‘divide’),  ma-ti-  ‘thought’  (man-  ‘think’), 
rd-ti-  ‘gift’  (rd-  ‘give’),  ri-ti-  ‘flow’  (ri-  ‘flow’),  vis-ti-  ‘work’  (vis-  ‘be  active’), 
stu-ti-  ‘praise’;  from  the  reduplicated  root:  carkr-ti-  ‘praise’  (kr-  ‘comme¬ 
morate’);  with  connecting  -a-3:  amh-a-ti -  ‘distress’,  drs-a-ti-  ‘appearance’, 
mith-a-ti-  ‘conflict’,  vas-a-ti-  ‘abode’.  With  accent  on  the  root  are  formed 
e.  g.  is-ti-  ‘offering’  ( \ryaj~),  gd-ti-  ‘motion’  (  ]P gam-),  di-ti-  ‘liberality’  (da- 
‘give’),  vrd-dhi-  ‘increase’  (] fvrdh-'),  sdn-ti-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘repose’  ( ys'am-);  from 
the  reduplicated  root  didhi-ti-  ‘devotion’  (din-  ‘think’)4 *;  with  connecting 
-a-:  dm-a-ti- 5  ‘indigence’  (am-  ‘be  afflicted’). 


a.  The  derivative  di-ti-  ‘giving’  when  used  as  the  final  member  of  a  compound  is 
reduced  to  -tti- :  bJidga-tli-,  mag/id-tti-,  vdsu-tti-’,  above  26  a  2. 

2.  Agent  nouns.  These  are  rare,  amounting  to  hardly  20  in  number. 
Accented  on  the  suffix:  jhd-ti-  m.  ‘relative’,  pat-ti-  m.  (AV.  VS.)  ‘pedestrian’, 
rd-ti-  ‘willing  to  give’;  with  connecting  -a-:  ar-a-ti-  m.  ‘servant’,  khal-a-ti-  (VS.) 
‘bald’,  and  with  accent  on  the  connecting  vowel  vrk-a-ti-  m.  ‘murderer’. 
Accented  on  the  root:  m.  dhtt-ti -  ‘shaker’,  pd-ti-  ‘master’,  miis-ti-  ‘fist’, 
sdp-ti-  ‘steed';  adjectives:  dhrs-ti-  (VS.)  ‘bold’,  pd-ti-  (AV.)  ‘putrid’,  vds-ti- 
‘eager’;  and  from  the  reduplicated  root  jigar-ti-  m.  ‘swallower’;  with  connecting 
vowels:  dm-a-ti-  ‘poor’,  rdm-a-ti-  (AV.  TS.)  ‘liking  to  stay’,  fj-i-ti-  ‘glowing’, 
turv-i-ti-,  N.  of  a  man  (turn-  —  tin'-,  tr-  ‘overcome’),  dabh-z-ti-6 ,  N.  of  a 
man’7,  snch-a-ti-  ‘carnage’  and  snih-i-ti-  (SV.). 

a.  These  derivatives  are  often  compounded  with  prepositions 8,  which  are  almost 
always  accented;  thus  dnu-ma-ii-  ‘assent’,  abhiti-  ‘attack’  ( abhi-iti -),  a-hu-ti-  ‘offering’, 
nir-r-ti-  ‘dissolution’,  vy-cip-ti-  (AV.)  ‘attainment’,  sdm-ga-ti-  ‘coming  together’,  abhi-md-ti- 
‘insidious’  (man-  ‘think’)9;  with  suffix  accented,  only  d-sak-ti-  ‘pursuit’,  a-su-ii-  ‘brew’  (\/su-) 
and  ‘enlivening’  (]/su-);  also  abhi-s-ti -  m.  ‘helper’  beside  abhi-s-ti-  f.  ‘help’. 


1  See  the  list  in  Grassmann,  Wdrterbuch  | 
1719 — 21;  Lindner  p.  76 — 79. 

2  The  roots  tan-  ‘stretch’,  ram-  ‘rest’,  han- 
‘strike’  may  retain  the  nasal :  tdn-ti-  f.  ‘cord’, 
rdn-ti-  ‘enjoyment’  (AV.  VS.  TS.)  beside 
rd-ti-  (VS.),  d-han-ti-  (VS1.)  beside  d-ha-ti- 
‘uninjured  condition’. 

3  The  -a-  here  often,  if  not  always,  belongs 
to  a  verbal  stem. 

4  Roots  which  have  the  connecting  -i-  in 

the  past  participle,  do  not  take  it  here: 

gup-ti-  (AV.)  ‘protection’  beside  gup-i-td-,  prd- 

drp-ti-  ‘arrogance’  beside  a-drp-i-ia-  ‘not  in¬ 


fatuated’  (also  d-drp-ta-).  These  are,  however, 
the  only  two  examples. 

5  But  with  the  connecting  -a-  accented: 
am-a-ti -  ‘lustre’,  ram-d-ti-  (AV.)  ‘haunt’,  vrat- 
d-ti-  ‘creeper’. 

6  This  word  may  be  a  compound  (pdabhi- 
i(i-). 

7  yayati-,  N.  of  a  man,  is  according  to 
BR.  and  Grassmann  derived  from  yat- 
‘stretch’. 

8  See  Lindner  p.  77  f. 

9  Compounded  with  a  noun:  Zuma-kd-ti- 
‘requiring  the  fulfilment  of  a  wish’. 


IV.  Nominal  Stem  Formation.  Primary  Nominal  Derivation. 


123 


b.  The  suffix  is  added  to  a  secondary  stem  in  jdn-aya-ti-  (VS.)  f.  ‘generation’;  it 
seems  to  have  a  secondary  character  in  yuva-ii -  f.  ‘maiden’,  adj.  ‘young’.  It  is  secondary 
in  paksa-ti  (VS.)  ‘root  of  the  wing’ ;  in  the  numerals  vimsa-ti -  ‘20’,  sas-ti-  ‘60’,  and  others; 
in  pankti -  f.  ‘set  of  five’;  in  the  pronominal  words  ka-ti  ‘how  many?’,  ta-ti  (AV.)  ‘so 
many’,  ya-ti  ‘as  many  as’;  and  in  addha-ti -  m.  ‘sage',  formed  from  the  adverb  ad-dha  ‘truly’. 

An  :  action  and  agent. 

149.  The  great  majority  of  the  words  derived  with  this  suffix  are  infinitives 
appearing  in  the  form  of  the  dative,  ablative-genitive,  and  accusative  cases. 
Besides  these,  there  are  a  few  action  nouns  used  independently,  and  still 
fewer  agent  nouns.  The  root  is  usually  accented1  and  takes  Guna;  but 
the  suffix  is  accented  in  some  'half  dozen  instances,  in  two  or  three  of 
which  the  radical  syllable  is  weakened.  The  gender  is  usually  masculine,  but 
a  few  feminines  and  neuters  also  occur. 

1.  Accented  on  the  root:  m.  o-tu-  ‘weft’  (va-  ‘weave’),  kra-tu-  ‘capacity’ 
(hr-  ‘make’),  td?i-tu-  ‘thread’,  - dhd-tu -2 3  ‘element’,  sdk-tn-  ‘groats’  ( j Psauj-),  se-tu- 
‘bond’  (si-  ‘bind’),  sd-tu-  ‘libation’  (su-  ‘press’),  dhd-tu-  adj.  ‘drinkable’  (dhe- 
‘suck’);  m.  man-tu -  ‘adviser’;  f.  vds-tu -  ‘morning’  (vas-  ‘shine’),  sd-tu -3  (AV.) 
'birth’;  n.  dd-tu-  ‘division’  (da-  ‘divide’),  vds-tu- 4  ‘abode’  (vas-  ‘dwell’). 

2.  Accented  on  the  suffix:  m.  ak-tu-  ‘ray’  (ahj-  ‘anoint’),  ga-tu-  ‘way’ 
(gd-  ‘go’)  and  ‘song’  (gd-  ‘sing’),  jan-tu-  ‘creature’,  he-tu-  ‘cause’  (hi-  ‘impel’); 
with  weak  radical  vowel:  r-tu-  ‘season’,  pi-td-  ‘drink’  (pi-  ‘swell’)5. 

a.  The  suffix  is  attached  in  a  few  instances  (as  in  some  infinitives)  with 

connecting  dur-d/idr-T-tu-  ‘irresistible’,  su-hav-T-tu-  ‘to  be  successfully 

invoked’,  tur-phar-T-tu- 6. 

b.  The  suffix  appears  in  a  few  instances  to  be  attached  to  a  present 
or  a  secondary  conjugational  stem:  edha-tu-  m.  ‘welfare’  (edha-te  ‘thrives’), 
tapya-tu-  adj.  ‘glowing’  (tapyd-te  ‘is  heated’),  vaha-tu-  m.  ‘wedding’  (vdha-ti 
‘conveys’),  sisasd-tu-7  ‘desirous  of  obtaining’;  jivd-td -  f.  ‘life’  (jiva-ti-  ‘lives’). 

c.  Derivatives  formed  with  -in  are  in  several  instances  compounded  with  the 
particles  dus -  and  su- :  dur-dhar-i-tu •  and  dur-dhar-tu-  ‘irresistible’,  dur-var-tu-  ‘difficult 
to  ward  off’,  dus-tdr-T-lu-  ‘unconquerable’,  su-yan-tn-  ‘guiding  well’,  su-iro-tu-  ‘hearing 
willingly’,  su-hdn-tu-  ‘easy  to  slay’;  also  with  a  pronoun  in  svaitu-  ‘going  one’s  own 

(clu  ■ ). 

Ana  :  action  and  agent. 

150.  This  suffix  is  very  rare,  occurring  only  in  cyau-tna-  n. 

(cyu-  ‘stir’)  and  in  rd-tna-  n.  ‘gift’  (rd-  ‘give’). 


(sva-)  gait 


concussion 


adj. 


‘animating 


Anu  :  agent. 

15 1.  This  suffix,  which  is  always  accented,  forms  more  than  a  dozen 
adjectives  and  a  few  substantives.  It  is  added  to  the  root  either  directly  or 
more  commonly  with  the  connecting  vowel  -a-  (which  probably  belongs  to  the 
present  stem)  or  -i-  (which  is  almost  exclusively  used  with  causative  stems). 

1.  Attached  directly  to  the  root:  kr-tnu-  ‘active’,  dar-tnu-  m.  ‘breaker’, 
ha-tnu-  ‘deadly’  (Yhan-);  with  reduplication:  jiga-tnu-  ‘hastening’  (gam-  ‘go’), 
jigha-tnd-  ‘harming’  (han-  ‘strike’). 

2.  With  connecting  -a-:  kav-a-tnu -8  ‘miserly’, piy-a-tmi-  ‘reviling’  (piya-ti 


1  The  infinitives  always  accent  the  root(ic>5). 

2  Only  in  the  compounds  tri-dhdtu three¬ 
fold’  and  sapta-dhatu-  ‘sevenfold’. 

3  Without  Guna. 

4  With  lengthened  a. 

5  krtv-as  ‘times’  is  probably  an  acc.  pi.  of 

a  stem  kf-tu -  ‘making’.  Cp.  BB.  25,  294. 


6  The  derivation  of  this  word  is  uncertain 
and  its  meaning  is  obscure.  [Cp.  Mahabhasya 
Vol.  I,  p.  363,  1.  25.] 

7  From  the  desiderative  stem  of  sa- 
‘obtain’. 

8  Cp.  Whitney,  Roots,  under  ku-  ‘design’. 


1.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  Yedic  Grammar. 


i  24 


‘abuses’),  meh-a-tnu -,  N.  of  a  river  ( meha-ti ),  d-ruj-a-tnu-  ‘breaking’  ( rujd-ti 
‘breaks’). 

3.  With  connecting  drav-i-tnu-  ‘running’  ( dru -  ‘run’);  from  causative 
stems:  ta?iay-i-tnu-  ‘thundering’,  dravay-i-tnu-  ‘hasting’  {dru-  ‘run’),  posay-i-tnu- 
‘causing  to  thrive’  ( \f pus-) ,  maday-i-tnu-  ‘intoxicating’  ( ]P mad-),  suday-i-tnu- 
‘causing  sweetness  to  how’  ( \Psud-),  stanay-i-tnu-  m.  ‘thunder’  ( Y stan-') ; 
an-dmay-i-tnu-  ‘not  making  ill’,  ‘curative’  (Yam-). 


-tra  :  agent. 


152.  This  suffix  was  doubtless  originally  formed  by  a  secondary  -a  added 
to  -tr  (the  weak  form  of  tar-).  But  having  early  attained  an  independent 
character,  it  came  to  be  largely  employed  as  a  primary  suffix.  It  is  used  to 
form  some  half  dozen  adjectives1  and  about  60  substantives,  the  latter  being 
neuters  except  about  a  dozen  (partly  masc.  and  partly  fem.)2 3 4 5 6 7.  The  substantives 
generally  express  the  means  or  instrument  by  which  the  action  of  the  verb 
is  performed,  sometimes  the  place  where  it  is  performed.  The  root  is  generally 
accented  and  has  Guna;  but  it  is  sometimes  unaccented  and  has  a  weak 
vowel.  The  suffix  is  generally  added  directly  to  the  root,  but  in  about  a 
dozen  instances  with  a  connecting  vowel. 

l.  Attached  directly  to  the  root:  adjectives:  jdi-tra- 3  ‘victorious’, 
svd-tra- 4  ‘invigorating’;  with  reduplication:  johd-tra-  ‘calling  aloud’  ( \dhu-). 

m.  a-trd- 5  ‘eater’,  us-tra- 6  ‘buffalo’,  ddms-tra-  ‘tusk’  {dams-  ‘bite’),  man-tra- 
‘prayer’;  with  weak  (etymologically  doubtful)  root:  pu-tra-  ‘son’,  mi-trd-1  ‘friend’, 
vr-trd- 8  ‘foe’. 

f.  ds-tra-  ‘goad’  (as-  ‘reach’),  nds-ird-  (AY.  VS.)  ‘destroyer’  (  y  nas-),  ma-trd- 
‘ measure’,  hd-tra-  ‘sacrifice’. 

n.  With  accent  on  the  root:  a- tra- 9  ‘food’,  kdr-tra-  (AV.)  ‘spell’,  kse-ira- 
‘field’,  ksnd-tra-  ‘whetstone’,  gd-ira-  ‘limb’,  jnd-tra-  (VS.)  ‘intellectual  faculty’, 
tdn-tra-  Svarp’,  dd-tra-xo  ‘gift’,  da-tra-  ‘knife’,  dhdr-tra-  ‘support’  (VS.  TS.), 
pdt-tra-  (VS.)11  ‘wing’,  pd-tra-  ‘cup’,  ( pd -  ‘drink’),  pes-ira-  (AV.)  ‘bone’,  mfi-tra- 
(AV.)  ‘urine’,  medhra-  (AV.)  ‘penis’,  ydk-tra-  ‘rope’,  vdr-tra-  (AV.)  ‘dam’, 
z ’ds-tra-  ‘garment’,  sro-tra-  ‘ear’,  sd-tra -  (AV.)  ‘thread’  (stv-  ‘sew’). 

With  accent  on  the  suffix  and  often  with  an  abstract  meaning:  as-trd- 


(AV.)  ‘missile’,  ks a-trd- 12  ‘dominion’,  da-tra-  ‘share’,  des-ird-  ‘indication’  ( |A/z/-), 
ne-tra-  (AV.)  ‘guidance’,  ras-trd-  ‘dominion’,  sas-trd-  (VS.)  ‘invocation’,  sds-trd- 
‘command’,  sai-tra-  ‘sacrificial  session’,  sto-trd-  ‘praise’,  sthd-tra-  ‘station’,  Zw-trd- 
‘sacrifice’. 

2.  With  connecting  vowel -a-:  dm-a-tra-  ‘violent \  ydj-a-tra-  ‘adorable’; 
krnt-d-tra-  ‘shred’,  gdiy-a-trd-  (song\ pdt-a-ira-  ‘wing’,  vddh-a-tra-  ‘deadly  weapon’, 
f.  var-a-trd-  ‘strap’;  with  -/-:  khan-i-tra-  ‘shovel’,  car-’-tra-  doot\jan-/-tra-  ‘birth¬ 
place’,  pav-i-tra-  ‘sieve’,  bhar-i-tra-  ‘arm’,  bhav-i-tra-  ‘world’,  san-i-tra-  ‘gift’; 
with  -u-:  tdr-u-tra -13  ‘overcoming’. 


1  These  have  mostly  masc.  forms,  some 
neuter;  the  only  one  which  has  fem.  forms  is 
yajatra -  ‘deserving  adoration’. 

2  Six  or  seven  masculines  and  five  femi¬ 
nines. 

3  With  exceptional  Vrddhi  of  the  radical 
syllable. 

4  From  ivd-  =  hi-  ‘swell’. 

5  For  at-trd-  from  arf-‘e at’.  Cp.  p.  125,  note1. 

6  With  wreak  root  though  accented. 

7  Occurs  in  the  RV.  as  a  n.  when  it 
means  ‘friendship’. 


8  Occurs  also  as  a  n.  in  the  RV.  when 
plural. 

9  For  dt-ira-  from  ad-  ‘eat’. 

10  Probably  for  ddl-ira-  from  the  present- 
stem  of  da-  ‘give’. 

Only  at  the  end  of  a  compound  in  the 

RV. 

12  naksatra-  ‘asterism’  is  perhaps  a  com¬ 
pound.  Cp.  above  Si,  2  a. 

13  Cp.  tar-u-tar-  ‘victor’. 


IV.  Nominal  Stem  Formation.  Primary  Nominal  Derivation.  125 

-tri  :  agent. 

153.  This  very  rare  suffix  occurs  in  only  three  or  four  derivatives:  a-tri-1 
‘devouring’,  sd-tri-  m.,  N.  of  a  man2 3;  with  connecting  -a  in  arc-a-tri-  ‘roaring’; 
also  in  the  f.  form  with  T  in  rd-trl -•*  ‘night’. 


-tru  :  agent. 

154.  This  suffix  is  found  only  in  sdtru-  ‘enemy’  for  *s'dt-tru-,  perhaps 
from  sad-  ‘prevail’. 

-tva  :  agent. 

155.  This  suffix  probably  arose  by  the  addition  of  the  secondary  suffix  -a 
to  action  nouns  in  tu ,  which  turned  them  into  adjectives  used  in  a  gerundive 
sense.  It  occurs  in  about  a  dozen  such  derivatives  which  are  almost  restricted 
to  the  RY.;  e.  g.  kdr-tva-  ‘to  be  made’4. 


-tha  :  action. 

156.  This  suffix  is  almost  exclusively  used  to  form  action  nouns  (some 
of  which  have  acquired  a  concrete  meaning)  in  all  genders5.  The  root 
generally  appears  in  a  weak  form,  as  the  suffix  is  mostly  accented.  The 
suffix  is  attached  to  the  root  either  directly  or  more  commonly  with  a 
connecting  vowel6. 

1.  Attached  directly  to  the  root:  m.  dr-tha-1 8 *  ‘goal’,  gd-thd-  ‘song’, 
pak-thd N.  of  a  man,  bhr-tha-  ‘offering’,  rd-tha- 8  ‘car’,  hd-tZia- 9  ‘slaughter’; 
in  composition  with  prepositions:  sam-i-thd-  ‘conflict’,  nir-r-thd-  ‘destruction’, 
sam-ga-thd -  ‘union’  {gam-  ‘go’),  ud-gT-thd-10  (AV.)  ‘singing  of  chants’;  in  com¬ 
position  with  nouns:  putra-kr-thd-  ‘procreation  of  sons’,  dirgha-ya-thd-  ‘long 
course’,  go-pT-thd -11 *  ‘protection’  {pd-  ‘protect’)  and  ‘draught’  (pd-  ‘drink’)  of 


milk’.  —  f.  kds-thd-  ‘course’,  gd-thd-  ‘song’,  ni-thd-  ‘trick’.  —  n.  uk-thd-  ‘saying’ 
(ihz’at-),  tlr-thd-  ‘ford’  {tr-  ‘cross’),  ni-thd-  ‘song’,  yfi-thd- 12  ‘herd’,  rik-thd- 
‘inheritance’ I3. 

2.  With  connecting  vowel  -a- :  ay-d-tha-  n.  ‘foot’,  uc-a-tha-  n.  ‘praise’ 
( Yvac-),  car-d-tha-  n.  ‘mobility’,  tves-a-tha-  m.  ‘fury’,  proth-d-tha-  n.  ‘snorting’, 
yaj-d-tha- 14  ‘worship’,  rav-a-tha-  m.  ‘roar’,  vaks-a-tha-  m.  ‘growth’,  vid-a-tha- 15  n. 
‘assembly’,  sap-d-tha-  m.  ‘curse’,  say-d-tha-  n.  ‘lair’,  svas-a-tha-  m.  ‘snorting’, 
sac-d-tha-  m.  ‘aid’,  stan-d-tha-  m.  ‘thunder’,  stav-d-tha-  m.  ‘praise’,  srav-d-tha- 

m.  or  n.  ‘flow’;  with  prefix:  a-vas-a-thd-  (AV.)  ‘abode’, pra-ztas-a-thd-  n.  ‘absence’, 
prdn-a-tha- 16  (VS.)  ‘respiration’. 

a.  With  -u  :  jdr-u-tha -,  m.  a  kind  of  demon  (‘wearing  out’,  jr-)}  var-u-tha- 

n.  ‘protection’;  with  - u :  mat-u-tha -17  m.  ‘sage’. 


1  For  dt-tri-  from  ad-  ‘eat’.  Cp.  p.  124,  note  5. 

2  For  sat-tri-  from  sat-  ‘cut  in  pieces’. 

3  In  AV.  rd-tri-  also. 

4  See  below,  Future  Passive  Participles, 

5S1. 

5  The  fern,  form  of  the  suffix  is  -tha. 

6  This  vowel  for  the  most  part  belongs 
in  reality  to  a  present  stem. 

7  With  accented  strong  root. 

8  The  root  is  uncertain. 

5  With  root  accented  though  weakened 
by  loss  of  nasal  {han-  ‘slay’). 

10  With  ga-  ‘sing’  weakened  to  gt-. 

11  Both  pa-  ‘protect'  and  pd-  ‘drink’  are 

weakened  to  pi-.  Cp.  above  27. 


12  The  root  in  this  word  is  uncertain. 

13  prstha-  ‘back’  probably  contains  the 
root  stha-  ‘stand’,  —  *pra-stha-  ‘prominent’. 

The  gender  is  uncertain,  as  the  word 
occurs  in  the  dat.  sing,  only, 

*5  Probably  from  vidh-  ‘worship’ :  Oi.den- 
berg,  ZDMG,  54,  608 — 61 1 ;  cp.  above  p.  23, 
note  io. 

16  When  there  is  a  prefix  the  accent  is 
thrown  on  the  suffix;  but  pran-  {—pra-an-) 
is  treated  like  a  root. 

17  Perhaps  from  man-  with  double  suffix 
{-tu,  -tha). 


126  I.  Allgemeines  unu  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


-thi  :  agent. 

157.  As  far  as  can  be  judged  from  the  very  few  examples  occurring, 
this  suffix  was  used  to  form  agent  nouns.  It  is  attached  with  or  without 
a  connecting  vowel.  The  derivation  of  all  the  words  which  seem  to  be 
formed  with  this  suffix  is  doubtful:  dt-i-thi-  m.  ‘guest’  (if  from  at-  ‘wander’); 
ud-ar-a-thi-  adj.  ‘rising’;  me-th'i-  (AV.)  m.  ‘pillar’  {mi-  ‘fix’).  The  neuters  dsthi- 
(AV.  VS.,  beside  asth-dn-)  ‘bone’  and  sdkthi-  (beside  sakth-dn-)  may  be  formed 
with  the  suffix  -i. 

-thu  :  action. 


158.  This  very  rare  suffix,  which  is  not  found  in  the  RV.,  appears  only 
with  the  connecting  vowel  -a-  (which  in  reality  belongs  to  a  present  stem), 
forming  masculine  action  nouns:  ej-d-thu-  (AV.)  ‘trembling’,  vep-d-thu-  ‘quivering’, 
stan-d-t/iu-  (AV.)  ‘roar’. 

-na  :  action  and  agent. 


159.  This  suffix  is  in  the  first  place  used,  like  -ta,  to  form  past  passive 
participles1;  e.  g.  bhin-nd-  from  bhid-  ‘split’;  but,  unlike  -ta,  it  is  never  added 
to  the  root  with  a  connecting  vowel  or  to  a  secondary  conjugation  stem. 

It  is  further  employed  to  form  a  number  of  adjectives  and  masculine 
substantives,  mostly  accented  on  the  suffix.  It  also  forms  a  few  feminine 
{-no)  and  neuter  substantives,  all  but  one  of  the  latter  being  accented  on  the 
root.  The  substantives  have  partly  an  abstract  and  partly  a  concrete  meaning. 
A  medial  vowel  never  takes  Guna,  but  a  final  vowel  nearly  always  does. 

1.  The  adjectives  (f.  -a)  are:  ds-nd-  ‘voracious’,  us-na-  ‘hot’,  u-nd- 
‘deficient’,  r-na-  ‘guilty’,  krs-nd-  ‘black’,  kso-nd-  ‘immovable’  (?),  nag-mi-  ‘naked’, 
bradh-nd-  ‘pale  red’,  sd-na-  ‘red’,  sro-nd-  and  slo-nd -  (AV.)  ‘lame’,  slaks-nd- 
(A V.)  ‘slippery’,  svit-na -  ‘white’,  syo-nd-  ‘agreeable’;  compounded:  an-amr-nd- 
‘inviolable’,  d-ruks-na-  (AV.)  ‘tender’,  sada-pr-nd-  ‘always  munificent’. 

2.  Substantives  are:  m.  ghr-nd-  ‘heat’,  budh-nd-  ‘bottom’,  bhru-nd- 
‘embryo’, yaj-hd-  ‘sacrifice’,  sye-nd-  ‘eagle’,  ste-na-  ‘thief’;  sa m -pras-jid-  ‘question’; 
accented  on  root:  ds-na-  ‘stone’,  kdr-na-  ‘ear’,  vdr-na-  ‘colour’,  siis-na -,  N.  of 
a  demon,  svdp-?ia-  ‘sleep’.  —  n.  tr-n a-  ‘grass’,  dhd-na- 2  ‘booty’,  par-7id-  ‘wing’ 
vas-na-  ‘price’,  sis-na-  ‘penis’,  su-nd-  ‘welfare’,  sU-na-  ‘want’,  s'i-?ia-  ‘property’ 
f.  trs-na -  ‘thirst’,  dhd-na-  ‘milch  cow’,  sd-na-  ‘missile’,  sthfi-nd-  ‘post’. 


1 


-nas  :  action. 

160.  This  suffix,  which  has  the  same  meaning  as  -as  and  - tas ,  is  used 
in  forming  a  few  action  nouns  which  have  mostly  acquired  a  concrete  sense. 
These  are  dp-nas-  n.  ‘possession’,  dr-nas-  n.  ‘flood’,  -bhar-nas- 3  ‘bearing’ (?), 
rdk-nas-  n.  ‘property  left  by  bequest’  (ric-  ‘leave’).  With  connecting  vowel: 
drdv-i-tias-  n.  ‘movable  property’  (dru-  ‘run’),  pdr-T-nas -  m.  ‘abundance’ 
(pjr-  ‘fill’).  It  also  appears  in  the  agent  noun  ddm-fi-nas-  adj.  ‘domestic’, 
m.  ‘friend  of  the  house’  {dam-). 


-ni :  action  and  agent. 

161.  This  not  very  frequent  suffix  is  employed  to  form  111.  and  f.  action 
nouns  as  well  as  agent  nouns  (adjectives  and  substantives).  Either  the  radical 
vowel  or  the  suffix  may  be  accented;  and  the  root  in  several  instances  takes- 
Guna.  The  feminines  have  rarely  an  abstract  sense,  having  generally  acquired 
a  concrete  meaning. 


1  For  a  list  of  these  see  below  576. 

2  Probably  from  d/id-  ‘place’. 


3  In  sahdsra-bharnas-  ‘thousandfold’. 


IV.  Nominal  Stem  Formation.  Primary  Nominal  Derivation. 


12  7 


1.  The  feminines  are:  jur-nt-  ‘heat’,  -jya-ni -1  (AV.)  ‘injury’,  me-?ii-  ‘missile’, 
sre-ni-  ‘line’,  srd-ni-  ‘hip’,  sr-ni-  and  sr-ni-  ‘sickle’;  masculines  are:  ghf-ni- 2 3 
‘heat’,  yu-ni-  ‘receptacle’. 

2.  Agent  nouns,  adjectives  and  m.  substantives,  are:  ag-ni-  m.  ‘fire’, 
jiir-ni -  ‘singeing’,  tfir-ni -  ‘speeding’,  dhar-ni-  m.  ‘supporter’,  prs-ni-  ‘speckled’, 
pre-ni -  ‘loving’  ( V prt-),  bhiir-ni-  ‘excited’,  vah-ni-  m.  ‘draught  animal’,  vrs-ni- 
and  vrs-nt-  ‘virile’,  m.  ‘ram’. 

a.  The  suffix  occurs  with  a  connecting  -u-  in  hrdd-u-ni-  f.(?)  ‘hail’  3. 


-nu  :  action  and  agent. 

162.  With  this  suffix  is  formed  a  small  number  of  action  and  asent 
nouns  of  all  genders,  but  mostly  masculine.  The  action  nouns  often  have  a 
concrete  meaning.  As  the  suffix  is  almost  invariably  accented,  the  radical 
vowel,  with  one  exception,  never  shows  Guna.  This  suffix,  like  -///,  is  some¬ 
times  preceded  by  -a  (which  really  belongs  to  present  stems). 

1.  The  substantives  occurring  are:  ksep-nu-  m.  ‘jerk’  (x.  5 1 6 *),  dd-nu- 4 
m.  f.  ‘demon’,  f.  ‘dew’,  n.  ‘drop’,  dhe-nu-  f.  ‘cow’,  bha-nu-  m.  ‘light’,  vag-ni't- 
m.  ‘sound’,  vis-nu- 5  m.,  N.  of  a  god,  su-nu-  m.  ‘son’,  stha-mi- 6  m.  ‘pillar’;, 
with  connecting  - a -\  krand-a-m'c-  m.  ‘roaring’,  ksip-a-nu-  m.  ‘missile’,  nad-a-nu- 
m.  'roaring’,  nabh-a-nu-1  m.  ‘fountain’8. 

2.  Adjectives  are:  grd/i-nu -  ‘hasty’,  dhrs-nu-  ‘bold’;  with  connecting  -a-: 
the  compound  vi-bhahj-a-nu-  ‘breaking  to  pieces’. 


- pa  :  concrete  substantives. 

163.  A  few  words  are  formed  with  this  suffix,  but  the  origin  of  all  of 
them  is  more  or  less  obscure9.  These  are:  pus-pa-  n. ‘flower’,  stu-pd-10  (V S.) 

m.  ‘tuft’,  stfi-pa-'°  m.  ‘top-knot’;  perhaps  also  tal-pa-  m.  ‘couch’,  scts-pa-  (VS.) 

n.  ‘blade  of  grass’,  sil-pa  (VS.)  11.  ‘ornament’,  sttr-pa-  (AV.)  ‘winnowing  basket’; 
possibly  apu-pd-  m.  ‘cake’,  ula-pa-  m.  ‘shrub’,  kuna-pa-  (AV.)  11.  ‘corpse’11. 

-ma  :  action  and  agent. 

164.  This  suffix  forms  a  considerable  number  of  action  nouns  (almost 
exclusively  masculine)  as  well  as  agent  nouns,  botli  adjectives  and  substantives. 
Only  a  single  neuter  and  one  or  two  feminine  substantives  occur.  The  suffix 
is  accented  more  than  twice  as  often  as  the  root.  The  vowel  r  always  takes 
Guna  in  the  radical  syllable;  on  the  other  hand,  initial  or  medial  i  and  u 
never  take  Guna;  when  final  they  only  do  so  if  the  root  is  accented.  Several 
of  these  derivatives  in  -?na  appear  beside  others  in  -man]  some  at  least  are 
transfers  from  the  latter;  thus  dhdr-man-  ‘ordinance’  alone  is  found  in  the  RV., 
while  dhar-ma-  appears  beside  it  in  the  later  Samhitas. 

1.  Accented  on  the  suffix:  adjectives:  e.  g.  jih-md-  ‘oblique’,  tig-md- 
‘sharp’,  das-nid-  ‘wondrous’,  b/iT-md-  ‘terrible’,  sag-md-  mighty’;  with  reduplication, 


1  In  sarva-jyani -  (AV.)  ‘complete  loss  of 
property’. 

2  Beside  ghr-nd-  m.  and  ghr-na -  f. 

3  This  suffix  is  in  several  words  preceded 
hy  -a-,  much  in  the  same  way  as  but 
as  -ani  has  assumed  a  more  independent 
characterit is  treated  above  (122)  as  aseparate 
suffix. 

4  With  irregular  accent. 

5  Perhaps  originally  an  adjective  *  vis-nu-, 

with  shift  of  accent  on  becoming  a  Proper 

Name.  But  cp.  p.  85,  note  L 


6  The  origin  of  the  cerebral  n  here  is 
obscure. 

7  Also  nabh-anu-  f. 

8  The  Proper  Name  krs-dnu-  is  perhaps 
similarly  formed,  but  with  long  -a-. 

9  Cp.  Lindner  p.  69;  Liden,  IF.  iS, 
496. 

10  Probably  from  a  root  slu-  ‘drip’;  see 
Whitney,  Roots. 

n  yupa-  m.  ‘sacrificial  post’  is  probably 
derived  from  yup-  ‘obstruct’. 


I.  At.lgemeines  und  Sprache.  Vedic  Grammar. 


i  2S 


tutu-md-  ‘powerful’;  substantives:  m.  aj-md-  ‘course',  idh-md-  ‘fuel’,  ghar-md- 
’heat’,  dar-md-  ‘breaker’,  dhu-md-  ‘smoke’,  nar-md-(VS.)  ‘jest’,  ruk-md-‘ ornament’, 
hi-md-  ‘cold’. 

2.  Accented  on  the  root:  substantives:  m.  e.  g.  tt-ma-  ‘friend’  ( av - 
'favour'),  e-ma-  (VS.)  ‘course’,  dhar-ma-  (AV.  VS.  TS.)  ‘ordinance’,  bhd-ma- 
‘brightness’,  sdr-ma-  ‘flow’,  sd-ma-  ‘Soma’  ( \Z~su-),  std-ma-  ‘praise’  ( \f  stu-),  hd-ma- 
‘offering’;  f.  hi-md-  ‘winter’;  n.  bil-ma-  ‘chip’. 

a.  The  suffix  seems  to  be  added  once  with  connecting  -a-  (which  really  belongs  to 
a  present  stem)  in  the  f.  sar  a-ma-  ‘the  fleet  one’,  N.  of  a  goddess. 


-man  :  action  and  agent. 

165.  This  suffix  forms  a  large  number  of  derivatives1,  which  are  almost 
exclusively  action  nouns.  The  great  majority  of  these  are  neuters  accented 
on  the  root,  but  there  are  also  a  good  many  masculines  accented  on  the 
suffix.  Besides  these  occur  a  few  agent  nouns,  mostly  accented  on  the  suffix, 
both  adjectives  and  masculine  substantives,  all  of  them,  except  bra/i-mdn- 
■priest’,  of  rare  occurrence.  The  same  word  in  several  instances  varies  in 
meaning  according  to  the  accent  and  gender2 3;  e.  g.  dhdr-man-  n.  ordinance’, 
m.  dhar-mdn-  ‘ordainer’.  The  root  in  these  derivatives  usually  takes  Guna; 
in  a  few  instances  it  lias  Vrddhi  or  lengthens  a;  sometimes  it  is  weak.  The 
suffix  is  often  added  with  the  connecting  vowels  -i-  or  -T-.  The  derivatives 
are  occasionally  compounded  with  prepositions,  which  are  then  nearly  always 
accented. 

1.  Examples  of  action  nouns  are:  n.  dd-man-  ‘food’,  c-man-  ‘course’, 
kdr-man-  ‘action’,  kdrs-man-  ‘goal’,  jdn-man-  ‘birth’,  trd-man-  ‘protection’, 
dd-man-  ‘gift’  (da-  ‘give’)  and  ‘bond’  (da-  ‘tie’),  nd-man-  ‘name’,  pdt-man-  ‘flight’, 
brdh-man-  ‘devotion’,  bhdr-man-  ‘table’,  bhd-man-  ‘world’,  vdk-man-  ‘invocation’, 
v art- man-  ‘course’,  ves-man-  ‘dwelling’,  sak-man-  ‘power’,  sas-man-  ‘praise’, 
sdk-man-  ‘power’,  hd-man-  ‘sacrifice’  (Y  hu-)  and  ‘invocation’  ( Y hu-) ;  with 
connecting  -/-:  jdn-i-man-  ‘birth’,  vdr-i-man-  ‘expanse’  (beside  var-i-mdn-  m.); 
with  connecting  -/-:  ddr-T-man- ‘destruction’,  dhar-T-man-1 ordinance’ , pd?'-T-ma?i-^ 
‘abundance’,  bhdr-l-man-  ‘maintenance’,  vdr-T-man-  ‘expanse’,  sdr-t-man-  ‘course’, 
sdv-T-man-  ‘impulse’4,  hdv-i-man-  ‘invocation’. —  m.  us- man-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘heat’, 
o-mdn-  ‘favour’,  j e-mail-  (VS.  TS.)  ‘superiority’,  dragh-mdn-  (VS.)  ‘length’  (beside 
drag/i-i- man-),  pap-man-  (AV.)  ‘wickedness’,  bhu-mdn-  ‘abundance’,  vid-mdn- 
'knowledge’,  svad-mdn-  ‘sweetness’,  he-mdn-  ‘impulse’;  with  connecting  -/-: 
jar-i-mdn-  'old  age’,  prath-i-mdn-  ‘breath’,  mah-i-mdn-  ‘greatness’,  var-i-mdn -, 
vars-i-mdn-  (VS.)  ‘height’  (beside  vdrs-man-  and  vars-mdn-) ,  har-i-man- 
‘yellowness’. 

2.  Agent  nouns  accented  on  the  suffix  are:  dar-mdn-  ‘breaker’ 
da-mdn-  ‘giver’,  dhar-mdn-  ‘supporter’,  brah-mdn-  ‘one  who  prays’,  bhuj-mdn- 
'fertile’,  vad-mdn-  ‘speaker’,  sad- man-  ‘sitter’,  so- man-  ‘Somapresser’;  accented 
on  the  root:  ds-man-  ‘stone’,  o-man-  ‘friend’,  jc-man-  ‘superior’,  bhds-man- 
‘chewing’5. 

a.  The  following  words  are  according  to  difference  of  accent  neuter  action  nouns 
or  masculine  agent  nouns  dd-man-  ‘gift’  and  da-mdn-  ‘giver’;  dhdr-man-  ‘ordinance’  and 
dhar-mdn -  ‘ordainer’;  brdh-man-  ‘worship’  and  brah-mdn-  ‘priest’;  sdd-man-  ‘seat’  and 
sad-mdn-  ‘sitter’. 


1  For  lists  of  these  see  Grassmann,  Worter-  4  Also  stdr-l-man-  ‘spreading’  used  in  the 

buch  1730  f.;  Lindner  p.  91  —  93.  loc.  as  an  infinitive. 

2  Somewhat  in  the  same  way  as  the  5  In  a  compound  also  svadu-ks ad-man- 

derivatives  in  -as  (126).  ‘having  sweet  food’. 

3  Also  with  anomalous  - e-: par- e-man- ( SV1.). 


IV.  Nominal  Stem  Formation.  Primary  Nominal  Derivation.  129 


b.  In  a  few  words  difference  of  gender  and  accent  is  not  accompanied  by  difference 
of  meaning:  vdrs-man-  n.  and  vars-man-  m.  both  mean  ‘height’;  svad-man-  n.  and  svaa- 
man-  m.  ‘sweetness’;  var-i-man-  n.  and  var-i-man-  m.  ‘expanse’. 

c.  In  a  few  instances  difference  of  accent  is  accompanied  by  a  reversal  of  the 
usual  distinction  of  meaning:  je-man-  ‘victorious’,  je-man-  (VS.  TS.)  ‘superiority’;  6-man- 
m.  ‘friend’,  o-tnan -  m.  ‘favour’. 

d.  A  few  derivatives  in  -man  both  action  and  agent  nouns  are  compounded  with 
prepositions:  vi-gd-man-  n.  ‘step’,  pra-bhar-ma ?i-  n.  ‘presentation’,  pra-ya-man-  n.  ‘de¬ 
parture’,  vi-dhar-man-  m.  ‘maintainer’,  vi-pat-man- 1  ‘flying  through’,  ami-vart-man-  (AV.) 
‘following  after’,  vi-sar-man -1 2 3 4  m.  ‘flowing  asunder’. 


-mana  :  agent. 


166.  This  suffix  is  used  to  form  the  present^,  future,  and  aorist  middle 
participle  and  the  present  passive  participle4.  It  is  always  preceded  by 
a  except  in  the  anomalous  perfect  participle  sasr-mana-  (=  sasr-and-) 
‘speeding’. 


-mi  and  -mi :  action  and  agent. 

167.  The  suffix  -mi  is  used  to  form  a  few  adjectives  and  masculine 
substantives;  it  also  forms  (generally  in  the  form  of  -mf)  a  few  feminine 
substantives  with  a  concrete  meaning:  ur-mi-  m.  ‘wave’  (j/’z >r~),  -kur-mi- 
‘action’  in  tuvi-kur-mi-  ‘working  mightily’,  ja-mi-  ‘related’,  ‘kinsman’;  bhti-mi- 
and  bhd-mi-  f.  ‘earth’,  laks-mi-  f.  ‘sign’,  sur-mi-  f.  ‘tube’;  probably  also  ras-mi- 
m.  ‘ray’  and  the  adj.  krudh-mi -5  (RV1.)  ‘irascible’. 


-min  :  agent. 

168.  A  few  adjectives  have  the  appearance  of  being  formed  with  a  suffix 
-min.  They  are  is-mbi-  ‘impetuous’,  bha-min-  ‘shining’,  sus-min-  ‘roaring’.  They 
may,  however,  be  explained  as  secondary  derivatives  made  with  the  suffix  -in, 
like  dhum-bi-  from  dhumd-  ‘smoke’. 


-ya  :  gerundive. 

169.  This  suffix  is  used  to  form  a  large  number  of  future  participles 
passive6.  It  probably  has  a  primary  character  in  other  derivatives  besides 
these;  but  it  is  so  difficult  to  distinguish  them  from  those  which  are  secondary, 
that  it  is  preferable  to  treat  all  but  gerundives  under  secondary  -ya  (228). 

-yu  :  action  and  agent. 

170.  This  suffix  forms  a  few  action  and  agent  nouns.  The  root  remains 
unchanged,  while  the  accent  varies.  Action  nouns  are:  man-yu-  m.  ‘anger’, 
mrt-yu-  m.  ‘death’.  Agent  nouns  are:  dds-yu-  m.  ‘enemy’,  druh-yu -,  N.  of  a 
man  (‘hostile’),  sim-yu-  ‘enemy’;  bhuj-yu-  both  adj.  ‘wealthy’  and  m.  as  N.  of 
a  man.  Adjectives  only  are:  ydj-yu-  ‘pious’,  sundh-yu-  ‘pure’,  sdh-yu-  ‘strong’. 

-ra  :  agent. 

171.  A  large  number  of  derivatives  are  formed  with  this  suffix  7,  which 
is  usually  accented,  the  root  consequently  almost  always  appearing  with  a 
weak  vowel.  These  words  are  mostly  adjectives,  but  a  few  substantives 
occur  in  all  genders.  The  suffix  is  frequently  added  with  the  connecting 
vowels  -a-,  -i-,  -T-,  -u-. 


1  Or  as  a  Bahuvrihi  ‘having  the  flight  of 
a  bird’ 

2  With  unusual  accent  on  the  suffix  in¬ 
stead  of  on  the  preposition. 

3  In  the  ^-conjugation. 

4  See  below  under  those  tenses,  427,  435, 

442,  447;  5I2>  538;  an(I  CP-  Delbruck, 

Verbum  226;  Lindner  72. 

Indo-arische  Philologie.  I.  4. 


5  The  only  form  occurring  krudhmi ,  N. 
pi.  n.  might,  however,  come  from  krudh- 
mtn-. 

6  See  below,  Future  participles  passive, 
578;  cp.  Delbruck,  Verbum  230;  Lindner 
76,  p.  96-99- 

7  See  Lindner  78,  p.  ico — 102;  Whitney 
118S. 


9 


i3° 


l.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


1.  Of  derivatives  accented  on  the  suffix  there  are  more  than  60 
adjectives;  e.  g.  ak-rd-  ‘swift’,  ug-rd-  ‘mighty’,  cit-rd-  ‘bright’,  tu-rd -  ‘strong’, 
mu-ra-  ‘stupid’,  s'ak-rd-  ‘mighty’,  suk-rd-  ‘bright’,  hims-rd-  ‘injurious’,  Sub¬ 
stantives  are:  m.  us-rd-  ‘bull’,  ksu-rd-  ‘razor’,  mrdh-ra-  ‘foe’,  rud-rd-,  N.  of 
a  god,  vam-ra-  ‘ant’,  vi-rd-  man’,  sud-rd -  ‘man  of  the  fourth  caste’;  n.  abh-rd - 
‘cloud’,  krcch-rd-  ‘distress’,  kru-ra-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘wound’,  ksi-rd-  ‘milk’,  khid-rd- 
‘ weight’,  rip-rd-  ‘defilement’,  sl-rd-  ‘plough’;  f.  hi-rd-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘vein’. 

a.  With  connecting  vowel  -a-:  drav-a-rd-  ‘running’,  pat-a-rd-  ‘flying’, 
ny-oc-a-ra-  (AV.)  ‘suiting’1;  n.  gambh-a-rd-  ‘depth’,  tas-a-ra-  ‘shuttle’2;  with  /: 
aj-i-rd-  ‘swift’,  is-i-rd-  ‘lively’,  dhvas-i-rd-  ‘stirring  up’,  badh-i-rd-  ‘deaf’,  mad- 
i-rd-  ‘pleasing’,  rudh-i-rd-  (AV.)  ‘red’,  sphi-ra-  ‘fat’;  m.  k/iad-i-ra-,  a  kind  of 
tree;  n.  sar-i-rd-  (VS.)  ‘wave’;  with  T:  gabh-T-ra-  and  gambh-T-rd-  ‘deep’; 
with  u:  amh-u-rd-  ‘narrow’,  vith-u-ra-  ‘tottering’. 

2.  Of  stems  accented  on  the  root  the  only  adjectives  are:  grdh-ra- 
‘greedy’,  tum-ra-  ‘stout’,  dhz-ra-  ‘wise’,  vip-ra-  ‘inspired’;  substantives  are: 
m.  dj-ra-  ‘field’,  ind-ra -,  N.  of  a  god,  vaj-ra-  ‘thunderbolt’,  vdrdh-ra-  (AV.) 
‘girth’,  su-ra-  ‘hero’;  n.  dg-ra-  ‘point’,  rdndh-ra-  ‘hollow’,  svdbh-ra-  ‘pit’; 
f.  dha-ra-  ‘stream’,  sip-ra-  ‘jaw’,  su-ra-  ‘intoxicating  liquor’. 

a.  With  connecting  vowel  -/-:  sthav-i-ra-  ‘firm’;  m.  dng-i-ra -,  N.  of 
a  seer,  ds-i-ra-  ‘missile’;  with  -7- :  sdv-T-ra-  ‘mighty’;  n.  sdr-T-ra-  ‘body’; 
with  -u-:  m.  as-u-ra-  ‘spirit’,  bdk-u-ra-  ‘trumpet’. 

a.  A  few  of  these  derivatives  are  compounded  with  prepositions:  ni-ci-ra-  ‘attentive’, 
ni-mrg-ra -  ‘attached’;  m.  a-kha-rd-  ‘lair’,  sam-ud-rd-  ‘sea’. 


-ri  :  agent. 

172.  This  suffix  forms  adjectives  as  well  as  m.  and  f.  substantives.  It  is 
sometimes  added  with  connecting  -u-.  The  root  is  more  frequently  accented 
than  the  suffix. 

1.  Adjectives  are:  bhfi-ri-  ‘abundant’,  vadh-ri-  ‘emasculated’,  subh-ri- 
‘beautiful’;  with  connecting  -u- :  jds-u-ri-  ‘exhausted’,  dds'-u-ri-  ‘pious’,  sdh-u-ri- 
‘mighty’. 

2.  Substantives  are:  m.  ahgh-ri-  (VS.)  ’foot’,  jt-ri-  ‘flowing  water’, 
su-ri-  ‘patron’;  f.  dbh-ri-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘hoe’,  ds'-ri-  ‘edge’,  us-ri-  ‘dawn’,  vdhk-ri- 
‘rib’;  with  connecting  -u-:  ahg-u-ri-  ‘finger’;  -rT  occurs  in  tand-ri-  (AV.) 
‘weariness’. 

-ru  :  agent. 


173.  This  rare  suffix  forms  adjectives  and  a  very  few  neuter  substantives. 
It  is  added  either  directly  to  the  root  or  with  a  preceding  -d-,  or  -e-. 
Either  the  root  or  the  suffix  may  be  accented. 

1.  Adjectives  are:  cd-ru-  “dear’,  dhd-ru-  (AV.)  ‘sucking’,  pe-ru-  ‘causing 
to  swell’  (pT-),  bhl-ru-  ‘timid’;  ar-d-ru-  ‘hostile’,  pat-d-ru-  ‘flying’;  jdb-a-ru -3 
(RV1.)  ‘speeding’,  piy-d-ru-  ‘reviling’,  vand-d-ru-  ‘praising’,  s ar-d-ru-  ‘injurious’; 
mad-e-ru-  ‘intoxicating’,  san-i-ru- 4  ‘obtaining’. 

2.  Substantives  are:  n.  ds-ru-  ‘tear’,  smas-ru-  ‘beard’. 


-la  :  agent. 

174.  This  rare  suffix,  a  later  form  of  - ra ,  is  equivalent  in  sense  and  use 
to  the  latter,  sometimes  also  interchanging  with  it.  It  forms  adjectives  and  a 


1  bharvara-  (of  doubtful  meaning)  is 
probably  a  secondary  formation,  and  vdsara- 
‘matutinaP  seems  to  be  derived  from  vasar • 
‘morning’. 


2  Also  -rksara-  ‘thorn’  m.  in  an-rksara- 
‘thornless’. 

3  Perhaps  for  *jav-a-ru-  from  ju-  ‘speed’. 

4  The  suffix  is  secondary  in  mitre-ru-  ‘ally’. 


IV.  Nominal  Stem  Formation.  Primary  Nominal  Derivation. 


131 

few  masculine  and  neuter  substantives.  The  radical  syllable  is  accented  in 
two  or  three  substantives  only.  The  suffix  is  added  either  directly  to  the 
root  or  with  the  connecting  vowels  -a-,  -u-. 

Derivatives  thus  formed  are:  -pa-ld-  (VS.)  m.  ‘guardian’  in  aja-pald-  (VS.) 
‘goat-herd’,  suk-ld-  (AV.)  n.  ‘white  colour’  (beside  suk-rd-  ‘white’),  sthu-la- 
(A V.)  ‘thick’  (beside  st/iii-rd-);  with  connecting -a-:  trp-d-la -  ‘joyous’,  bhrtn- 
a-ld-  (AV.)  ‘torpid’,  mus-a-la -  (AV.)  m.  ‘pestle’,  sab-a-la-  ‘mottled’,  sdm-a-la- 
(AV.)  n.  ‘defilement’;  with  dn-i-la-  m.  ‘wind’,  trd-i-ld-  ‘porous’,  sal-i-ld - 
‘surging’  (beside  sar-i-rd-  VS.  ‘flood’);  with  -u-\  tand-u-la-  (AV.)  m.  ‘grain’, 
sak-u-ld-  (AV.  VS.)  m.,  a  kind  of  fish. 

-//  and  -lu  :  agent. 

175.  The  suffix  -li  occurs  only  once  as  the  equivalent  of  -ri  in  ahg-u-li- 
(VS1 2.)  f.  ‘finger’  (beside  ang-u-ri-').  Similarly  -lu  occurs  only  once  as  the 
equivalent  of  -ru  in  pataya-lu -  (AV1.)  ‘flying’,  formed  from  the  conjugation 
stem  patdya-  (from  pai-  ‘fly’). 


-va  :  agent. 


176.  This  suffix  forms  about  20  adjectives  and  seven  or  eight  substantives, 
mostly  masculines  with  a  concrete  meaning.  With  one  or  two  exceptions  it 
is  added  directly  to  the  root.  The  accent  is  rather  oftener  on  the  suffix 
than  on  the  radical  syllable.  The  root  hardly  ever  appears  in  a  strengthened 
form. 


1.  Accented  on  the  suffix  are  the  adjectives:  urdh-vd-  ‘upright’,  rk-vd- 
"praising’,  rs-vd-  ‘lofty’,  tak-vd-  ‘swift’,  dhru-vd-  ‘fixed’,  pak-vd-  ‘ripe’,  mal-vd- 
(AV.)  ‘foolish’,  yah-vd-  ‘swift’,  ran-va-  ‘joyful’,  vis-va- 1  ‘all’,  sik-vd-  (AV.)  ‘deft’, 
sya-vd -  ‘dark  brown’,  hras-vd-  (VS.)  ‘short’;  the  substantives:  m.  ur-vd- 
‘stall’,  sar-vd-  (AV.  VS.),  N.  of  a  god,  sru-vd-  ‘ladle’;  f.  prus-vd-  (AV.)  ‘rime’; 
vidh-a-va- 2  ‘widow’. 

2.  Accented  on  the  root  are:  rbh-va-  ‘skilful’,  e-va-  ‘quick’,  m.  ‘course’, 
pi-va-  ‘fat’,  pdr-va-  ‘preceding’,  vdk-va-  ‘twisting’,  vis-va-  ‘all’,  sdr-va-  ‘all’; 
m.  ds-va-  ‘horse’,  khdl-va-  (AV.  VS.),  a  kind  of  grain,  srdk-va-  ‘corner  of 
the  mouth’;  f.  dm-i-va-  ‘disease’3. 

a.  A  few  such  derivatives  occur  only  compounded  with  prefixes:  a-khar-va-  ‘not 
shortened’,  citi-kulva-  (VS.)  ‘too  bald’,  vi-bha-va -  ‘brilliant’. 


-van  :  agent. 

177.  This  suffix  is  used  almost  exclusively  to  form  agent  nouns4,  both 
adjectives  and  substantives,  which  are  mostly  masculine,  but  sometimes  neuter. 
Though  the  root  is  regularly  accented3,  it  almost  invariably  appears  in  its 
unstrengthened  form.  If  it  ends  in  a  short  vowel  -t-  is  added  before  the 
suffix.  The  feminine  of  these  words  is  regularly  formed  with  -vari  (179  a). 

Examples  of  adjectives  are:  fk-van-  ‘praising’,  kr-t-van-  ‘active’,  druh-van- 
‘injurious’,  pdt-van-  ‘flying’,  pi-van-  ‘fat’,  ydj-van-  ‘sacrificing’,  rd-van -  (VS.) 


1  Cp.  Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  p.  126. 

2  Cp.  Roth,  KZ.  19,  223;  Brugmann, 
Grundriss  2,  p.  126. 

3  Also  n.  ulba-  ‘caul’  if  this  stands  for 
*u/va-  from  vr-  ‘cover’. 

4  The  only  action  nouns  are  the  few 
which  in  the  active  are  employed  as  infini¬ 
tives;  cp.  Whitney  1169  e. 


5  The  only  exceptions  are  two  words 
formed  with  the  connecting  vowel  mus- 
i-van-  ‘robber’,  san-i-i-van-  ‘bestower’,  and 
I  two  others  from  the  reduplicated  root, 
rara-van-  ‘liberal’,  cikit-van-  ‘wise’. 


9* 


132  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

‘bestowing’,  sak-van-  (VS.)  ‘able’,  su-t-van-  ‘pressing  Soma’;  substantives: 
m.  adh-van-  ‘road’,  dr-van-  ‘steed’,  gra-van-  ‘stone’;  n.  tug-van-  ‘ford’,  d/idn- 
van-  ‘bow’  and  ‘desert’,  par-van-  ‘joint’,  s?iti-van-x  (AV.  VS.)  ‘sinew’. 

a.  Several  derivatives  with  - van  are  compounded  with  prepositions;  thus  ati-skad- 
uan -  (VS.)  ‘transgressing’,  upa-/ids-van-  ‘mocking’,  vi-vds-van-  ‘shining  forth’,  vi-mfg-van- 
(A V.)  ‘cleansing’,  sam- bhf-t- van-  (AV.)  ‘accumulating’ 1  2. 


-van a,  -vani,  -vanu  :  agent. 

178.  These  rare  suffixes  are  doubtless  secondary  forms  of  -van.  They 
are  all  three  accented:  -vana  and  -vanu  on  the  final,  -vani  on  the  first 
syllable.  With  -vana  are  formed:  vag-vand-  ‘talkative’,  sat-vana-,  m.  ‘warrior’ 
(beside  sdt-van -),  and  from  the  reduplicated  root  susuk-vand-  ‘shining’  ( Y  sue-'). 
The  suffix  -vani  seems  to  be  preferred  for  derivatives  from  the  reduplicated 
root;  thus  besides  tur-vani-  ‘overcoming’,  bhur-vdni-  ‘restless’,  occur  jujur- 
vani-  ‘praising’,  tutur-vani-  ‘desiring  to  gain’,  dadhrs-vani-  ‘daring’,  susuk-vani- 
‘shining’  (\ f  sue-) \  the  obscure  word  arharisvani-  ‘exultant’  seems  to  be  derived 
with  this  suffix  from  an  irregularly  reduplicated  form  of  hrs-  ‘be  excited’. 
With  -vanu  is  formed  only  vag-vanu-  m.  ‘noise’. 


-vara,  -1 tala  :  action  and  agent. 

179.  This  suffix  makes  a  few  masculine  nouns  (f.  -t)  chiefly  accented 
on  the  final  syllable  of  the  suffix,  and  a  very  few  neuter  substantives  accented 
on  the  root.  The  masculines  are:  i-t-vard -  ‘going’,  is-vard-  (AV.)  ‘able’, 
phar-vara-  ‘sower’,  vyadh-vard-  (AV.)  ‘piercing’3  (l f vyadh-').  Neuter  sub¬ 
stantives  are:  kdr-vara-  ‘deed’,  gdh-vara-  (AV.)  ‘thicket’.  There  are  also 
two  feminines  which  have  the  appearance  of  being  derived  with  this  suffix, 
ur-vara-  ‘field’  and  ur-vdrT-  (AV.)  ‘filament’,  but  their  origin  is  uncertain. 
This  suffix  appears  with  /  instead  of  r  in  vid-vald-  ‘cunning’. 

a.  The  f.  of  this  suffix,  -varl ,  is  used  as  the  f.  of  adjectives  in  -van,  with  which 
it  corresponds  in  accent  and  treatment  of  the  radical  syllable.  There  are  about  25  of 
these  feminines  in  the  RV. ;  e.  g.  ydj-varT-  ‘pious’,  sf-l-vari-  ‘speeding’ 4. 


-vas  :  action  and  agent. 

180.  This  very  rare  suffix  forms  only  the  neuter  subtantive  vdr-i-vas- 
‘wide  space’  (beside  vdr-i-man-)  and  the  adjectives  rbh-vas-  ‘skilful’  (beside 
rbh-va-  and  fbh-van-)  and  sik-vas-  ‘skilful’  (beside  sik-van-).  The  vocative 
khid-vas  (vi.  2  24)  ‘oppressing’  is  probably  from  a  perfect  participle  khid- 
vdms-5  formed  without  reduplication,  not  from  a  stem  khid-vas-. 

-vdms  :  agent. 

181.  This  suffix  is  used  to  form  a  large  number  of  perfect  participles 
active,  being  added  with  or  without  the  connecting  vowel  -i-\  e.  g.  cakr-vdms- 
‘having  done’,  Ty-i-v tints-  ‘having  gone’;  sometimes  without  reduplication;  e.  g. 
vid-vtims-  ‘knowing’6.  This  suffix,  which  is  always  accented,  is  in  the  weak 
cases  reduced  to  -us-  before  vowels7. 


1  On  two  or  three  doubtful  derivatives 
with  this  suffix  see  Whitney  1169  b. 

2  Several  others  are  compounded  with 
nouns;  see  Lindner  p.  107. 

3  According  to  the  Pada  text  vi- 
adhvard-. 

4  See  Whitney  1171b;  for  such  femi¬ 


nines  occurring  in  the  AV.  see  his  Index 
Verborum  375. 

5  Cp.  pw.;  in  BR.  the  stem  is  given  as 
khid-van-.  According  to  Whitney  1173  b, 
it  is  derived  from  \/khad-. 

6  For  the  forms  occurring  see  below  492. 

7  See  Declension,  -vdms  stems,  347. 


IV.  Nominal  Stem  Formation.  Primary  Nominal  Derivation.  133 


-vi  :  agent. 

182.  This  rare  suffix  is  used  to  form  some  half  dozen  adjectives  and 
one  f.  substantive,  partly  from  the  simple  root  (which  is  accented),  partly 
from  the  reduplicated  root  (of  which  the  reduplicative  syllable  is  accented). 
The  adjectives  are:  ghrs-vi-  ‘lively’,  jir-vi- 1  (AV.)  ‘aged’,  dhru-vi-  ‘firm’; 
jdgr-vi-  ‘watchful’,  dd-dhr-vi-  ‘sustaining’,  dl-di-vi-  ‘shining’1 2 3;  f.  ddr-vi- 3  ‘ladle’. 


-vit  :  agent. 

183.  This  suffix,  which  is  perhaps  an  extension  of  -vi  with  occurs  in 
the  single  form  cikit-vit  (RV1.)  ‘deliberately’. 


-sa  :  agent. 

184.  This  suffix  is  used  to  form  about  two  dozen  adjectives  and  substan¬ 
tives  of  all  genders.  It  is  added  to  the  root  with  or  without  the  connecting 
vowels  -i-  or  -u-.  The  accent  is  sometimes  on  the  suffix,  sometimes  on  the 
root,  which  is  usually  unstrengthened.  Many  of  these  derivatives  are  of 
obscure  origin. 

The  suffix  is  added  direct  in:  gf't-sa-  ‘adroit’,  - drk-sa -4 5  (VS.),  prk-sa- 
‘dappled’  (  V pTc~)  \  ut-sa-  m.  ‘fountain’,  kut-sa -,  N.  of  a  man,  ghram-sa-  m. 
‘sun’s  heat’,  drap-sa-  m.  ‘drop’,  ruk-sd-  m.  ‘tree’;  bhi-sd- 5  f.  ‘fear’. 

a.  The  suffix  is  added  with  a  connecting  vowel  (-*-,  - u -)  in:  tav-i-sd -6 
‘strong’,  bhar-i-sd-  ‘rapacious’,  mah-i-sd-  ‘mighty’7 ;  rj-T-sd-  ‘rushing’,  rbi-sa -8  n. 
‘chasm’,  pur-T-sa-  n.  ‘rubbish’;  man-T-sd-  f.  ‘devotion’;  ar-u-sd- 9  ‘red’,  as-us-a- 
‘voracious’,  tar-u-sa-  m.  ‘overcomer’,  pur-u-sa -  m.  ‘man’,  vidn-u-sa-  ‘man’; 
ang-u-sd-  m.  ‘hymn’,  ply-U-sa-  n.  ‘biestings’. 


-sani  :  agent. 

185. t:  This  suffix  is  found  only  in  the  derivatives  car-sani-  ‘active’,  f.  pi. 
‘people’,  and  par-sdni-  ‘carrying  across’  (pr-  ‘cross’). 


-sara  :  agent. 

186.  This  suffix  appears  only  in  mat-sard-  ‘intoxicating’  (| P mad-)  and 
perhaps  in  sap-sard -  (1.  i6SQ)  ‘inspiring  awe’(?)  if  derived  from  sap-  ‘do 
homage’. 

-sas  :  action. 

187.  This  suffix  seems  to  be  contained  in  vdp-sas-  (RV1.)  ‘beauty’ (?)ID, 
and  possibly  in  tdr-u-sas-  (RV.)  ‘superior’  ( ]/Vr-). 

-sna  :  agent. 

188.  This  suffix  (perhaps  syncopated  for  -sana)  forms  some  half  dozen 
adjectives  and  m.  or  n.  substantives:  tlk-snd-  ‘sharp’  (] f tij),  de-s/id-11  n.  ‘gift’ 


1  From  jr age’;  see  Whitney’s  note  on 
AV.  xiv.  I21.  The  RV.  has  jiv-ri-. 

2  The  derivation  of  pra-pharvi-  (RV1.)  is 
uncertain. 

3  In  VS.  ddf-vT-  in  the  vocative  darvi. 

4  In  T-drk-sa -  (VS.)  ‘looking  like  this’ 
‘such’  (from  drs-  ‘see’). 

5  Only  in  the  I.  s.  bhtsd  which  is  a  con¬ 
traction  for  bhiyasd. 

6  The  f.  is  iavisi-. 


7  The  f.  is  mdhisi-. 

8  The  absence  of  cerebralization  in  the  s, 
together  with  the  b ,  makes  the  origin  of 
this  word  quite  uncertain ;  it  is  most  probably 
borrowed. 

9  The  f.  is  driest-. 

10  This  is  Sayana’s  interpretation  of  the 
word. 

Generally  to  be  read  trisyllabically  as 

da-isnd *. 


134  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

(da-  ‘give’),  slak-snd-  (AV.)  ‘smooth’;  with  connecting  -a-:  kar-d-sna-  m.  ‘fore¬ 
arm’,  mat-a-sna-,  n.  ‘lung’,  vadh-a-snd-  n.  ‘deadly  weapon’. 

-snu  :  agent. 

189.  This  suffix,  which  is  always  accented,  forms  adjectives,  being  added 
with  or  without  a  connecting  vowel  to  the  simple  root,  or  more  usually  with 
connecting  -i-  to  the  causative  stem. 

1.  From  the  simple  root:  ji-snu-  ‘victorious’,  dahk-snu-  (VS.)  ‘biting’ 
(Y  danis-),  ni-sat-snu-  ‘sitting  down’;  vadh-a-snu-  ‘murderous’,  vrdh-a-snu-  ‘joyous’; 
car-i-snu-  ‘wandering’,  a-mavisnu- 1  (x.  9411)  ‘immovable  (\f mu-  —  miv-). 

2.  From  the  causative  stem:  tapay-i-snu-  ‘tormenting’,  uamay-isnu- 
‘b  ending’,  patay-i-snu-  ‘flying’,  paray-i-snu-  ‘saving’,  posay-i-snu-  (AV.)  ‘causing 
to  thrive’,  maday-i-snu-  ‘intoxicating’,  abhi-socay-i-snu-  (AV.)  ‘causing  torments’. 


II.  Secondary  Nominal  Derivation. 

Lindner,  Altindische  Nominalbildung  p.  114 — 52.  —  Whitney,  Sanskrit  Grammar 
p.  454 — 80. 

igo.  Secondary  nominal  stems  are  those  derived  from  stems  already 
ending  in  a  suffix.  They,  however,  include  derivatives  from  pronominal  roots, 
as  i-tara-  ‘other’,  and  exceptionally  from  indeclinable  words  or  case-forms,  as 
antar-vant-  ‘pregnant’  ( antar  ‘within’),  mdma-ka-  ‘belonging  to  me’  ( mama 
‘of  me)’.  The  stem  to  which  secondary  suffixes  are  added  is  subject  to  certain 
changes.  Thus  final  -a  and  -i  vowels  are  regularly  dropped  before  suffixes 
beginning  with  a  vowel  or  y,  while  final  -?/  generally  takes  Guna;  thus  asv-in- 
‘possessing  horses’  (as'va-),  khad-in-  ‘adorned  with  rings’  (k/iadi-),  vayav-yci- 
‘relating  to  the  wind’  (vayu-).  Again,  the  n  or  the  a  of  stems  ending  in 
-an  is  occasionally  lost,  e.  g.  vrsa-tva-  ‘manly  power’,  vfsn-ya-  ‘manly’  (but 
vfsan-vant-  ‘drawn  by  stallions’);  while  stems  in  -a?it  regularly  appear  in  the 
weak  form  of  -at,  e.  g.  vaivasvat-a-  ‘son  of  Vivasvant’.  The  commonest 
change  is,  however,  the  strengthening  of  the  initial  syllable  with  Vrddhi1 2, 
e.  g.  amitrd-  ‘hostile’  (a-niitra-  ‘enemy’),  pdrthiv-a-  ‘relating  to  the  earth’ 
( prthivi -),  maitravaruna-  ‘derived  from  Mitra-varuna’,  sdubhaga-  ‘luck’  (su- 
b/idga-  ‘lucky’). 

As  regards  meaning,  the  great  majority  of  secondary  suffixes  form 
adjectives  with  the  general  sense  of  ‘relating  to’  or  ‘connected  with’.  In 
several,  however,  the  meaning  has  become  specific.  Thus  the  suffixes  - ayana , 
-i,  -eya,  form  patronymics  or  metronymics;  -in,  -, mant ,  -vant  express  possession; 
-tama  and  -tar a  imply  degrees  of  comparison;  -ta  and  -tv a  form  abstract 
substantives.  The  masculines  and  feminines  of  adjectives  are  frequently  used 
as  appellatives,  while  the  neuter  is  commonly  employed  as  a  substantive 
expressing  the  attributive  sense  of  the  adjective  as  an  abstraction. 

a.  The  secondary  suffixes  are  in  their  alphabetical  order  the  following: 
-a,  -a,  -am,  ayajia,  ayT,  ayya,  -i,  -in,  -i?na,  -iya,  -I,  -ina,  -Jya,  -cm,  -enya,  -eya, 
-cyya,  -ka,  -ta,  -tana  and  -tna,  -tama,  - taya ,  -tara,  -tavya,  -ta,  -tat,  -tati,  - tya , 
- tv  a ,  - tvata ,  - tvana ,  -tha,  -11a,  -ni,  -bha,  -via,  -mant,  -maya,  -min,  - mna ,  -ya, 
-yin,  - ra ,  -la,  -v a,  -vat,  -van,  -vant,  -vaya,  -vala,  - vin ,  -vya,  -sa. 


1  Thus  derived  in  pw. ;  in  BR.  emended 
to  d-marisnu-  ‘immortal’;  in  Grassmann  ex¬ 
plained  as  ama-visnu -  ‘mit  Ungestiim  an- 
dringend’. 

2  Strengthening  with  Guna  is,  on  the  other 


hand,  extremely  rare  in  secondary  derivation, 
as  devd-  ‘divine’  (div-  ‘heaven’),  drdna •  ‘wooden 
1  vessel’  (drti-  ‘wood’),  bhesaj-a -  ‘medicine’ 
( bhisdj -  ‘healing’);  cp.  191  a  a. 


IV.  Nominal  Stem  Formation.  Secondary  Nominal  Derivation.  135 


191.  With  the  suffix  -a  is  formed  a  very  large  number  of  derivatives 
which  are  primarily  adjectives  expressing  the  sense  of  relation  to  or  connexion 
with  the  primitive  word;  in  the  m.  and  f.  they  are,  however,  often  used  as 
appellatives,  and  in  the  neuter  as  abstracts.  The  first  syllable  of  the  primitive 
word,  whether  it  is  simple  or  compound  is  in  the  great  majority  of  instances 
strengthened  with  Vrddhi;  e.  g.  mdrut-a-  ‘relating  to  the  Maruts’  ( marut -), 
mdghon-a -  n.  ‘bountifulness’  ( maghavan -  ‘bountiful’) l,  dasarajn-a-  ‘battle  of  the 
ten  kings’  ( dasa-rajan -)2 3;  jaltr-a-  ‘victorious’  ( je-tr -  ‘conqueror’),  tvastr-d- 
‘belonging  to  Tvastr’;  manav-d-  ‘belonging  to  man’  ( manu -),  tdnv-a -3  ‘belonging 
to  the  body’  (, tanu -);  sarasvat-d-  ‘coming  from  the  Sarasvatl’,  aindragn-d- 
(A V.  VS.  TS.)  ‘belonging  to  Indra  and  Agni’  (. indragni );  yamun-d -  (AV.) 
‘coming  from  the  Yamuna’;  vddhryasv-a- 4  ‘descended  from  Vadhryasva’, 
vaisvadev-a-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘sacred  to  all  the  gods’  ( visvd-deva -). 

a.  A  comparatively  small  number  of  derivatives  add  the  suffix  without 
taking  V  rddhi.  These  are  probably  to  a  considerable  extent  due  to  transfers 
from  other  declensions  to  the  ^-declension.  Such  are  tamas-d-  (AV.)  ‘dark- 
coloured’,  parus-a-  ‘knotty’  {par us-  ‘knot’),  hemant-d-  ‘winter’;  dpak-a-  ‘distant’ 
{dp due-  ‘behind’);  hotr-a-  ‘office  of  priest’  {Zidtr-) ;  sakhy-a-  ‘friendship’  {sdkhi- 
‘friend’). 


a.  With  Guna  are  formed  tray- 
‘  two’),  nav-a-  ‘new’  {nu-  ‘now’);  dev-a-  ‘ 
‘healer’). 


a-  ‘threefold’  {tri-  ‘three’),  dvay-d-  ‘twofold’  [dvi- 
divine’  (div-  ‘heaven’),  bhesaj-d-  ‘medicine’  {bhisaj- 


192.  The  suffix  -a  is  used  in  a  very  large  number  of  stems  to  form 
the  feminine  of  adjectives  which  in  the  masculine  and  neuter  end  in  -a. 
Thus  nav-a -  f.,  ndva-  m.  n.  ‘new’;  priy-d-  f.,  priya-  m.  n.  ‘dear’;  gat-d-  £, 
gatd-  m.  n.  ‘gone’. 

193.  The  suffix  -a/7/~5  is  used  to  form  the  feminine  from  stems  in  -a0 
designating  the  wife  of  the  corresponding  male  being,  or  expressing  a  feminine 
personification:  arany-anf-  ‘Forest  Nymph’  {dranya-  ‘forest’),  indr-ani-  ‘wife  of 
Indra’,  uhnar-anT-  ‘Queen  of  the  Uslnaras’,  urj-dnT-  ‘Strength’  (personified), 
purukuts-anT-  ‘wife  of  Purukutsa’,  mudgal-dm-  ‘wife  of  Mudgala’,  varun-ani- 
‘Varuna’s  wife’. 

194.  The  suffix  -ciyana-  forms  a  few  patronymics  with  Vrddhi  in  the 
first  syllable:  anty-ayand-  (VS.  TS.)  ‘descendant  of  Antya’,  amusy-ayand- { AV.) 
‘descendant  of  so  and  so’  {amusya-  gen.  of  adds),  kdnv-ayana-  ‘descendant 
of  Kanva’,  daks-ayana-  (VS.  AV.)  ‘descendant  of  Daksa’;  also  the  f.  rdm- 
ayani -  (AV.)  ‘daughter  of  the  Black  One’  {ramd-).  The  derivative  uksan- 
dyana -,  N.  of  a  man,  being  formed  without  Vrddhi  is  perhaps  not  meant  for 
a  patronymic. 

195.  The  suffix  -dyT  occurs  perhaps  only  twice,  forming  the  feminine  from 
two  masculine  stems  in  -i  and  designating  the  wife  of  the  corresponding  male: 
agn-ayT-  ‘wife  of  Agni’  and  vrsakap-dyi-  (only  voc.)  ‘wife  of  Vrsakapi’. 

196.  The  suffix  -ayya  forms  gerundives6;  e.  g.  srav-dyya-  ‘glorious’ 
{sru-  ‘hear’).  There  are  also  a  few  other  derivatives  similarly  formed,  which 
are  used  as  ordinary  adjectives  or  as  neuter  abstracts ;  thus  nr-pdyya-  ‘guarding 


1  Formed  from  the  weakest  stem  maghon-. 

2  With  syncope  of  the  vowel  of  the  suffix. 

3  Without  Guna  of  the  ?7;  similar  ex¬ 
ceptions  in  parsv-d -  ‘side’  ( pdrsu -  ‘rib’), 
paidv-d-  ‘belonging  to  Pedu’,  mndhv-a -  ‘full 
of  sweetness’  ( madhu -),  yadv-ci-  ‘belonging 
to  Yadu’. 

4  It  is  natural  to  suppose  that  the  suffix 


- a  is  added  to  stems  in  -a  as  to  others  (the 
final  vowelof  the  primitive  disappearingbefore 
it)  and  not  that  derivation  by  Vrddhi  alone 
takes  place  here;  cp.  WHITNEY  1208  i. 

5  Cp.  Leumann,  KZ.  32,  294.  ff. 

6  These  are  probably  formed  from  dative 
infinilives  in  -ai  +  -ya;  cp.  Brugmann,  Grund- 

I  riss  2,  p.  1422;  cp.  also  IF.  12,  2. 


*3( 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


men’,  bahu-pdyya-  ‘protecting  many’;  purva-pdyya-  ‘first  drink’,  mahay-dyya- 
‘enjoyment’,  kunda-pdyya-  and  puru-mdyya-  as  Proper  Names;  also  formed 
from  nouns,  ras-dyya-  ‘tasteful’  ( rasa -  ‘sap’)  and  uttam-dyya-  n.  ‘summit’  ( uttamd - 
‘highest’)  h 

197.  The  suffix  -/  forms  a  few  patronymics  from  nouns  in  -a  with 
Vrddhi  in  the  initial  syllable:  dgnives-i-  ‘descendant  of  Agnivesa’,  pdurukuts-i- 
‘son  of  Purukutsa’,  prdtardan-i -  ‘descendant  of  Pratardana’,  prdhrad-i-  (AY.) 
‘son  of  Prahrada,  sdmvaran-i-  ‘descendant  of  Samvarana’.  Similarly  formed, 
but  with  the  sense  of  an  ordinary  substantive,  is  sdrath-i-  ‘charioteer’  (from 
sa-rdtha-m  ‘on  the  same  chariot’).  Two  other  words  add  a  secondary  -i 
without  Vrddhi  or  patronymic  sense:  tdpus-i-  ‘burning’  and  sucant-i -,  N.  of  a 
man  (seemingly  an  extension  of  the  participle  suc-dnt-  ‘shining’) 

198.  Hundreds  of  adjectives  are  formed  with  the  suffix  -in  from  stems 

in  -a,  but  very  rarely  from  stems  with  any  other  final;  e.  g.  ark-in-  ‘praising’ 

( arkd -  ‘praise’),  mams-in-  ‘wise’  ( manT-sd -  ‘wisdom’),  arc-in-  ‘radiant’  (arci- 

‘beam’),  satagv-in-  ‘consisting  of  hundreds’  (jsata-gva -),  vartn-in-  ‘clad  in 
armour’  ( vdrman -),  svan-in-  (VS.)  ‘keeping  dogs’  ( svdn -).  With  loss  of  final 
-as:  ret-in-  ‘abounding  in  seed’  {re'tas-)  and  perhaps  in  the  Proper  Name 

varc-in-  ( vdrc-as -  ‘power’);  with  loss  of  -ya:  hiran-in-  ‘adorned  with  gold’ 

( hiran-ya -). 

199.  The  suffix  -ima.  is  very  rare,  being  employed  to  form  adjectives 
from  the  stems  in  -tra  and  from  one  in  -ra\  krtr-ima-  ‘artificial’,  khanitr-ima- 
‘made  by  digging’,  putr-ima-  (AV.)  ‘purified’;  agr-imd-  ‘foremost’  ( dg-ra - 
‘front’). 

200.  The  suffix  -iya  is  employed  to  form  some  20  adjectives  (from 
stems  in  -a).  It  is  only  a  modified  form  of  -ya  which  is  added  for  facility 
of  pronunciation  after  two  or  more  consonants,  the  last  of  which  is  generally 
r ,  rarely  71,  m  or  v ;  e.  g.  abhr-iyd-  ‘derived  from  the  clouds’  ( abhrd -),  samudr- 
iya-  ‘belonging  to  the  sea’  ( samudra )-,  indr-iyd -  ‘belonging  to  Indra’; 
krsn-iyd -,  N.  of  a  man  (krsnd-  ‘black’);  rgm-iya  ‘praiseworthy’;  asv-iya-  ‘con¬ 
sisting  of  horses’,  ‘troop’. 

201.  The  suffix  -T  is  employed  in  a  very  large  number  of  derivatives 
to  form  the  feminine  of  masculine  stems;  often  from  stems  in  - a1  2;  e.  g. 
arus-T-  ‘ruddy’  ( arusa -),  dev 4-  ‘goddess’  ( deva -);  or  in  -u;  e.  g.  prthv-i-  ‘broad’ 
( prth-u -) ;  or  from  stems  formed  with  suffixes  ending  in  consonants,  as  parti¬ 
ciples  in  -at  or  -ant,  e.  g.  piprat-T-  /protecting’  ipr-  ‘take  across’),  ad-at-i- 
‘eating’  ( ad-ant -),  mad-ant-i  ‘rejoicing’  or  in  - vdyis -,  e.  g.  jagm-us-T-  ‘having 
gone’;  comparatives  in  - Tyams -,  e.  g.  ndv-tyas-l-  ‘new’;  stems  in  -tar,  e.  g. 
avitr-i-  ‘protectress’;  in  -mant,  e.  g.  dhenu-mat-T-  ‘abounding  in  nourishment’; 
in  - vant ,  e.  g.  ama-vat-i-  ‘impetuous’;  in  -an,  e.  g.  soma-raj n-T-  ‘having  Soma 
as  king’;  in  -in,  e.  g.  arkin-T-  ‘radiant’;  in  - ahc ,  e.  g.  arvdc-T-  ‘hitherward’; 
in  compounds  of  -han  ‘slaying’,  e.  g.  a-pati-ghn-T-  ‘not  killing  a  husband’,  of 
-drs-  ‘look’,  as  su-drs-T-  ‘well-looking’,  and  of  -pad  ‘foot’,  as  a-pdd-i-  ‘footless’. 

202.  The  suffix  -Tna  forms  more  than  a  dozen  adjectives  from  the  weak 
stems  of  derivatives  in  -aiic-,  expressing  direction  without  change  of  meaning; 
e.  g.  arvac-ina-  and  arvac-Tna-  ‘turned  towards’  ( arvdfic -  ‘hitherward’).  It  also 
forms  six  or  seven  adjectives  from  other  words,  expressing  the  general  sense 
of  relation;  e.  g.  ahjas-ina-  ‘straightforward’  ( anjasa -  ‘straight’),  visvajan-zna- 
(AV.)  ‘containing  all  kinds  of  people’. 


1  See  Whitney  1218  a.  formed  with  Vrddhi  in  the  initial  syllable; 

2  This  is  regularly  the  case  in  stems  e.  g.  manus-a-  ‘human’,  f.  manus-T-. 


IV.  Nominal  Stem  Formation.  Secondary  Nominal  Derivation. 


i37 


203.  The  suffix  -iya  forms  fewer  than  a  dozen  general  adjectives,  of 
which  only  two  occur  in  the  RV.;  e.  g.  arjzk-zya-,  designation  of  a  Soma 
vessel,  grha-medh-zya-  ‘relating  to  the  domestic  sacrifice’;  ahav-an-iya -  (AV.) 
‘sacrificial  fire’,  parvat-iya-  (AV.)  ‘mountainous’.  This  suffix  also  appears  in 
the  three  ordinals  dvit-zya-  ‘second’,  trt-zya -  ‘third’,  iur-zya-  ‘fourth’. 

204.  The  suffix  -ena  with  Vrddhi  of  the  initial  syllable,  occurs  only 
once,  forming  a  general  adjective,  in  its  feminine  form  samidh-enz-  ‘relating 
to  fuel’  ( santidh -). 

205.  The  suffix  -enya  was  doubtless  originally  formed  by  the  addition 
of  -ya  to  derivatives  made  with  - na ,  but  it  nearly  always  has  a  primary 
value  as  forming  gerundives;  e.  g.  drs-enya-  ‘worthy  to  be  seen’.  It  appears, 
however,  also  in  the  two  ordinary  adjectives  klrt-enya-  ‘famous’  ( klrti -  ‘fame’) 
and  vir-enya-  ‘manly’  {vira-  ‘hero’). 

206.  The  suffix  -e/a,  with  Vrddhi  of  the  initial  syllable,  is  employed 
to  form  fewer  than  a  dozen  adjectives  of  a  patronymic  or  metronymic  value 
and  some  half  dozen  adjectives  of  a  general  character,  the  latter  occasionally 
appearing  in  the  neuter  as  abstract  substantives;  e.  g.  ars-eya-  ‘descended 
from  a  seer’  ( rsi -),  adit-eya-  ‘son  of  Aditi’ ;  paurus-eya-  ‘relating  to  man’ 
( purusa -),  mdun-eya-  ‘position  of  a  sage’  ( muni -).  Two  words  with  this  suffix 
are  formed  without  initial  Vrddhi,  following  the  analogy  of  gerundives  from 
roots  ending  in  a  like  deya-  ‘to  be  given’  {da-  ‘give’):  didrks-eya-  ‘worth 
seeing’  (as  from  didrk-sa-  ‘desire  to  see’)  and  sabh-eya-  ‘fit  for  an  assembly’ 
(sabhd-). 

207.  The  very  rare  suffix  -eyya  forms  adjectives  with  a  gerundive  sense 
in  stus-eyya-1  ‘praise-worthy’,  and  sapath-eyyci-  (AV.)  ‘worthy  of  cursing’.  It 
also  forms  an  ordinary  adjective  used  as  a  neuter  substantive,  sahas-cyya- 
n.  ‘lying  together’  (si-  ‘lie)’. 

208.  The  suffix  -ka  was  probably  used  originally  to  form  adjectives 
expressive  of  connexion,  but  it  has  become  so  attenuated  in  meaning  as  often 
to  be  added  to  substantives  or  adjectives  without  changing  the  sense;  while 
on  the  other  hand  it  has  become  specialized  as  a  suffix  forming  diminutives. 

1.  Examples  of  its  significant  use  are:  anta-ka-  ‘making  an  end’  ( dnta -), 
rdpa-ka-  (AV.)  ‘having  an  assumed  form’  {rupd-  ‘form’);  asmd-ka-  ‘our’ 

( asmd -  ‘us’),  mdma-ka-  ‘my’  {mama  ‘of  me’);  anti-ka-  ‘near’  {anti  ‘before’). 

2.  The  suffix  appears  without  changing  the  meaning  in  e.  g.  dura-kd- 
‘distant’  {dura-  ‘far’),  vamra-kd-  ‘ant’  {vamra-  ‘ant’),  sarva-kd-  (AV.)  ‘all’ 

( sdrva -),  and  in  the  fem.  form  of  -ka  in:  avi-kd-  ‘ewe’  {dvi-  ‘sheep’),  isu-kd- 
(AV.)  ‘arrow’  {isu-),  dhenu-ka-  (AV.)  ‘cow’  {dhenu-).  3.  The  diminutive 
sense  appears  in  e.  g.  arbha-kd -  ‘small’,  kumara-ka-  ‘little  boy’,  pada-kd- 
‘little  foot’,  putra-kd-  ‘little  son’2.  Sometimes  a  contemptuous  meaning  is 
conveyed  at  the  same  time,  as  in  anya-ka-  ‘other’  ( any  a -),  dla-ka-m  ‘in  vain’ 
{dla-m  ‘enough’)3. 

a.  With  Vrddhi  in  the  first  syllable  is  formed  mama-kd -4  ‘belonging 
to  me’  {mama);  and  with  connecting  -i-\  vdrs-i-ka-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘belonging 
to  the  rains’  {varsa-),  vdsant-i-ka-  ‘belonging  to  the  spring’  (■ vasanta -),  and 
in  the  fem.  kairat-ikd-  (AV.)  ‘relating  to  the  Kiratas’. 

209.  The  rare  secondary  suffix  -ta  has  an  ordinal  sense  in  eka-td-  (VS.) 


1  This  gerundive  is  probably  based  on  small’,  kumar-ika-  (AV.)  ‘little  girl’,  kharv- 

the  infinitive  stuse  ‘to  praise’;  cp.  BRUGMANN,  ika- { AV.)  ‘mutilated’,  sakunt-ika -  ‘little  bird’, 
Grundriss  2,  p.  1422  (5).  i  kit-ikd-  ‘cool’  (AV.  slid-  ‘cold’). 

2  The  feminine  of  some  of  these  diminu-  3  Cp.  Whitney  $21. 

tives  is  formed  with  -ika  :  iyatt-ika-  ‘so  4  Beside  the  more  normal  mdma-ka-. 


i3§ 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


‘First’,  dvi-ta-  ‘Second’,  tri-id-  ‘Third’  as  Proper  Names.  It  also  appears  in 
ava-ta-  ‘well’  and  muhur-ta -  ‘moment’. 

210.  With  the  suffix  -tana  and  its  syncopated  form  -tna  are  made, 
from  adverbs  or  prepositions,  a  very  few  adjectives  with  a  temporal  sense: 
mi-tana-  and  ntt-tna-  ‘present'  (mi  ‘now’),  sand-tana-  (A V.)  and  sand-tna-  (AV.) 
‘eternal’  {sand  ‘from  of  old’),  pra-tnd-  ‘ancient’  (prd  ‘before’). 

211.  The  suffix  -tama  has  two  uses.  It  is  employed  to  form  superlatives 
from  nominal  stems  and  from  the  preposition  ud ;  e.  g.  puru-tama-  ‘very  many’, 
mddhumat-tama-  ‘very  sweet’,  rathi-tama- 1  ‘best  charioteer’;  ut-tamd-1 2  ‘highest’. 
It  is  also  used  to  form  ordinals;  e.  g.  sata-tamd-  ‘hundredth’. 

212.  With  the  suffix  -taya  are  formed  only  two  adjectives  from  numerals 
in  the  sense  of  ‘consisting  of  so  many  parts’:  catus-taya-  (AV.)  ‘fourfold’  and 
ddsa-taya-  ‘tenfold’. 

213.  The  suffix  -tara  is  regularly  used  to  form  comparatives  from 

adjectives,  substantives,  or  the  preposition  2/d;  e.  g.  tavas-tara-  ‘stronger’, 
rathi-tara-  ‘better  charioteer’,  vrtra-tara-  ‘worse  Vrtra’;  ut-tara-  ‘higher’.  It 
also  forms  the  ordinary  adjective  diva-tara-  (RV1 4.)  ‘diurnal’  {diva  ‘by  day’), 
and  a  few  substantives  in  which  the  meaning  of  the  suffix  is  somewhat 
obscure:  asva-tdra- 3  (AV.)  ‘mule’  (f.  vatsa-tard- 4  ‘weaned  calf’5  (f.  -/). 

214.  The  suffix  - iav-ya ,  probably  originating  from  the  predicative  use  of 
dative  infinitives  in  -tav-e  and  beginning  to  be  used  in  a  gerundive  sense, 
appears  only  twice  in  the  AV. :  j an-i-tav-ya-  ‘to  be  born’  and  hims-i-tav-ya - 
‘to  be  injured’. 

215.  The  suffix  -id  forms,  from  adjectives  and  substantives,  some  two 
dozen  abstract  nouns  expressing  the  sense  conveyed  by  the  English  suffixes 
-ness  and  -ship;  e.  g.  bandhu-td-  ‘relationship’,  vasu-td-  ‘wealthiness’;  ago-ta- 
‘lack  of  cattle’,  devd-ta-  ‘divinity’,  purusd-td-  ‘human  nature’;  jana-td-  (AV.) 
has  acquired  the  concrete  sense  of  ‘mankind’ 6.  Exceptional  formation  appears 
in  mama-td-  ‘selfishness’  and  tre-td-1  (VS.  TS.)  ‘triad’.  This  suffix  is  probably 
contained  in  su-nr-td- 8  ‘gladness’  also. 

a.  The  suffixes  -tdti  and  -tat  are  related  to  -td  and  have  the  same 
sense.  With  the  former  are  made  about  a  dozen  abstract  substantives  ;  e.  g. 
a-ristd-tdti-  ‘security’,  grbhTta-tdti-  ‘the  being  seized’,  jyestha-tdti-  ‘superiority’, 
dev  a  tdti-  ‘divinity’,  vasii-tdti-  ‘wealth’,  sarva-tdti-  ‘completeness’.  The  two 
substantives  sdm-tati-  ‘good  fortune’  and  satyd-tdti-  ‘truth’  also  appear  as 
adjectives  meaning  respectively  ‘beneficent’  and  ‘truthful’.  The  suffix  -tdt, 
which  seems  to  be  an  abbreviation  of  -tdti  and  occurs  only  in  the  RV.,  is 
employed  to  form  four  or  five  abstract  substantives:  7/pard-tdt-  ‘proximity’, 
devd-tat-  ‘divine  service’,  vrkd-tat-  ‘wolfishness’,  sarvd-tat-  ‘completeness’. 

216.  The  suffix  -tya  forms  some  half  dozen  adjectives  and  sub¬ 
stantives  from  prepositions  and  adverbs.  These  are  dpa-tya-  n.  ‘offspring’, 
amd-tya-  ‘companion’  {a/nd  ‘at  home’),  dvis-tya-  ‘manifest’  {avis  ‘openly’), 
nis-tya-  ‘foreign’  {nis  ‘out’),  sdnu-tya-  ‘secret’9.  This  suffix  is  also  added  to 


1  Also  in  the  Proper  Name  go-tama-. 

2  The  superlatives  tuvi-s-tama-  ‘strongest’ 
and  surabhi-s-tama •  ‘most  fragrant’  insert  a 
sibilant  before  the  suffix. 

3  Perhaps  ‘more  (like  a)  horse’  (than  an 
ass). 

4  Probably  ‘more  than  a  calf’. 

5  In  ratham-tard designation  of  a  kind 

of  Saman,  in  which  the  case  ending  of  the 

acc.  remains,  the  second  part  is  doubtless 


the  verbal  -tara  ‘speeding’  {tr-  ‘cross’). 
karotard -  ‘filter’  and  kaulitard designation 
of  Sambara,  are  probably  formed  with  • a 
and  Vrddhi. 

6  Like  ‘humanity’  in  English. 

7  Also  in  tret-in-T-  (RV.)  ‘the  threefold 
flame  of  three  fires’. 

8  Though  it  appears  also  as  a  neuter  su- 
nfta-  ‘gladness’  and  as  an  adjective  ‘joyful’. 

9  Cp.  sanu-tdr  ‘aside’. 


IV.  Nominal  Stem  Formation.  Secondary  Nominal  Derivation.  139 


the  substantive  dp-  ‘water’  to  form  the  two  adjectives  ap-tyd-  and  ap-tya- 
Svatery’. 

217.  With  the  suffix  -tva  are  formed  more  than  thirty  abstract  substan¬ 
tives  with  the  same  sense  as  those  in  - ta ;  e.  g.  amrta-tva-  ‘immortality’, 
a  ham- uttar a -tv  d-  (AV.)  ‘assertion  of  superiority’,  bhratr-tva-  ‘brotherhood’, 
?naghavat-tvd-  ‘liberality’,  raksas-tvd-  ‘sorcery’.  The  final  syllable  of  the 
primitive  is  lengthened  in  an-agas-tva-  ‘sinlessness’;  while  it  is  shortened  in 
sadhani-tva- 1  ‘companionship’.  Owing  to  the  influence  of  the  nominative,  3-  is 
inserted  before  the  suffix  in  su-prajd-s-tva-  ‘possession  of  many  children’  and 
with  initial  Vrddhi  in  sauprajd-s-tva-2  { AV1.)  ‘possession  of  good  offspring’. 

a.  The  two  suffixes  -ta  and  -tv a,  identical  in  meaning,  are  pleonastically 
combined  in  the  form  of  -tva-ta-  in  the  two  derivatives  isita-tvdta-  ‘excite¬ 
ment’,  and  purus a-tvatd-  ‘human  nature’. 

218.  The  suffix  - tvana ,  an  extension  of  -tva  with  -na,  appears  in  the 
formation  of  some  eight  neuter  abstracts  occurring  almost  exclusively  in  the 
RV.  These  are  kavi-tvana-  ‘wisdom’,  jani-tvand-  ‘state  of  a  wife’;  pati-tvand- 
‘matrimony’,  m arty a-tv and-  ‘the  ways  of  man’,  mahi-tvand-  ‘greatness’,  vasu- 
tvana-  ‘wealth’,  vrsa-tvand-  ‘manliness’,  sakhi-tvana-  ‘friendship’.  All  of  these 
except  martya-tvana-  have  beside  them  the  corresponding  abstracts  formed 
with  -tva 3. 

219.  The  suffix  -tha  forms  a  few  ordinals  from  cardinals,  and  adjectives 
from  pronominal  stems  with  a  general  numerical  sense.  Thus  catur-thd  (AV.) 
‘fourth’,  sas-thd-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘sixth’,  sapta-tha-  ‘seventh’;  kati-thd-  ‘the  how 
manieth?’. 

220.  The  rare  secondary  suffix  -na  appears  in  one  adjective  derived 
with  initial  Vrddhi  from  a  substantive,  strdi-na-  ‘feminine’  (stri-  ‘woman),  and 
in  three  adjectives  derived  from  adverbs  without  any  internal  change :  pura-nd- 
‘ancient  ( purd  ‘before’),  vlsu-na-  ‘various’  {vim-  ‘apart’),  sama-nd-  ‘like’  {samd- 
‘  equal’). 

221.  The  suffix  -nT  is  used  to  form  the  feminine  of  pati-  ‘lord’  and 
parus-a -  ‘knotty’,  as  well  as  of  several  adjectives  in  -ta  denoting  colours. 
Thus  pdt-nT-  ‘mistress’,  parus-nl -,  as  N.  of  a  river.  The  suffix  is  substituted 
for  -ta  in  e-ni-  ‘variegated’  ( e-ta -),  rohi-ni-  ‘red  cow’  {rdhi-ta-  ‘red’),  sye-m- 
‘white  cow’  {sye-td-  ‘white’),  hdtri-m-  ‘fallow’  ( hari-ta -).  In  a  few  such  words 
-m  is  substituted  for  the  final  a ,  while  k  takes  the  place  of  the  t 4:  dsik-nT- 
‘black’  ( asi-ta -),  pdlik-m-  ‘grey’  ( pali-td -),  hdrik-nT-  in  the  diminutive  form 
hdrikn-ika-  (AV.)  ‘yellowish’  {hari-ta-  ‘fallow’). 

222.  The  suffix  -bha  forms  half  a  dozen  derivatives,  all  names  of 
animals  except  one  adjective5:  rsa-bhd-  and  vrsa-bhd-  ‘bull’,  garda-bhd-  and 
rdsa-bha-6  ‘ass’,  sara-bhd-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘fabulous  eightlegged  animal’.  The  one 
adjective  is  sthula-bha -  (AV1.)  beside  sthula-  ‘big’. 

223.  The  suffix  -ma  forms  some  eight  superlatives,  partly  from  prepo¬ 
sitions,  and  the  ordinals  from  the  cardinals  for  ‘five’  and  ‘seven’,  ‘eight’,  ‘nine’, 
‘ten’.  The  former  are:  adha-ma-  ‘lowest’,  apa-md-  ‘farthest’,  ava-md-  ‘lowest’, 


1  From  sadha-ni-  (‘one  who  leads  with 
him’)  ‘companion’,  which  is,  however,  ana¬ 
lysed  in  the  Pada  text  as  sa-dham-. 

2  saubhaga-tva-  ‘happiness’  is  formed  from 
saubhciga-  ‘welfare’  =  ‘condition  of  welfare’, 
not  from  su-bhaga-  ‘lucky’,  from  which  is 
formed  subhaga-tva-  ‘welfare’. 

3  Cp.  Lindner  26  and  28. 


4  See  Brugmann,  Morphologische  Unter- 
suchungen  2,  p.  198,  and  Grundriss  2, 
P-  315- 

5  See  Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  p.  203 ; 
cp.  p.  89,  note  2. 

6  Formed,  with  Vrddhi  and  accented  on 
the  initial  syllable,  from  ras-  ‘roar’,  ‘bray’  etc. 


140  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


upa-md-  ‘highest’,  dtita-ma-1  ‘nearest’,  cara-ma-  ‘last’,  para-md-  ‘remotest’, 
madhya-ma-  ‘middlemost’.  The  ordinals  are:  panca-ma-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘fifth’, 
sapta-md-  (VS.)  ‘seventh’,  asta-md-  ‘eighth’,  nava-ma-  ‘ninth’,  dasa-md-  ‘tenth’. 

224.  The  suffix  -mant  forms  in  the  Samhitas  between  80  and  90 
possessive  adjectives,  like  the  parallel  suffix  -vant2,  with  which  it  is  to  some 
extent  interchangeable.  Unlike  - vant ,  however,  it  never  forms  derivatives  from 
stems  ending  in  -a  except  kanva-mant-  (RV1.)  ‘prepared  by  the  Kanvas’  and 
ydva-mant-  ‘rich  in  barley’.  Examples  are :  asdni-mant-  ‘possessing  the  thunder¬ 
bolt’,  osadhi-mant-  (AV.) ‘rich  in  herbs’,  kratu-mant-  ‘having  power’,  vadhd-mant - 
‘drawn  by  mares’(?),  hotr-mant-  ‘provided  with  a  sacrificed,  gd-mant-  ‘rich  in  kine’, 
viruk-mant-  ‘gleaming’,  garut-mant-  ‘winged’  (?),  kakud-mant -3  ‘provided  with  a 
hump’,  caksus-mant-  ‘possessed  of  eyes’,  vidyun-mant -4 5  ‘containing  lightning’. 

a.  A  final  -i  is  sometimes  lengthened:  tvisi-mant-  ‘vehement’  ( tvisi -  ‘vehemence’), 
dhrajT-mant-  ‘gliding’  (dhraji-  —  dhraji-  ‘gliding  motion’),  hirl-mant-  ‘tawny*horsed’  (hiri- 
=  hdri-  ‘bay  steed’);  -1-  is  inserted  in  jyotis-l-mant-  (AV.)5  ‘full  of  light’  (beside  jyotis- 
mant-\  and  .r  in  suci-s-mant -6 *  ‘shining’.  In  the  derivative  susu-i?iant-  (RV1.)  ‘very  stimu¬ 
lating’  the  suffix  seems  to  have  primary  value  7.  The  adverb  dsn-mat  ( AV1),  formed 
from  the  neuter  of  this  suffix,  seems  to  follow  the  analogy  of  adverbs  in  • vat  from 
derivatives  in  -vant. 


225.  The  suffix  -may a  (f.  -t)  forms  fewer  than  a  dozen  adjectives  with 
the  sense  of  ‘consisting  of’,  ‘derived  from’,  ‘abounding  in’.  The  suffix  -as 
remains  unchanged  before  the  m ,  but  d  is  assimilated  as  in  external  Sandhi. 
Derivatives  thus  formed  are:  ayas-mdya-  ‘made  of  metal’,  asman-mdya-  ‘made 
of  stone’,  kim-maya -  ‘consisting  of  what?’,  go-mdya-  ‘consisting  of  cattle’, 
jiabhas-mdya-  ‘vaporous’,  manas-maya-  ‘spiritual’,  mrn-mdya-  ‘made  of  clay’ 
(mrd-),  saka-mdya-  ‘arising  from  dung’,  su-mdya -8  ‘well-fashioned’. 

226.  The  suffix  -min  was  most  probably  due  to  the  derivatives  in  -in 
from  nouns  in  - ?na ,  like  dhum-in-  ‘smoking’  ( dhuntd -  ‘smoke’)  which  are  fairly 
common.  It  has  an  independent  character,  however,  in  is-min-  ‘impetuous’ 
and  rg-?nl?i-v  ‘jubilant  with  praise’  (fc-). 

227.  The  rare  suffix  -mna  forms  a  few  neuter  abstracts  from  nouns  or  par¬ 
ticles.  It  seems  to  be  an  extension  with  -a  of  -man  syncopated  like  -tna  for  -tana. 
The  derivatives  formed  with  it  are:  dyti-mnd-  ‘brightness’  ( dyu -  ‘sky’),  nr-mnd- 
‘manliness’  (nr-  ‘man’),  ni-mnd-  ‘depth’  (ni  ‘down’),  su-mnd-  ‘welfare’  (su-  ‘well’). 

228.  The  very  common  suffix  -ya10  forms  a  large  number  of  adjectives 
of  relation,  including  a  good  many  patronymics,  and  abstract  substantives. 
It  is  pronounced  -ia  nearly  four  times  as  often  as  -ya.  The  feminine  is  usually 
-yd,  both  in  adjectives  and  abstract  substantives;  but  in  the  former  it  is  some¬ 
times  -1,  as  dr-T-  and  Cir-ya-  ‘Aryan’,  ddiv-i- 11  and  ddiv-ya-  ‘divine’. 

a.  All  the  patronymics  besides  a  good  many  general  adjectives,  and 
most  of  the  abstract  substantives  are  formed  with  initial  Vrddhi;  e.  g. 
adit-yd-  ‘Son  of  Aditi’,  sahadev-yd-  ‘descendant  of  Sahadeva’;  grdiv-ya-  (AV.) 
'relating  to  the  neck’  (grind-),  ddiv-ya-  ‘divine’  (devd-  god’),  prdjdpat-ya-  (AV.) 


1  Once  (1.  1655)  anta-ma-',  cp.  p.  89, 
note  3. 

2  Which  is,  however,  about  three  times 
as  common. 

3  The  \  S.  has  kakun-mant-  as  in  external 
Sandhi. 

4  With  assimilated  t  as  in  external  Sandhi. 

5  Following  the  analogy  of  tavisT-mant- 
‘strong’, 

6  Occurring  only  once  in  the  vocative 

sucis-mas. 


7  The  word  is  analysed  in  the  Pada  text 

as  susu-mdn. 

8  This  derivative  seems  to  preserve  the 
originally  nominal  character  of  this  suffix. 

9  In  this  derivative  the  original  guttural 
appears,  though  it  has  become  sonant  as  in 
external  Sandhi. 

10  See  Whitney  1210 — 1213  (p.459 — 466) 
and  Lindner  36  (p.  138 — 144). 

These  are  evident  instances  of  the  re¬ 
duction  of  unaccented  yd  to  T;  cp.  24  a. 


IV.  Nominal  Stem  Formation.  Secondary  Nominal  Derivation. 


141 


‘relating  to  Prajapati’;  ddhipat-ya-  ‘lordship’  ( ddhi-pati -  ‘lord’),  janardj-ya- 
(VS.)  ‘kingship’  (jana-rdjan-  ‘king  of  the  people’),  vaimanas-ya-  (AV.)  ‘de¬ 
jection’  ( vi-inanas -),  sdmgram ajit-ya-  (AV.)  ‘victory  in  battle’  ( saingrama-j it- - 
AV.)  ‘conquering  in  battle’),  sduvasv-ya -1  ‘wealth  in  horses’  (sv-dsva-). 

b.  Derivatives  formed  without  Vrddhi  are  mostly  ordinary  adjectives, 
being  about  four  times  as  numerous  as  those  formed  with  Vrddhi.  They  are 
made  from  stems  with  all  kinds  of  finals.  The  following  are  examples:  dsv-ya- 
‘relating  to  horses’  (dsva-);  urvar-yd-  (VS.)  ‘belonging  to  cultivated  land’ 
(urvard-) ;  dv-ya-  ‘belonging  to  sheep’  (dm-);  vayav-yd-2 3  ‘belonging  to  wind’ 
(vayu-) ;  ndr-ya-  ‘manly’  (nr-  ‘man’);  pitr-ya-  ‘belonging  to  the  fathers’  (pity-); 
gdv-ya-  ‘derived  from  cows’  (go-);  nav-yd -  (AV.)  ‘navigable’  (ndu-  ‘boat’), 
svardj-ya-  ‘autocracy’  (sva-rdj-  ‘sovereign’) ;  karmari-ya- ‘skilful  in  work '  (karman-), 
vfsn-ya- 3  ‘virile’  (vrsan-  ‘male’);  sat-yd -4 5  ‘true’  (sant-),  prac-yd-  (AV.)  ‘eastern’ 
( prdhc -);  ayus-yd-  (VS.  AV.)  ‘length  of  life’  (dyus-). 


a.  The  final  -a  is  retained  before  the  suffix  in  hiranyd-ya-  ‘made  of  gold’  (, hiranya •), 
while  -an  is  dropped  before  it  in  aryam-ya-  ‘intimate’  (arya-mdn-  ‘companion’).  The  suffix 
is  added  pleonastically  in  avya-ya-  and  avya-ya-  ‘belonging  to  sheep’  (beside  dv-ya-)  and 
gavya-ya-  ‘derived  from  cows’  (beside  gdv-ya-);  also  in  forming  a  few  possessive  com¬ 
pounds,  as  su-hdst-ya-  ‘skilful-handed’  (beside  su-hdsta -)  5.  It  is  also  used  in  forming  a 
few  governing  compounds,  as  ddhi-gart-ya-  ‘being  on  the  driver’s  seat’  (, garta •),  abhi- 
nabh-ya-m,  adv.  ‘near  the  clouds’  ( nabhas -)6. 

/3.  In  some  adjectives  and  substantives,  the  suffix  has  a  primary  appearance;  e.  g. 
pus-ya-  ‘flower’,  yuj-ya-  ‘related’,  mddk-ya-  ‘middle’,  mdr-ya-  ‘young  man’,  sur-ya-  ‘sun’, 
f.  sur-ya-  7  ( svar -  ‘light’). 

y.  Though  as  a  gerundive  suffix  -ya  must  be  regarded  as  primary,  it  is  manifestly 
secondary  in  certain  adjectives  which  have  a  gerundive  sense;  thus  a-vi-inok-ya-  (AV.) 
‘not  to  be  loosened’,  pari-varg-ya-  8  (AV.)  ‘to  be  avoided’. 

d.  Akin  to  the  gerundives  are  a  few  abstract  feminines  in  -yd ;  e.  g.  kr-l-yd-  ‘action’, 
‘enchantment’,  vid-ya- 9  (AV.)  ‘knowledge’,  deva-yaj-yd-  ‘worship  of  the  gods’. 

229.  The  rare  suffix  -yin,  like  -in,  forms  a  few  possessive  adjec¬ 
tives,  all  of  which  except  one  occur  in  the  VS.  They  are  dtata-yin-  (VS.) 
‘having  one’s  bow  drawn’  (d-tata-),  dhanvd-yin-  (VS.)  ‘bearing  a  bow’  (dhdnvan-), 
7nara-yin-xo  (RV1.),  N.  of  a  man,  srka-yin-  (VS.)  ‘having  a  spear’  (srkd-), 
svadhd-yin-lx  (VS.)  ‘owning  the  Svadha’. 

230.  The  suffix  -ra  forms  four  superlatives  from  prepositions  and  about 
a  dozen  ordinary  nouns,  most  of  which  are  adjectives.  The  superlatives 
are  ddha-ra-  ‘lower’,  dpa-ra-  ‘later’,  dva-ra-  ‘lower’,  upa-ra-'2  ‘lower’.  The 
ordinary  adjectives  formed  with  the  suffix  have  the  sense  of ‘belonging  to’ 
or  ‘connected  with’.  It  is  usually  added  direct;  e.  g.  dhum-rd-  ‘grey’  (dhumd- 
‘smoke’),  asrT-rd-  ‘ugly’,  pdinsu-ra-  ‘dusty’  (pamsu-  ‘dust’,  AV.),  and  with 
initial  Vrddhi  dgmdh-ra -  ‘belonging  to  the  fire-kindler’  (agnid/i-).  It  is  added 
with  connecting  i  in  medh-i-rd -  ‘wise’  (medhd-  ‘wisdom’)  and  rath-i-rd-  ‘riding 
in  a  car’.  It  also  occurs  in  a  few  substantives,  some  of  which  are  of 


1  As  if  from  suvasva- ;  like  vaiyasv-a- 
‘descendant  of  Vyasva’;  cp.  Whitney 
1204  b,  c. 

2  With  Guna  of  final  -u  as  usual  before 
secondary  suffixes  (190);  prasav-yd-  ‘to  be 
partaken  of’  (pra-as-)  and  urjav-ya-  ‘rich  in 
nourishment’  ( urj -)  are  formed  without  any 
primitives  prdsu-  and  urju-. 

3  With  syncope  in  the  suffix  of  the  pri¬ 
mitive;  cp.  190. 

4  From  the  weak  stem  of  the  primitive; 
cp.  190. 

5  Cp.  Whitney  1212  c. 


|  6  Cp.  Whitney  1212  m. 

7  Cp.  Whitney  1213  e;  and  Roots,  under 
svar-  ‘sound’. 

8  Here  the  guttural  shows  that  these 
words  are  derived  from  nominal  stems 
-?noka-  and  -va7ga-. 

9  In  the  RV.  only  in  the  compound  jata- 
vidyd-  ‘knowledge  of  creatures’. 

Perhaps  meaning  ‘brilliant’  or,  according 
to  Sayana,  ‘destroying’  enemies. 

11  The  TS.  IV.  4.  114  has  svadha-vin -. 

12  For  dnta-ra  cp.  above  p.  90,  39  and 
note  L 


142 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


doubtful  etymology:  karmd-ra-x  ‘smith’,  muska-rd-  (AY.),  a  kind  of  small 
animal1 2,  sdmbara -3,  N.  of  a  demon,  saiikurd-  (A V.)  ‘penis’,  sahds-ra-  ‘thousand’. 


a  dozen  adjectives  with  the  same 
which  it  sometimes  interchanges  and 
Examples  are:  asli-ld-  (AV.)  ‘ugly’, 
tilvi-la-  ‘fertile’,  bahu-ld-  ‘abundant’, 
This  suffix  also  forms  two  or  three 


231.  The  suffix  -la  forms  about 
meaning  as  those  formed  with  - ra ,  with 
of  which  it  is  generally  a  later  form. 
kapi-la-  ‘brown’,  jiva-ld-  (AV.)  ‘lively’, 
madhu-ld-  ‘sweet’,  seva-la-  (AV.)  ‘shiny’, 
diminutives:  vrsa-ld-  ‘little  man’,  sisii-la-  ‘little  child’,  and  the  fem.  salaka-ld- 
(AV.)  ‘small  splint’. 

232.  The  suffix  -va  forms  a  few  adjectives:  arna-va-  ‘billowy’,  kesa-vd- 
(AV.)  ‘hairy’,  anji-vd-  (AV.)  ‘slippery’,  santi-vd-  (AV.)  ‘friendly’,  sraddhi-vd- 
‘credible’. 

233.  The  suffix  -vat  forms  seven  feminine  abstract  substantives,  with 
a  local  sense,  from  adverbs  or  prepositions:  arvd-vdt -4  ‘proximity’,  a-vdt- 
(AV.)  ‘proximity’,  nd-vdt-  ‘height’,  ni-vat-  ‘depth’,  para-vat-  ‘distance’,  pra-vdt- 
‘height’,  sam-vat-  ‘region’. 

234.  With  the  suffix  -van,  before  which  -a  and  -i  may  be  lengthened, 
are  formed  some  twenty  derivatives,  nearly  all  adjectives  with  the  sense  of 
‘possessing’  or  ‘connected  with’.  The  adjectives  are:  amatT-vdn-  ‘indigent’, 
aratl-vdn-  ‘hostile’,  fghd-van-  ‘impetuous’,  rna-van-  ‘indebted’,  dhitd-van- 5  ‘rich 
in  gifts’,  dhz-van-  (AV.)  ‘clever’,  maghd-van-  ‘bountiful’,  srustT-vdn-  ‘obedient’, 
satyd-van- 6  (AV.)  ‘truthful’,  samdd-van-  ‘warlike’,  svadhd-van -,  f.  -vafi-1 6 7  ‘faith¬ 
ful’,  hdrd-van-  (VS.)  ‘hearty’;  also  the  feminines  sumna-vari-  ‘bringing  favour’, 
sunrta-varZ-  ‘joyous’.  Somewhat  anomalously  formed  are  indhan-van-  ‘possessed 
of  fuel’  ( indhana -),  sa/id-van -8  and  saho-van-9  (AV.)  ‘mighty’.  There  are  also 
the  substantives  dthar-van-  m.  ‘fire-priest’,  musl-vd?i-  m.  ‘robber’,  and  sani-t- 
van- 10  ‘reward’. 

235.  The  suffix  -vanf  forms,  from  nominal  stems  of  every  kind,  possessive 
adjectives  numbering  at  least  250  in  the  Samhitas.  A  final  vowel  is  often 
lengthened  before  the  suffix,  most  frequently  -a,  but  very  rarely  -u.  Examples 
are:  kesa-vant-  ‘hairy’,  dsva-vant-  ‘possessed  of  horses’  (beside  dsva-vant-) ; 
prajd-vant-  ‘having  progeny’;  sdkhi-vant-  ‘having  friends’,  sdktz-vant-  ‘mighty’ 
( sdkti -  ‘might’);  dydva-prthivi-vant- 11  (AV.)  ‘connected  with  heaven  and  earth’; 
visnu-vant-  ‘accompanied  by  Visnu’,  visu-vdnt-  ‘dividing’  ( visu -  ‘apart’);  harit- 
vant-  ‘gold-coloured’;  asan-vant-  (AV.)  ‘having  a  mouth’,  rdman-vant-  and 
loma-vant-  (AV.)  ‘hairy’,  sTrsan-vdnt-  (AV.)  ‘having  a  head’;  kakubh-vant-  (MS. 
1.  111)  ‘having  a  peak’;  svar-vant-  ‘splendid’;  pdyas-vant-  ‘containing  milk’, 
nas-vant-  (AV .)  ‘having  a  nose’.  With  external  Sandhi:  prsad-vant-  ‘  variegated’ 12 . 

a.  Some  of  these  derivatives,  especially  if  formed  from  pronominal  stems, 
have  the  meaning  of  ‘resembling’  instead  of  ‘possessing’;  thus  md-vant-  ‘like 
me’,  l-vant-  ‘so  great’,  kz-vant-  ‘how  far?’,  indr as-v ant- 13  ‘like  Indra’,  nila-vant- 


1  sevara-  ‘treasury’  probably  stands  by 
haplology  for  seva-vdra-. 

2  The  word  occurs  in  TS.  V.  (B)  as  an 
adjective  meaning  ‘having  testicles’. 

3  Probably  a  foreign  word. 

4  From  arva-  ‘hither’  contained  in  aruanc- 
‘hitherward’  and  some  other  derivatives. 

5  The  Pad  a  text  has  dhita-van-. 

6  The  Pada  text  has  satya-van-. 

7  The  fem.  of  the  secondary  -van  being 
formed  like  that  of  the  primary  -van ;  see 
177  and  cp.  179  a. 

8  The  Pada  text  has  saha-van-. 


j  9  The  only  instance  of  external  Sandhi 
with  this  suffix. 

10  With  t  interposed,  as  after  short  radical 
vowel  preceding  primary  -van-,  e.  g.  kf-t- 
van-. 

11  Retaining  the  double  accent  of  the  pri¬ 
mitive. 

12  In  a  few  derivatives  -vani  has  the 
appearance  of  a  primary  suffix :  vivas-vant- 
or  vi-vasvant-  ‘shining’,  ar-vant-  ‘swift’,  yah- 
vant-  ‘speeding’. 

13  With  the  s  of  the  nominative. 


V.  Compounds.  Form  of  Compounds. 


i43 


‘blackish’,  nr-vdnt -  ‘manly’.  From  this  sense  is  derived  the  use  of  the  neuter 
acc.  as  an  adverb  of  comparison,  e.g.  manus-vat  ‘like  Manus’,  ‘as  Manus  did’. 

236.  The  very  rare  suffix  - vaya ,  probably  a  noun  in  origin,  seems  to 
be  found  only  in  one  numeral  adjective,  cdtur-vaya-  ‘fourfold’,  and  one  sub¬ 
stantive,  dru-vdya-  (AV.)  ‘wooden  dish’. 

237.  The  suffix  -vata  (cp.  179)  seems  to  be  used  in  the  formation  of 
secondary  derivatives  only  in  krsi-vald-  ‘peasant’  {krsi-  ‘tillage’)  and  in  the 
fern,  nad-vald-  (VS.)  ‘reed-bed’. 

238.  The  suffix  -vin  is  used  in  forming  nearly  twenty  possessive  adjectives 

from  stems  ending  in  -a  (which  is  lengthened),  -a1,  -as;  thus  ubhaya-vin- 

‘partaking  of  both’  ( ubhdya -),  astra-vin-  ‘obedient  to  the  goad’,  yasas-vin- 

(AV.)  ‘beautiful’.  To  the  analogy  of  the  derivatives  from  stems  in  -as  is  due 
the  insertion  of  s  in  sata-s-vin *  ‘possessing  a  hundred’.  The  only  derivatives 
from  stems  ending  in  any  consonant  other  than  t  are  dhrsad-vin-  ‘bold’ 

(, dhrsdt -)  and  vag-vtn-  (AV.)  ‘eloquent’  {vdc-  ‘speech’),  both  formed  as  in 
external  Sandhi. 

239.  The  only  derivative  of  the  suffix  -vya  forming  names  of  relation¬ 
ship  which  occur  in  the  Samhitas  seems  to  be  bhrdtr-vya-  (father’s) 

‘brother’s  son’2 3. 

240.  The  suffix  -sa  forms  eight  or  nine  adjectives  or  substantives  without 
in  most  instances  changing  the  original  meaning.  The  adjectives  are  eta-sa- 


‘ variegated’,  babhlu-sd-  (VS.)  ‘brownish’,  yuva-sd-  ‘youthful’,  and  with  possessive 
sense  roma-sd-  ‘hairy’.  The  substantives  are  ahku-sa-  m.  ‘hook’,  kdsma-sa- 
(AV.)  m.  or  n.  ‘stupefaction’  (?),  kald-sa-  m.  ‘jar’,  turvd-sa-,  N.  of  a  man, 
lopa-sd- 3  m.  ‘jackal’. 


V.  COMPOUNDS. 

Benfey,  Vollstandige  Grammatik  p.  245 — 282.  —  Whitney,  Sanskrit  Grammar 
1246 — 1316.  —  Reuter,  Die  altindischen  nominalcomposita,  ihrer  betonung  nach  unter- 
sucht,  KZ.  31,  157  —  232;  485 — 612.  —  Wackernagel,  Altindische  Grammatik,  21, 
Nominalkomposition,  1905:  cp.  Bartholomae,  IF.  20,  162  —  172  (Anzeiger). 

241.  Form  of  compounds.  —  The  Vedic  language  has  inherited  from 
the  Indo-European  speech  the  power  of  combining  words  into  a  compound 
treated  like  a  simple  word  as  regards  accent,  inflexion,  and  construction. 
Both  in  the  frequency  and  the  length  of  compounds  the  Vedic  language 
resembles  that  of  Homer.  In  the  RV.  and  the  AV.  no  compounds  of  more 
than  three  independent  members  occur;  and  those  which  consist  of  three 
members  are  rare,  such  as  ddabdha-vrata-prarnati-  ‘superior-minded  owing  to 
unbroken  observances’,  purva-kama-krtvan-  ‘fulfilling  former  wishes’,  mitho- 
avadya-pa-  ‘mutually  warding  off  want’,  hari-manyu-sayaka-  ‘stimulating  the 
mettle  of  the  bays’. 

The  two  characteristic  features  of  a  compound  are  unity  of  accent 
and  use  of  the  uninflected  stem  in  the  first  member  (or  members).  There 
are,  however,  exceptions  to  both  these  rules.  The  Sandhi  between  the  two 
numbers  is  occasionally  different  from  that  between  words  in  a  sentence. 
Occasionally  also  tmesis  of  a  compound  occurs 4.  Generally  speaking  a 


1  The  doubtful  word  vy-asnuv-in-  (VS1.) 
seems  to  add  -in  to  the  present  stem  with 
interposed  euphonic  -v-. 

2  pitr-vya-  ‘father’s  brother’,  *uncle’,  occurs 
in  the  later  language. 

3  Cp.  Gustav  Meyer,  IF.  1,  328. 


4  Frequently  in  dual  compounds,  as  dyavd 
ha  ksamd  ‘heaven  and  earth’;  occasionally 
in  others  also,  as  si'mas  cic  cheparn  for  sunak- 
sepam ;  nara  vd  samsam  for  nara-samsam ; 
sapid  me  sapid  for  saptd-sapta  me. 


144  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

compound  assumes  a  modified  and  single  meaning  as  compared  with  the 
same  words  used  in  juxtaposition  in  a  sentence;  e.  g.  krsna-sakuni-  (AY.) 
‘raven’,  while  krsnah  sakunih  would  mean  ‘black  bird’.  Compounding  must 
take  place  when  a  derivative  has  to  be  formed  from  the  two  words;  as 
ks  ditrap  at-y  a-  ‘property’  beside  ksetrasya  pdti-  ‘lord  of  the  field’.  Sometimes, 
however,  the  case-ending  remains  while  the  compound  accent  is  used,  as 
rayas-posa-dd-  ‘bestowing  abundance  of  wealth’,  beside  rayds  posa-  ‘abundance 
of  wealth’.  There  is  a  tendency  to  compounding  when  the  first  of  two 
syntactical  words  is  indeclinable.  Thus  beside  sdm  yds  ‘happiness  and  wel¬ 
fare’  also  appears  sam-yos  (1.  346);  and  analogously  the  indeclinable  form  or 
stem  of  a  word  takes  the  place  of  the  case1.  Sometimes  compounds  are 
formed  by  the  coalescence  of  inflected  words  occurring  side  by  side  in  a 
sentence.  Thus  visvdhd  (TS.)  ‘all  days’  beside  aha  visvd  (RV.)  has  become 
visvdha  ‘daily’  with  a  single  accent.  Occasionally,  when  two  compounds 
have  the  same  final  member,  the  latter  is  used  only  once,  as  mitrota 2 3 
medhyatithim  (1.  367)  for  mitrdtithim  utd  medhyatithivi ;  pataydn  ?na?idaydt- 
sak/iam  (1.  47)  for  pataydt-sakham  tnandaydt-sakham.  Sometimes  one  of  the 
members  of  a  compound  governs  a  case3  outside  the  compound,  as  drvato 
mdmsa-bhiksdm  (1.  16212)  ‘begging  for  the  flesh  of  the  steed’;  in  some  instances 
pleonastically,  as  gandncim  gand-patim  (11. 231)  ‘troop-leader  of  troops’.  A  case- 
form  may  agree  with  the  first  member  of  a  compound  when  that  member 
has  the  form  or  even  only  the  sense  of  that  case,  as  rayas-kamo  visvdpsnyasya 
(vn.  426)  ‘desirous  of  wealth  of  all  forms’;  or  a  case-form  may  agree  with 
the  second  member,  while  coordinated  in  sense  with  the  first,  as  itiaha-dhane 
.  .  drbhe  (1.  7s)  ‘in  great  booty  (and)  in  small’. 

a.  The  gender  of  compounds  is,  in  Copulatives  (Dvandvas)  and 
Determinatives  (Tatpurusas)  ending  in  substantives,  that  of  the  last  member4; 
but  collective  compounds  are  regularly  neuter5.  Compounds  ending  in  adjec¬ 
tives,  possessives,  and  governing  compounds  have  the  gender  of  the  substan¬ 
tives  with  which  they  agree  or  which  they  represent.  The  number  in  Deter¬ 
minatives  is  that  of  the  last  member.  In  Copulatives  of  the  older  types  it  is 
dual  or  plural  according  to  the  total  number  meant  by  the  combination, 
while  it  is  singular  (and  neuter)  in  the  later  type.  Collective  compounds 
(whether  copulatives  or  possessives)  are  singular.  Compounds  ending  in 
adjectives,  possessives,  and  governing  compounds,  have  the  number  of  the 
substantive  with  which  they  agree  or  which  they  represent. 


A.  The  First  Member  of  Compounds. 

242.  Its  form. —  The  first  member  of  nominal  compounds  may  consist 
of  nouns  (including  numerals  and  pronouns)  or  indeclinables  suitable  for  quali¬ 
fying  nouns.  Exceptionally  an  inflected  form  appears  in  this  position  qualifying 
the  second  member  in  dependent  determinatives  and  possessives.  This  is 
mainly  due  to  words  frequently  in  juxtaposition  becoming  permanently  joined; 
thus  beside  the  two  independent  words  jds  pdtih  (vn.  38°)  ‘lord  of  the  family’ 


1  Thus  for  visnoh,  krama -  (AV.  TS.)  ‘step 
of  Visnu’  there  appears  in  a  B.  passage  of 
the  TS.  (v.  2.  i1)  the  compound  visnu-kramd- . 

2  The  Pada  text  reads  mitra  utd. 

3  This  seems  to  be  almost  restricted  to 
the  genitive  in  the  Samhitas,  but  many 
examples  of  other  cases  (acc.,  inst.,  dat., 
abl.)  occur  in  the  later  laneuagm. 

4  In  a  few  Dvandvas  the  gender  of  the 

o 


first  member  prevails  (265,  notes  1  and  2); 
and  a  few  Determinatives  change  the  gender 
of  the  final  member,  as  patni-scLla-  (VS.)  n. 
( sdla -)  ‘shed  for  the  wives  (of  sacrifices)’ 
and  agra-jihva-  (VS.)  n.  ‘tip  of  the  tongue’ 
(/ ihva -). 

5  Both  Dvandvas  (266)  and  Bahuvrihis 
(290). 


V.  Compounds.  The  First  Member  of  Compounds.  145 


we  find  the  compound  jds-patim  (r.  1858)1.  But  it  partly  also  arises  from  a 
desire  to  express  the  syntactical  relation  of  the  words  in  the  compound  even 
without  antecedent  juxtaposition;  as  in  the  verbal  determinatives  dhanam-jayd- 
‘winning  booty’,  apsu-sdd -  ‘dwelling  in  waters’;  or  in  possessives  like  rayds- 
kama -  ‘desirous  of  wealth’.  Such  case-endings  show  a  tendency  to  encroach 
beyond  their  legitimate  sphere;  thus  the  frequency  of  the  ending  -as  before 
- pati e.  g.  vac-ds-pdti-  ‘lord  of  speech’,  led  to  its  becoming  the  general 
genitive  sign  before  that  word,  as  in  rdtha-s-pdti-  ‘lord  of  the  car’  ( rdtha -). 
Similarly,  according  to  apsu-ksi-t-  ‘dwelling  in  the  waters’  was  formed  apsu-ji-t- 
beside  ab-ji-t-  ‘winning  waters’,  where  the  locative  is  not  appropriate.  Ordinarily 
the  first  member  appears  only  in  its  stem  form.  As  the  stem  cannot  express 
number  it  may  mean  either  the  singular  or  the  plural.  That  it  often  indicates 
the  plural  is  shown  by  expressions  like  nardm  or  jdnanam  nr-patr-  ‘man- 
guardian  of  men’  or  ‘people’.  The  plural  sense  is  also  evident  in  compounds 
like  deva-krta -  ‘made  by  the  gods’,  vird-jata-  ‘produced  by  men’,  nr-pdti- 
‘lord  of  men’.  In  personal  pronouns  and  cardinals  the  number  is  of  course 
inherent  in  the  stem  itself. 

a.  The  gender  is  expressed  in  the  first  member  only  in  as  far  as 
feminine  words  retain  their  f.  stem  when  coordinated  in  copulatives  or  depen¬ 
dent  on  the  final  member  in  the  sense  of  a  case  in  determinatives;  e.  g. 
patnT-sdla-  (VS.)  ‘shed  for  wives’.  The  f.  suffix  -a  is,  however,  often  shortened 
to  a 2 3,  as  in  amiva-han-  ‘destroying  suffering’,  anuva-sdtana-  ‘dispelling  suffering’ 
( amiva -).  But  when  a  feminine  adjective  as  first  member  agrees  attributively 
with  a  feminine  in  the  last  member,  it  appears  in  the  masculine  stem-form  3- 
e.  g.  prayata-daksina-  ‘one  by  whom  a  sacrificial  fee  ( ddksina -)  has  been 
presented’4. 

243.  If  the  stem  is  liable  to  gradation,  that  form  is  used  which  occurs 
in  the  weak  cases.  Thus  in  the  vowel  stems  -/,  -u,  -r,  appear;  e.  g.pdti- 
justa-  ‘dear  to  a  husband’,  vasu-vid-  ‘finding  wealth’,  pitr-yajha-  ‘sacrifice  to 
the  manes’.  Similarly  dyu-  (, dui -)  ‘heaven’  appears  before  consonants,  as  dyu-ksa- 
‘dwelling  in  heaven’,  dyu-bhakta-  ‘presented  by  heaven’,  but  div-  before  vowels, 
as  div-it-  ‘going  to  heaven’,  div-isti-  ‘prayer’.  The  two  stems  ddru-  ‘wood' 
and  dp-  ‘water’  are  reduced  to  dru-  and  ap-\  dru-padd-  ‘wooden  pillar’,  dru- 
sdd-  ‘sitting  on  the  tree’;  ap-tur-  ‘overcoming  the  waters’,  ab-jd-  ‘derived  from 
waters’.  The  stem  pumams-  ‘man’  appears  in  the  weak  form  pums-  in  pums- 
calt -  (VS.  AV.)  and  pums-cald-  (VS.)  ‘courtezan’  (‘running  after  men’). 

a.  Stems  in  -an  have  -a  not  only  before  consonants5,  but  also  before 
vowels6  and  y,  v" ;  e.  g.  raja-putrd-  ‘king’s  son’,  uksdnna-  ‘devouring  bulls’ 
(; uksdn -),  asmasya-  ‘whose  mouth  is  a  rock’  {as man-),  brdhmeddha-  ‘kindled 
with  devotion’  {brahman-),  brahmaudand -  (AV.)  ‘boiled  rice  {odand-)  for 
Brahmans’  {brahman-).  Exceptions,  however,  are  nemann-is-  ‘following  the  lead’, 
vrsan-asvd-  ‘drawn  by  stallions’,  vfsan-vasu-  ‘having  great  wealth’8. 

b.  Stems  in  -in  seem  to  follow  the  same  analogy,  dropping  the  -n  before 
consonants;  thus  saci-gu-  (only  voc.)  ‘having  strong  cattle’  and  saci-pujana- 
(only  voc.)  ‘worshipping  the  strong’ 9. 


1  The  compounding  of  such  forms  probably 
often  started  from  vocatives  like  sahasas putra 
treated  as  a  unit  in  regard  to  accent. 

2  This,  however,  seems  to  be  due  to 
metrical  influence. 

3  An  exception  in  urny-uU -  ‘giving  wide 
aid’,  where  the  f.  stem  urvt-  appears  instead 
of  the  m.  urn-. 

4  In  byhac-chandas -  (AV.)  ‘having  Brhatl 

Indo-arische  Philologie.  I.  4. 


as  metre’  and  jagac-chandas-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘having 
Jagati  as  metre’,  the  first  members  doubtless 
represent  neuter  names  of  the  metres. 

5  As  in  raja-bhis  etc. 

6  Unlike  rdj-n-e  etc. 

7  Not  -an  as  in  rdjan-ya-,  tidan-vant-. 

8  In  dsann-isu-  ‘having  arrows  in  his 
mouth’  the  first  member  is  a  locative. 

9  Cp.  Wackernagel  21,  p.  54  /3,  note. 

10 


146 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


c.  Occasionally  the  weak  grade  stem  used  as  first  member  does 
not  occur  as  an  independent  word;  thus  ksa-pdvant-  and  ksa-pdvant-  ‘earth- 
protector'  from  ksdm-  ‘earth’;  jnu-bddh -  ‘bending  the  knee’  from  jdnu -  ‘knee’; 
man-dhatr-  ‘devout  man’  from  mdn-as-  ‘mind’  (through  *manz -),  sdt-pati-  ‘lord 
of  the  abode’,  probably  from  sdd-as-  ‘abode’  (through  *sats~). 

204.  When  in  the  inflexion  of  a  word  two  or  more  collateral  stems 
(not  diftering  in  gradation  only)  are  used,  the  one  which  appears  in  weak 
cases  is  mostly  employed  as  first  member  in  compounds.  1.  Even  though 
the  stem  as-ya-li nouth’  is  inflected  throughout,  the  alternative  stems  of  weak 
cases  as-  and  asan-  are  preferred:  a-daghnd-  ‘reaching  to  the  mouth’,  asdnn- 
isu- 1  ‘having  arrows  in  his  mouth’.  2.  udan-2  ‘water’  is  preferred  to  uda-kd- 3 4 5 : 
uda-grabha-  m.  ‘holding  water’,  uda-pd-  (A V.)  ‘purified  by  water’,  uda-megha- 
‘ water-shower’;  uda-kd-  appears  only  in  uddkatman -4  (AV.)  ‘having  water  for 
its  chief  substance .  3.  Of  the  three  stems  pdnthan -,  path!-,  path-,  only  the 

middle  one,  which  appears  before  consonant  endings,  is  used:  pathi-krt-  ‘path¬ 
making’,  pathi-raksi-  ‘protecting  roads’.  4.  sdkan-s  is  preferred  to  sdkrt- 
‘dung’  :  saka-dhdma-  (AV.)  ‘dung-smoke’,  saka-pindd-  (VS.)  ‘lump  of  dung’, 
sdka-puta-  (‘purified  by  dung’),  N.  of  a  seer.  5.  sTrsan-  is  preferred  to  s/ras- 
‘head’:  sTrsa-kapdld-  (AV.)  ‘skull’,  sTrsa-bhidya-  (AV.)  n.  ‘head-splitting’,  sirsa- 
mayd-  (AV.)  m.  ‘disease  (am  ay  a-)  of  the  head’.  6.  There  is  fluctuation 
between  pad-  and  pdda-  ‘foot’,  mams-6  and  mainsa-  ‘flesh’,  hrd-  and  hrdaya- 
‘heart’  :  pad-ghosa- 7  (AV.)  ‘sound  of  footsteps’,  but  pada-grhya ,  ger.  ‘seizing 
by  the  foot’;  mams-pacana-  ‘used  for  cooking  flesh’,  but  mains a-bhiksd- 
‘begging  for  flesh’,  hrd-rogd-  ‘heart-disease’,  but  hrdaya-vidh-  ‘wounding  the 
heart’8. 

245.  Alternative  adjective  stems  sometimes  appear  in  the  first  member 
of  compounds.  Thus  in  the  RV.  mahi-  interchanges  with  maha-9  ‘great’  in 
Karmadharayas  and  Bahuvrihis,  as  mdhi-ksatra  ‘owning  great  sway’,  but  maha- 
dhand-  ‘great  booty’,  mahd-manas-  ‘great-minded’10.  A  few  stems  in  -i  appear 
instead  of  or  interchanging  with  others  in  -ra:  rji-  in  rji-pya-  and  the 
Proper  Names  rji-svan- 1 1  beside  rjrd-  ‘quick’  in  rjrdsva-  (‘having  quick  horses’), 
N.  of  a  man;  *dabh!-  in  dabhiti-  (for  *dabh!-iti- )  ‘injured,  beside  dabhrd- 
‘small’  in  dabhrd-cetas-  ‘of  little  wit’;  sviti-  in  svity-ahc- 1 2  ‘bright’,  beside  svitrd- 
(AV.)  ‘white’;  saci-  in  saci-vid-  ‘belonging  together’,  beside  d-sk-ra -13  ‘united’; 
perhaps  also  -kravi-  for  *kruvi-  in  d-kravi-hasta-  ‘not  having  bloody  hands’, 
beside  kru-ra- 14  (AV.)  ‘bloody’. 

a.  A  few  adjective  stems  in  -i  used  as  first  member  neither  occur  as  uncompounded 
adjectives  nor  have  corresponding  adjective  stems  in  -ra :  tuvi-jatci -  ‘mightily  born’, 
iuvi-griva-  ‘strong-necked’,  tuvy-ojas-  ‘very  strong’;  gabhi-sak  (AV.)  ‘deep  down’. 


1  See  above  p.  145,  note  8. 

2  Inst.  sing,  add,  pi.  uda-bkis. 

3  Nom.  n  acc.  udakdm. 

4  With  irregular  accent;  cp.  Wacker- 
nagel  21,  p.  56,  note. 

5  Inst,  sdka-bhis  (TS.),  nom.  acc.  sakrt. 

6  Beside  vana •  ‘wood’  (which  is  fully  in¬ 
flected  and  appears  in  vand-dhiti -  ‘layer  of 
wood’),  the  stem  van -  (gen.  van-am,  loc. 
vam-su )  is  perhaps  used  in  vam-saga-  ‘bull’,  j 
van-dhura-  ‘car-seat’,  and  van-ad-  ‘devouring 
wood’  (?). 

7  Perhaps  in  pad-grbhi-,  N.  of  a  man  or 

demon,  if  pad-  =  pad-,  cp.  Wackernagel  | 

I,  148  a. 


8  On  the  other  hand,  of  the  alternative 
stems  dsrj-  and  asan-  ‘blood’,  only  the  nom. 
acc.  form  is  used ;  e.  g.  asrk-pavan-  (AV.) 
‘drinking  blood’,  dsrh-mukha-  (AV.)  ‘bloody- 
faced’. 

9  maha-  being  the  m.,  mahi-  the  n.  nom. 
acc.  stem,  beside  the  weak  dat.  mah-e  etc. 

10  The  AV.  has  the  stem  mahdt-  in  the 
Karmadharaya  mahai-kanda-,  ‘great  section’. 

11  Perhaps  also  in  fjih-  (—  rji-iti-),  cp. 
Wackernagel^  21,  p.  59. 

12  Cp.  siti-pad-  ‘white-footed’,  siti-prstha- 
‘white-backed’. 

13  From  sac-  ‘be  attached’  with  syncope. 

14  Cp.  Wackernagel  21,  p.  59. 


V.  Compounds.  The  First  Member  of  Compounds.  147 


246.  Extension  of  the  stem  sometimes  takes  place  in  the  first  member. 
The  commonest  addition  is  -0  owing  to  the  frequency  of  that  ending:  dur- 
a-dabhnd-  (A V.)  ‘eluding  doors’,  asv/n-a-krta-  (.VS.)  ‘done  by  the  Asvins’; 
visaujas -1  (VS.)  ‘ruling  the  people’;  sad-a-rca-2  (AV.)  ‘collection  of  six  verses’. 
An  a-stem  becomes  one  in  -as  in  yaks?no-dhd-  (AV.)  ‘seat  of  a  disease’  ( yaksma -). 
An  extension  with  -d  appears  in  satdd-vasu -3  ‘having  a  hundred  {said- ) 
treasures’,  and  in  dn-atid-bhuta- 4 *  ‘unsurpassed’. 

a.  Shortening  of  the  stem  sometimes  takes  place  by  the  dropping 
of  a  final  t  or  x  (preceded  by  d)  or  of  the  vowel  -0;  thus  prsodard-  (TS. 
v.  6.  141)  ‘having  a  spotted  ( fir  sat-)  belly’  ( udara -);  apna-rdj-  ‘ruling  over 
riches’  (1 dpnas -);  bhar-isd- 5  (iv.  402)  ‘desiring  booty’  ( bhdra -);  til-pinja-  (AV.) 
‘barren  sesamum’  (ti/d-) ;  sas-pmjara-  (TS.iv.  5.21)  ‘reddish  like  grass’  (X0X0'-), 
may  also  be  an  example,  but  it  is  more  probably  a  modification  of  x0x- 
pihjara-  (VS.  xvi.  17)  by  haplology  for  * saspa-pinjara -. 

247.  Adverbs  often  occur  as  first  member  of  compounds.  In  several 
instances  a  nominal  stem  in  -0  represents  an  adverbial  case  (acc.,  inst.,  abl., 
loc.)  formed  from  that  stem;  thus  nitya-vatsa-  ‘having  a  calf  continually’ 
{nityam)\  satya-ydj-  ‘sacrificing  truly’  ( satydm ),  samantd-siti-bahu-  (VS.)  ‘whose 
forefeet  are  white  all  round’  ( samanidm );  sana-jd-  ‘born  of  old’  (=  sand  or 
sandt) ;  upakd-caksas-  ‘visible  from  near  at  hand’  {upake  ‘near’).  Occasionally 
a  nominal  stem  which  has  no  separate  existence  is  abstracted  from  the  adverb ; 
thus  ard-manas-  ‘ready-minded’  (from  dram  ‘ready’),  ard-mati-  ‘suitable  prayer’, 
abhyardha-ydjvaji-  ‘offering  apart’  ( abhyardhds ).  A  cardinal  is  sometimes 
thus  used  instead  of  its  adverb:  try-arusa-  ‘reddish  in  three  places’  {iris'), 
dvi-ja-  (AV.)  ‘born  twice’  ( dvi-s ). 

248.  The  case-ending  is  also  preserved  in  several  instances;  thus 
aram-kft-  ‘preparing’,  sakam-uks-  ‘sprinkling  together’,  sdkam-yuj-  ‘joined 
together’  ( sakdm ),  sayam-bhava-  (AV.)  ‘becoming  evening’;  pasca-dosd-  (VS.) 
‘late  evening’.  Adverbs  that  are  neither  case-forms  nor  look  like  them 
regularly  remain  unchanged;  thus  aksnaya-druh- 6  ‘injuring  wrongly’;  itthd-dhi- 
‘truly  devout’;  ida-vatsard-  (VS.  AV.)  ‘the  present  year’,  a  particular  kind  of 
year;  punar-nava-  ‘renewing  itself’,  punar-bhd-  ‘arising  again’;  visvdto-dhi- 
‘observing  in  all  directions’,  visu-rupa-  ‘coloured  variously’  (1 visu -),  visu-vft-  ‘rolling 
in  various  directions’.  A  nasal  is  added  in  maksu-m-gamd-  ‘approaching  quickly’ 
( maksti ). 

249.  Prepositions  frequently  occur  as  the  first  member  of  a  compound. 

1.  Owing  to  their  originally  adverbial  character  they  may  qualify  ordinary 
adjectives  or  substantives  like  adverbs;  thus  dti-krsna-  (VS.)  ‘excessively 
dark’,  vi-mahT-  ‘very  great’; pra-napat-  ‘great  grandson’,  vi-vac-  ‘opposing  shout’; 
and  in  Bahuvrlhis:  pra-srhgd -  (VS.)  ‘having  prominent  horns’,  vy-dmsa-  ‘having 
shoulders  wide  apart’. 

2.  Owing  to  their  constant  connexion  with  verbs  they  are  very  common 
before  verbal  nouns;  e.  g.  upa-stu-t -  and  upa-stuti-  ‘invocation’;  purd-hita- 
‘domestic  priest’. 

3.  Owing  to  their  frequent  connexion  with  cases,  they  also  appear  in  a 
governing  sense;  e.  g.  ddhi-gart-ya-  ‘being  on  the  car-seat’,  anu-pathd- 
‘following  the  path’. 


1  For  visa-ojas-  like  (AV.  VS.)  satyaujas - 
(=  saiya-ojas-)  instead  of  v'ld-ojas-. 

2  Like  pancarca -  =  pahca-rca. 

3  Influenced  by  the  analogy  of  pancasad- 
‘50’  etc.,  and  vidad-vas2i -,  etc. 

4  Due  to  a  confusion  of  * ati-bhuta-  =  ati- 

bhiita -  ‘surpassed’  and  adbhula-  ‘marvellous’. 


5  According  to  the  analogy  of  gav-isd- 
‘desiring  cows’. 

6  aksnci-yavcin -  ‘going  across’  stands  by 
haplology  for  *  aksnaya-yavan-,  Cp.  W  acker - 
NAGEL  21,  p.  128  d. 


10* 


148 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


a.  Prepositions  as  first  member  sometimes  appear  in  a  shortened  form ;  thus  bhi-  — 
abhi 1  in  bhi-saj - 1  2:  ‘healer’;  in  o-gand -  (‘away  from  the  crowd’)  ‘isolated’,  ‘wretched’, 

and  in  o-pasd -  ‘top-knot’  (‘that  which  is  tied  down’,  from  ‘fasten’).  On  the  other 
hand,  anu  several  times  appears  lengthened  to  anu-:  thus  an-anu-krtya -  ‘inimitable’, 
an-anu-da -  ‘not  giving  way’,  dn-anu-dista-  ‘unsolicited’,  dn-dnu-bhuti-  ‘disobedient’,  dnu-sak 
‘in  constant  succession’. 

250.  Sam  and  sa-.  —  The  preposition  sam  is  of  very  common  occur¬ 
rence  as  first  member.  This  is  its  form  invariably  before  vowels,  and 
when  accented  originally  always  before  consonants.  Its  unaccented  form 
sa-  (—  sm -)  should  phonetically  always  appear  before  consonants.  But  the 
proper  use  of  sam-  and  m-  before  consonants  has  begun  to  be  confused. 

a.  In  determinatives  (1)  when  the  final  member  is  a  verbal  noun  sam- 
always  appears  before  a  vowel,  as  sam-ankd-  (AV.)  ‘hook’  (from  ahc-  ‘bend’), 
sam-!dh-  ‘fuel’;  and  sam-  if  accented  predominates3  before  consonants,  being 
phonetic;  e.  g.  sdm-gati-  f.  ‘coming  together’,  sam-dhatr-  ‘one  who  puts 
together’,  sdm-prkta-  ‘mixed’,  sa-,  however,  also  occurs  in  sd-gdhi-  (VS.  MS.) 
f.  ‘eating  together’,  sd-cyuti-  (MS.  11.  712)  ‘falling  together’.  sa-pJti-  (VS.  MS.) 
f.  ‘drinking  together’,  sd-hiiti-  f.  ‘joint  invocation’. 

(2.)  sa-  is  preserved  before  accented  verbal  nouns  formed  from  the 
simple  root  with  or  without  -t,  or  with  the  suffixes  -a,  -a?ia,  -van,  - in ;  thus 
sa-clt-  ‘thinking’,  sa-bddh-  (TS.  in.  2.  124)  ‘oppressed’,  sa-yuj-  ‘united’,  sa-vfdh- 
‘increasing  together’,  sa-stubh-  (TS.  iv.  3.  122),  a  kind  of  metre,  sa-sydd- 
‘streaming  together’4;  sa-ksi-t-  ‘dwelling  together’,  sa-sru-t-  ‘streaming’5 *;  sa-gm-d- 
(VS.)  ‘coming  to  terms’,  sa-jdsa-  ‘unanimous’,  sa-mddana-  ‘conflict’5;  sa-yd-van- 
‘going  along  with’,  sa-yug-van-  ‘united  with’,  sa-sthd-van-  ‘standing  together’, 
sa-jl-t-van-  ‘victorious’;  sa-vas-m-  (AV.)  ‘dwelling  together’7. 

(3.)  Before  ordinary  adjectives  sam-  appears  in  sdm-vasu-  ‘fellow-dweller’, 
sam-misla-  ‘commingling’,  sdm-priya-  (VS.)  ‘loving  one  another’,  and  even 
when  unaccented  before  ordinary  substantives  in  sam-vatsara-  ‘year’,  saiii- 
grdma-  (AV.)  ‘assembly’,  but  sa-pdtnT-  ‘co-wife’. 

b.  In  Bahuvrihis  when  the  meaning  is  (1.)  ‘together’  (as  in  the  verbal 
use  of  the  preposition)  sam-  appears,  as  sdm-hanu-  (AV.)  ‘striking  the  jaws 
together’,  sa/n-gavd-  m.  ‘(time  when  the)  cows  (are  driven)  together’,  and  (as 
usual  before  vowels)  sam-udra-  m.  ‘sea’.  But  when  the  meaning  is  (2)  ‘united 
with’,  ‘accompanied  by’  what  is  expressed  by  the  final  member,  sa-  is  almost 
exclusively  used  (and  nearly  always  even  accented)8,  as  sd-cetas-  ‘accompanied 
by  intelligence’,  ‘rational’;  sam-  occurs  here  only  in  sdm-sahasra-  ‘accompanied 
by  a  thousand’,  and  in  sdm-patm-  (AV.)  ‘accompanied  by  her  husband’ 9.  In 
this  sense  sam-  still  appears  before  vowels  in  sdm-agra-  and  sam-agrd-  (AV.) 
(‘including  the  top’),  ‘complete’,  sdm-anga-  (AV.)  ‘accompanied  by  all  limbs’ I0, 
‘complete’,  sdm-asir-  ‘accompanied  by  mixture’,  ‘mixed’;  but  even  here  sa- 
once  in  the  RV.  takes  the  place  of  sa?n-  in  the  compound  sasana-  (x.  904) 


1  The  initial  a-  of  some  other  prepositions 
is  lost  in  the  later  language  :  pi-  =  dpi  (SB.); 
dhi-  =  ddhi  and  va-  —  ava  are  post-Vedic. 

2  See  Wackernagel  21,  p.  72  e,  and  cp. 
Brugmann,  KZ.  25,  214,  note. 

3  sam-  occurs  more  than  three  times  as 
often  as  sa-  before  consonants,  doubtless 
owing  to  the  parallel  use  of  sam-  with 
verbs. 

4  But  also  satn-gir -  ‘assenting’,  sam-ydi- 
‘contiguous’. 

5  But  also  sam-ji-t-  ‘conqueror’,  sam-ha-t- 

‘layer’. 


6  But  also  sam-gamd-  ‘coming  together’, 
sam-cdrana-  ‘suitable  for  walking  on’. 

7  With  verbal  nouns  otherwise  formed, 
as  with  -tra  or  -na  only  sam-  occurs,  as 
sam-hotra-  ‘joint  sacrifice’,  sam-prasna-  ‘inter¬ 
rogation’. 

8  With  the  usual  Bahuvrihi  accent  on  the 
first  member. 

9  In  order  to  distinguish  this  sense  from 
that  of  sa-pdtm-  ‘co-wife’. 

10  Cp.  also  the  adv.  sam-anta-m  (AV.)  ‘in¬ 
cluding  the  ends’,  ‘completely’. 


Y.  Compounds.  The  First  Member  of  Compounds.  149 


‘provided  with  food’  (dsa/ia-),  ‘eating’,  and  becomes  common  in  the  later 
Samhitas;  e.  g.  sd/iga-  (AV.)  ‘accompanied  by  the  limbs’  (dfiga-),  sdntardesa- 
(AY.)  ‘accompanied  by  the  intermediate  quarters’  ( antar-desd -).  —  When  the 
meaning  is  (3.)  ‘in  common’,  ‘same’,  ‘identical’ 1  sa~  2  is  very  common  before 
consonants,  as  sa-keta-  ‘having  the  same  intention’,  sa-laksman-  ‘having  the 
same  characteristics’;  while  sani-  appears  only  in  sam-sisvari -  ‘having  a  calf 
in  common’,  sam-manas-  (AV.)  ‘being  of  the  same  mind’,  unanimous’,  sdm- 
matr-  ‘having  the  same  mother’.  In  this  sense  sam-  alone  appears  (as  usual) 
before  vowels:  sam-anta-  ‘contiguous’  (‘having  the  same  boundary’),  sdm-okas- 
‘having  a  common  abode’,  ‘living  together’. 

251.  Particles,  which  for  the  most  part  have  no  independent  existence, 
frequently  appear  as  first  member  of  compounds. 

1.  The  negative  particle,  the  form  of  which  in  the  sentence  is  na, 
almost  invariably  appears  in  composition  as  a-1 2 3  before  consonants,  and  in¬ 
variably  as  an-  before  vowels.  It  completely  reverses  the  meaning  of  the 
final  member;  thus  mitrd-  ‘friend’,  a-mitra-  ‘enemy’,  sastl-  ‘praise’,  a-sasti- 
‘curse’4.  As  participles,  infinitives,  and  gerunds  are  nominal  forms, 
they  may  be  compounded  with  the  privative  particle:  thus  d-bibhyat -  ‘not 
fearing’,  d~budhya-mana-  ‘not  waking’,  d-dasyant-  (AV.)  ‘not  about  to  give’, 
d-vidvams -  ‘not  knowing’5.  The  syntactical  form  of  the  particle  is  very  rare: 
na-mura-  (AV1.)  ‘non-dying’  (?)6.  Perhaps  also  in  nd-pat-  ‘grandson’,  if  it 
originally  meant  ‘un-protected’7. 

2.  su-  ‘well’,  ‘very’,  except  in  the  RV.  very  seldom  used  independently8 *, 
and  dus-  ‘ill’,  ‘hardly’,  which  occurs  as  a  prefix  only,  appear  as  first  member 
in  determinatives  and  possessives;  e.  g.  su-kdra-  ‘easy  to  be  done’,  su-krta- 
‘well-done’,  su-dd-  ‘giving  willingly’,  su-vasand-  ‘fair  raiment’,  su-varnd-  ‘fair- 
coloured’,  sv-dsva-  ‘having  excellent  horses’;  du-das-  (AV.)  ‘not-worshipping’, 
‘irreligious’,  dus-cyavand-  ‘difficult  to  be  felled’,  dur-vdsas -  ‘having  bad  clothing’, 
‘ill-clad’;  dur-dha  (AV1.)  Svail!’  is  formed  as  an  antithesis  to  sv-dha  ‘hail!’. 

3.  There  are  a  few  prefixes  beginning  with  k-  which  seem  to  be  etymo¬ 
logically  connected  with  the  interrogative,  and  express  depreciation,  bad¬ 
ness,  or  difficulty:  ku-9'm  ku-card-  ‘wandering  about’,  kn-nakhin-  (AV.)  ‘having 
diseased  nails’,  ku-namnamd-  ‘hard  to  bend’,  ku-yava-  (VS.)  ‘bringing  bad 
harvest’10;  kad-  in  kat-paya-  ‘swelling  horribly’;  kim-  in  kim-sila-  (V S.  TS.  MS.) 
(land)  ‘having  small  stones’,  kim-purusd -,  a  kind  of  mythical  being  (‘some¬ 
what  like  a  man’);  a  collateral  form  kavd-  perhaps  in  kavari-  ‘stingy’,  kava- 
sakhd-  ‘selfish’11. 

4.  The  particles  -id  and  -cid  make  their  way  into  the  first  member  of 
compounds  in  the  company  of  pronominal  words  to  which  they  may  he 


1  samana-  is  also  used  in  this  sense:  as 
samana- bandhu-  ‘having  the  same  relatives’. 

2  sa-  has  the  sense  of  ‘one’  in  sahna -  (AV.) 
‘lasting  one  day’,  sa-kft  ‘once’,  sa-divas  and 
sa-dyas  ‘on  one  and  the  same  day’. 

3  This  is  the  low-grade  form  (=  n-)  of 
na-. 

4  It  frequently  reverses  the  pregnant  sense 
of  the  final  member,  as  vi-sastf-  ‘(good) 
dissector’,  a-visastf -  ‘bad  dissector’. 

5  See  Knauer,  Ueber  die  betonung  der 

composita  mit  a  privativum  im  Sanskrit,  KZ. 

27,  1  —  68;  examples  from  the  later  Sam¬ 

hitas  in  Delbruck,  Altindische  Syntax 

p.  540  f.,  Syntaktische  Forschungen  2,p.53of. 


6  nd-pumsa-ka-  ‘neuter’  also  occurs  in  MS. 
and  SB. 

7  See  LeumANN,  Festgruss  an  Bohtlingk, 
p.  77  f.  For  a  few  other  doubtful  compounds 
with  na-  see  Wackernagel  2g  p.  78,  note. 

8  su  occurs  as  an  independent  particle 
about  250  times  (but  never  at  the  beginning 
of  a  sentence)  in  the  RV.,  rarely  in  the 
later  Samhitas  :  only  14  times  in  AV. 

9  Often  in  adverbs  such  as  ku-tas  ‘whence’, 
ku-tra  ‘where’. 

10  On  a  few  doubtful  compounds  with  ku-, 
see  Wackernagel  2R  p.  83,  note. 

11  Also  in  kdvd-tiryanc-  (TS.)  ‘directed 
somewhat  across’. 


150  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

appended;  thus  tad-id-artha-  ‘directed  to  that  particular  object’;  ka-cit-kara- 
‘  effecting  all  manner  of  things’;  ku-cid-arth'm-  ‘striving  to  get  anywhere’,  kuha- 
cid-vid-  ‘wherever  being’. 

5.  A  few  interjectional  or  onomatopoetic  words  are  compounded 
with  -kdra-  and  -krti-  ‘making’  =  ‘sound’,  ‘utterance’,  or  -kartr-  ‘maker’,  to 
express  the  actual  phonetic  sound  of  those  words:  thus  vasat-kara-  (AY.  VS.) 
‘the  interjection  vasat\  svadha-kara-  ‘pronouncing  (the  benediction)  sva-dhd ’, 
svdha-krti-  ‘consecration  with  the  call  svdhd ,  hih-kartr-  (TS.)  ‘one  who 
utters  the  sound  hin\  hih-kard-  (VS.)  ‘the  sound  hih\  In  has-kartr-  ‘enli¬ 
vened,  has-kara-  ‘laughter’,  has-krti-  ‘loud  merriment’,  the  first  member 
represents  either  an  interjection  connected  with  the  verb  has-  ‘laugh’,  or  a 
reduced  form  of  *  has  as-  ‘laughter’  (like  sdt-pati-  for  sddas-pati-  through 
*sdts-pati-). 


B.  The  Last  Member  of  Compounds. 

252.  Its  form.  —  Practically  all  nouns  may  appear  in  this  position.  But 
many  verbal  nouns,  especially  participles,  if  used  in  their  primary  sense,  are 
found  exclusively  after  indeclinables  which  are  capable  of  being  combined 
with  the  corresponding  verbs.  Some  stems  also  occur  as  final  members 
though  not  used  independently;  such  are  verbal  nouns  formed  from  the 
simple  root  with  or  without  an  added  determinative  also  derivatives  like 
-jariina-  (AV.)  ‘belonging  to  the  people  (Java-)  of  — 

a.  Change  of  ending.  —  When  the  gender  of  the  final  member  is 
changed,  the  -a  of  feminine  words,  even  though  radical,  becomes  -a  in 
masculine  or  neuter  compounds;  thus  priyosriyd-  ‘fond  of  cows’  ( usriya -); 
an-avasd-  ‘restless’  (from  ava-sd -  ‘rest’),  a-sraddha-  ‘unbelieving’  (from  srad-dhd - 
‘belief’),  rtd-jya-  ‘well-strung’  (from  jyd-  ‘bowstring’).  Even  -i  in  a  few  instances 
becomes  -a\  thus  ati-ratra-  ‘performed  overnight’  and  aho-ratrd-  ‘day  and 
night’  {r  atrip ;  api-sarvare  ‘early  in  the  morning’  and  ati-sarvarc  or  ati- 
sarvaresu  (AV.)  ‘late  at  night’  (. sdrvart -). 

On  the  other  hand  m.  and  n.  stems  in  -a  regularly  end  in  -a  in  the 
feminine,  as  citta-garbha-  ‘having  evident  offspring’  {garb ha-  m.);  and  pdti- 
‘husband’  in  f.  possessives  substitutes  ~patm-\  thus  eka-patnl-  (AV.)  ‘having  a 
single  husband’,  dasd-patnl-  ‘having  demons  as  lords’,  sa-pdtnl-  ‘having  one 
husband  in  common’,  sdm-patnl-  (AV.)  and  sahd-patnl-  (AV.)  ‘having  her 
husband  with  her’,  su-pdtni-  ‘having  a  good  husband’;  also  in  the  deter¬ 
minative  vlra-patnl-  ‘wife  of  a  hero’. 

253.  Alternative  stems. — When  in  the  inflexion  of  a  word  alternative 
stems  are  used,  only  one  of  these,  and  as  a  rule  the  older  one,  appears  as 
final  member  of  possessive  compounds:  thus  dant-  ‘tooth’  (not  ddntap  in 
sata-dant-  (AV.)  ‘hundred-toothed’,  suci-dant-  ‘bright-toothed’;  pad-  ‘foot’  (not 
pdda -) :  a-pdd-  ‘footless’,  uttand-pad-  ‘whose  feet  are  extended’,  eka-pad- 1  ‘one¬ 
footed’;  nds-  ‘nose’  (not  ndsa-)  in  rju-nas-2  ‘straight-nosed’,  N.  of  a  man3; 
fidhan-  ‘udder’  (not  fidhar-)  in  an-udhdn -4  ‘udderless’,  rapsdd-udhan-  ‘having 
a  distended  udder’,  f.  a-cchidrodhn-T-  ‘having  an  intact  udder’;  dhdnvan-  ‘bow’ 
(not  dhdtius-)  in  abald-dhanva?i-  (AV.)  ‘having  a  weak  bow’,  dvatata-dhaiwan- 
(VS.)  ‘having  an  unstrung  bow’,  ksiprd-dhanvan-  ‘having  a  swift  bow’,  satd- 


1  The  AV.,  however,  has  the  nom.  sing.  3  According  to  Wackernagel  2I,p.  92(top), 

eka-pada-h.  a-nasika-  occurs  in  TS.  (vil.  5.  121. 

2  According  to  Bloomfield  also  in  J  4  Cp.  Wackernagel  2r,  p.  93,  note. 

rujanas ,  for  ruj ana-nas  ‘broken-nosed’ ;  see 

p.  59,  note  1. 


V.  Compounds.  The  Last  Member  of  Compounds. 


151 


dhanvan-  (VS.)  ‘having  a  hundred  bows’1;  sirsdn-  ‘head’  (not  sir  as-)  in  a-slrsdn- 
‘headless’,  tri-sTrsdn-  ‘three-headed’ 2,  f.  ruru-sirsn-T-  ‘having  the  head  of  a  Ruru 
antelope’3;  hfd-  ‘heart’  (not  hr  day  a-)  in  its  long-grade  form  -hard-  in  dur- 
Juird-  (AV.)  ‘ill-disposed’  and  su-hdrd-  ‘good-hearted’. 

a.  Sometimes  an  alternative  stem  is  used  which  has  not  been  preserved 
as  an  independent  word;  thus  -jhu-  ‘knee’  (weak  form  of  jdnu-)  in  asitd-jhu- 
(AV.)  ‘dark-kneed’,  mitd-jhu-  ‘firm-kneed’  4 ;  an  old  stem  -medhas-  in  su-medhds- 
‘wise’  and  puru-mcdhas-  (S V.)  ‘wise’  beside  the  regular  compounds  in  -medha- 
(from  medhd-  ‘wisdom’)  such  as  puru-me'dha-  ‘having  much  wisdom’;  -tvacas- 3 5 
‘skin’  in  sttrya-tvacas-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘having  a  skin  bright  as  the  sun’  and  hiranya- 
tvacas-  (AV.)  ‘having  a  golden  skin’,  beside  tvac-  in  sUrya-tvac-  and  hiranya-tvac-. 

254-  Transfer  stems.  —  Some  four  stems  appear  in  certain  forms 
changed  to  stems  in  -as  from  a  misunderstanding  of  the  nom.  -j-  in  -a-s  (as 
in  su-prajd-s );  thus  from  praja-  ‘offspring’,  a-prajas-  (AV.)  ‘having  no  off¬ 
spring’,  and  su-pra/as-6 7  ‘having  good  offspring’,  ida-prajas- 1  (MS.  1.  53) 
‘descendant  of  Ida’;  from  ksa-  ‘dwell’,  divd-ksas-  ‘living  in  heaven’;  from 
da-  ‘give’,  dravino-dds-  ‘bestowing  wealth’;  from  dha-  ‘put’,  vayo-dhds-  (AV. 
VS.)  ‘bestowing  strength’  and  varco-dhds-  (AV.)  ‘bestowing  vigour’.  On  the 
other  hand,  by  the  loss  of  final  -s  or  -t  a  few  consonant  stems  are  trans¬ 
formed  to  tf-stems;  thus  beside  an-agas-  ‘guiltless’  appears  an-aga-,  and  beside 
puru-ddmsas-  ‘abounding  in  wondrous  deeds’,  puru-ddmsa -;  urv-asthivd-  (VS.)8, 
n.  du.  ‘thigh  and  knee’,  beside  asthi-vdnt -  m.  du.  ‘knees  (‘bony’);  ubhayd-da- 9 
(AV.)  ‘having  teeth  in  both  (jaws)’,  beside  ubhayd-dat -. 

255.  Vowel  gradation  in  final  member. —  a.  1.  The  low  grade 
vowel  of  the  roots  da-  ‘give’  and  da-  ‘cut’  disappears  when  the  past  parti¬ 
ciples  *dita-  ‘given’ 10  and  diia-  ‘cut’  and  the  action  noun  * diti-  ‘giving’  become 
unaccented  final  members  in  a  compound:  thus  dva-tta-  (VS.)  ‘cut  off’,  devd-tta- 
‘given  by  the  gods’,  zy-d-tta-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘opened’,  pdrl-tta-  (VS.)  ‘given  up’11, 
d-pratT-tta-  (AV.)  ‘not  given  back’;  bhdga-tti-  ‘gift  of  fortune’,  maghd-tti- 
‘giving  of  presents’,  vasu-tti-  ‘granting  of  wealth’ I2.  Unreduced  forms,  how¬ 
ever,  occur  in  tvd-data-  and  tvd-datta-  ‘given  by  thee’  and  in  havya-dati- 
‘sacrificial  gift’13. 

2.  The  vowels  T  and  u  in  the  radical  syllable  of  the  final  member  is 
in  a  few  instances  reduced  to  i  and  u\  thus  try-zcdhdn-  ‘having  three  udders’ 
(lidhan-),  dhi-ju-  ‘inspiring  the  mind’  (ju-  ‘impel’),  su-sird-  ‘having  a  good 
channel’,  ‘hollow’  ( slrd -  ‘stream’),  su-suli-  ‘easy  birth’  ( su-t'i -  TB.),  d-huti-  ‘in¬ 
vocation’  (otherwise  sd-huti-  ‘joint  invocation’,  etc.).  Derivative  -T  is  reduced 
to  -i  in  a-ni-bhrsta-tavisi-  ‘having  unabated  power’  ( tavis-l -). 


1  The  determinative  indra-dhanhs-  ‘Indra’s 
bow’,  occurs  in  the  AV. 

2  The  AV.  however  has  prthu-siras -  ‘broad¬ 
headed’. 

3  From  asthan-  (beside  asthi-,  AV.)  occur 
both  an-asthan-  and  an-astha-  ‘boneless’. 

4  Other  reduced  stems  are  sa-gdhi-  (VS.) 
‘joint  meal’  (\/g/ias-),  tiida-  ‘nest’  (ni-j-]/sad-). 
upa-bd-i -  ‘noise’  [upa-\-\pcid-)  a-sk-ra -  ‘united’ 
(y/sac-)'y  perhaps  pari-msa -  ‘best  part  of’ 
(1 amsa •  ‘part’). 

5  Also  in  the  derivative  tvacas-ya-  (AV.) 
‘being  in  the  skin’. 

6  Under  the  influence  of  this  new  stem 
is  formed  su-prajas-tva -  ‘possession  of  good 
offspring’  (for  *su-praja-tva-). 

7  In  K.  idd-praj as-  (IS.  3,  463)  with  the  a 

of  idd-  unshortened. 


8  Formed  by  dropping  the  -t  of  the  weak 
stem  asthT-vat-. 

9  Formed  by  dropping  the  - 1  of  the  weak 
stem  -dat-. 

i°  This  phonetic  form  has  otherwise  been 
ousted  by  the  anomalous  participle  dat-td- 
made  from  the  weak  present  stem  dad-. 

11  The  participle  prd-tta-  ‘given  up’  also 
occurs  in  TS.  II.  2.  84  (B). 

12  pra-tti-  ‘gift’  also  occurs  in  TS.  v.  4.  72 
(B)  and  nir-dva-tti  ‘distribution  of  shares’ 
in  K. 

13  The  d  of  saman-  ‘chant’  is  perhaps 
reduced  to  a  in  fk-sama-(yS.),  fk-sama-^ TS.), 
and  rcT-sama-\  cp.  Wackernagel  21,  43  f., 
note. 


152  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

3.  The  0  of  go-  ‘cow’  is  reduced  to  -u  in  pi/sti-gu-  ‘rearing  cows’,  N.  of 
a  man,  and  su-gu-  ‘having  fine  cows’.  The  -ai  of  rdi-  ‘wealth’,  is  reduced  to 
-i  in  brhad-ri-1  ‘having  abundant  wealth’;  perhaps  also  in  rdhdd-ri- 2,  N.  of 
a  man. 

4.  Final  -/  and  -u  of  the  first  member  combine  with  the  low  grade 
form  of  a  of  dp-  ‘water’  in  the  last  member  to  T  and  z7,  in  dvip-d -3 4 
‘island’  ( dvi-ap -),  prcitTp-d-m  ‘against’  ( prati -)  ‘the  stream’,  anup-d-  ‘pond’ 
(a/m-ap-). 

b.  On  the  other  hand,  radical  a  in  several  instances  appears  lengthened 
to  <7h  This  occurs  in  several  possessive  compounds  of  jani-  ‘wife’:  bhadra- 
jatii-  ‘having  a  beautiful  wife’  (only  voc.),  yitva-jani-  ‘having  a  young  wife’, 
vittd-jani-  ‘having  found  a  wife’,  ‘married’,  and  with  shifted  accent  dvi-jdni- 
‘having  two  wives’  and  a-jfini-  (AY.)  ‘having  no  wife’.  A  similar  lengthening 
appears  in  prthu-jaghana-  (only  voc.  f.)  ‘broad-hipped’;  sahd-janusa-  ‘with 
offspring’  ( Janus-), ;  ni-padd-  ‘low  ground’  ( padd -);  tvdt-pitaras  (TS.  1.  5.  io2), 
N.  pi.  ‘having  thee  as  father’;  su-vdcas-  ‘having  good  speech’,  ‘very  eloquent’, 
sd-vacas -5  (AV.)  ‘employing  similar  speech’,  vi-vacas-  (AV.)  ‘speaking  in  various 
ways’  (; ideas -),  visvd-sarada-  (AV.)  ‘occurring  every  autumn’  {sardd-)  ‘annual’, 
satd-sarada-  ‘lasting  a  hundred  autumns’6. 

256.  Adjectival  suffixes.  —  Adjective  compounds  not  infrequently  add 
certain  suffixes  to  mark  their  adjectival  character  more  clearly.  These  suffixes 
are  -ka:  -/,  -ya,  -a,  -in. 

1.  The  suffix  -ka7  is  thus  used  in  only  two  somewhat  obscure  compounds 
in  the  RV.  tri-kadru-ka-  (only  pi.),  a  designation  of  certain  soma  vessels 
( kadni -)  and  try-amba-ka-  ‘having  three  mothers’  ( amba  voc.);  in  the  AV. 
occur  vi-manyu-ka-  ‘free  from  anger’  and  sahd-kanthi-ka-  f.  ‘with  the  throat’ 
( kanthd -,  B.)8. 

2.  In  the  final  member  of  a  few  Bahuvrihis,  the  suffix  -/  sometimes 
takes  the  place  of  -a;  thus  prdty-ardhi-  ‘to  whom  the  half  ( drdha -)  belongs’; 
dnj ana- gandh-i-  ‘having  a  smell  ( gand/id -)  of  ointment’,  dhumd-gatidhi-  ‘smelling 
of  smoke’,  su-gdndhi-  or  su-gandhi  ‘sweet-smelling’;  krsta-radhi-  (AV.)  ‘attaining 
success  ( radha -)  in  agriculture’. 

3.  The  suffix  -ya  is  frequently  added  in  Bahuvrihis;  thus  anydda?'-ya- 
‘born  from  another  womb’  ( uddra -),  ddsa-mas-ya- 9  ‘ten  months  old’,  dlrgha- 
jihv-yd-  ‘long-tongued’ IO,  mddhu-kast-ya-  ‘honey-handed’,  mayfira-sep-ya- ‘peacock¬ 
tailed’  Ix,  visvd-jan-ya-  ‘belonging  to  all  men’,  visvd-dev-ya-  ‘relating  to  all  gods’, 
visvaiig-ya-  (AV.)  ‘being  in  all  limbs’,  sd-garbh-ya-  (VS.)  ‘born  from  the  same 


1  In  the  dative  brhadraye ;  cp.  BB.  25,  I 
250. 

2  In  the  anomalous  gen.  sing,  rdhad-  j 

rayas. 

3  Also  nlp-a -  ‘low-lying’  ( ni-dp -  ‘into  which 
the  water  flows  down’)  in  K. 

4  For  a  phonetic  explanation  of  this  phe¬ 
nomenon  see  Wackernagel  21,  43  (p.  ico); 
and  cp.  1,  68. 

5  There  is  a  various  reading  su-vdeasas 
in  AV.  vii.  122,  on  which  see  Whitney’s 
note. 

6  On  vi-hdyas -  ‘of  extensive  power’,  sdrva- 
hayas-  (AV.)  ‘having  all  vigour’,  su-ramd- 
‘delighting’,  su-ydma -  ‘guiding  well’,  see 
Wackernagel  21,  p.  101  (middle). 

7  This  suffix,  which  is  never  accented,  is 

probably  identical  with  that  which  forms 


adjectives,  as  dnta-ka-  ‘ending’  from  dnta- 
*end’. 

8  In  the  YV.  several  examples  occur; 
Wackernagel  21,  p.  102,  quotes  from  the 
TS.  a-karna-ka-  ‘earless’,  a-danta-ka-  ‘tooth¬ 
less’,  a-pdda-ka -  ‘footless’,  an-aksi-ka-  ‘eye¬ 
less’,  an-asthi-ka-  ‘boneless’,  a-tvdk-ka-  ‘skin¬ 
less’,  sasTr-ka -  ‘accompanied  by  a  blessing’, 
an-astr-ka -  ‘lacking  a  blessing’ ;  from  the  MS. 
a-cchandds-ka-  ‘metreless’,  an-dsiha-ka-  ‘bone¬ 
less’. 

9  Also  san-masyci-  ‘six  months  old’,  and 
sapta-mdsya-  ‘seven  months  old’  in  Iv. 

10  Also  in  TS.  some  compounds  formed 
with  - deva-tya -  ‘having  —  for  a  deity’  ( devdtd -); 
ndnd-vis-ya -  (INIS.)  ‘consisting  of  various 
villages’. 

11  Also  vi-sisn-ya-  (K.)  ‘tailless’. 


V.  Compounds.  The  Last  Member  of  Compounds.  153 

womb’,  sa-dhan-ya-  ‘accompanied  by  gifts’,  sd-yuth-ya-  (VS.)  ‘belonging  to  the 
same  herd’,  su-Ziast-ya-  ‘fair-handed’  (beside  su-hdsta -),  hiranya-kes-ya-  ‘golden- 
maned’  (beside  hiranya-kesa-')  \ 

The  suffix  -ya  is  also  common  in  governing  compounds  with  pre¬ 
positions  as  first  member;  thus  adhi-gart-ya-  ‘being  on  the  car-seat’,  antah- 
parsav-yd-  (VS.)  and  anta/i-parsv-yd-  (VS.)  ‘being  between  the  ribs’,  anv- 
dntr-ya-  (AV.)  ‘being  in  the  entrails’,  api-kaks-yd-  ‘situated  near  the  arm-pit’, 
ypa-trn-ya-  (AV.)  ‘being  in  the  grass’,  vpa-mds-ya-  (AV.)  ‘occurring  every 
month’,  pdri-rath-ya-  (AV.)2  ‘being  around  the  car’,  n.  part  of  the  car.  It 
also  appears  in  the  adverbially  used  governing  compounds  abhi-?iabh-yd-m 
‘near  the  clouds’  and  ud-ap-ya-m  (AV.)  ‘upstream’. 

4.  The  final  member  of  Bahuvrihis  is  very  frequently  extended  by 
the  suffix  -a.  In  the  RV.  there  are  at  least  fifteen  such  stems;  thus  aks-  ‘eye’ 
in  an-aks-a- ‘eyeless’,  adZiy-aks-a-  ‘eye-witness’,  catur-aZzs-d-  ‘four-eyed’,  bhury-aks-d- 
‘many-eyed’,  sahasraks-a-  ‘thousand-eyed’,  hiranyaks-a-  ‘golden-eyed’,  dktdks-a- 
(AV.)  ‘whose  eyes  are  anointed’,  dn-dktaks-a -3  (AV.)  ‘whose  eyes  are  not 
anointed’,  dhumaksd-  (AV.)  ‘smoke-eyed’,  paryastdks-a-  (A Ah)  ‘with  eyes  cast 
about’,  sanisrasaks-d -  (AV.)  ‘having  constantly  falling  eyes’,  hary-aks-a-  (VS.) 
‘yellow-eyed’;  *astZi-*<  ‘bone’  in  an-astZi-d -  ‘boneless’  beside  an-astZian- ;  *udar- 
‘water’  in  an-udr-a-  ‘waterless’;  go-  ‘cow’  in  su-gdv-a-  ‘having  fine  cows’,  sam- 
gav-d-  ‘time  when  cows  come  together’,  and  in  atitZii-gv-d -,  a  name,  eta-gv-a- 
‘variegated’,  ddsa-gva -,  N.  of  a  mythical  group,  ndva-gv-a-4  5,  N.  of  a  mythical 
group;  janus-  in  saZid-janus-a-  ‘with  offspring’;  div-  ‘heaven’  in  brZidd-dizi-a- 
and  brZicid-div-a -,  N.  of  a  seer,  su-div-d-  (AV.)  ‘bright  day’;  dur-  ‘door’  in 
satd-dur-a-  ‘having  a  hundred  doors’;  dZiur-  ‘yoke’  in  su-dhur-a-  ‘going 
well  under  the  yoke’  (beside  su-dhur -),  sa-dhur-a-  (AV.)  ‘harnessed  to  the 
same  yoke’;  nas-  ‘nose’  in  uru-nas-d-  ‘broad-nosed’,  pavT-nas-d-  (AV.)  ‘having 
a  nose  like  a  spear-head’,  vardZirT-n as-d-  (VS.)  ‘rhinoceros’;  mfdZi-  in  vi- 
mrdZi-d-b  (AV.)  ‘warding  off  foes’  (beside  vi-mrdZi -,  VS.);  rdi-  ‘wealth’  in 
d-rdy-a-  ‘not  liberal’;  vdstu -  ‘dwelling’  in  ndva-vdstv-a-  ‘having  nine  abodes’; 
sardd-  ‘autumn’  in  satd-sarad-a-  ‘lasting  a  hundred  autumns’;  dp-  ‘water’  in 
dvTp-d-  ‘island’7. 

In  the  later  Samhitas  several  other  final  members  extended  with  -a  occur: 
dhan-  ‘day’  in  sdhn-d-  (AV.)  ‘lasting  a  day’;  rc-  ‘verse’  in  eZza-rc-a-  (AV.) 
‘consisting  of  one  verse’;  Zesdm-  ‘earth’  in  su-ksm-d-  (VS.)  ‘consisting  of  good 
earth’;  7ietr-  ‘leader’  in  cignidietr-a-  (VS.  TS.)8  ‘having  Agni  as  leader’:  patZi - 
‘road’,  in  vi-patZi-d-  (AV.),  a  kind  of  chariot  (‘fit  for  untrodden  paths’);  pad- 
‘foot’  in  d-bd-a-  (VS.)  ‘year’;  *vcitas-  ‘year’  in  t7'i-vats-d-  (VS.)  ‘three  years 
old’;  sain-drs-  ‘aspect’  in  mddhu-sa7?idrs-a-  (AV.)  ‘sweet-looking’. 

a.  The  final  member  is  also  sometimes  extended  with  -a  after  a 
governing  preposition;  thus  d7iit-patZi-a-  ‘going  along  the  road’,  dntas-patZi-a- 
‘being  on  the  road’,  a7iup-d-  ‘tank’  (‘lying  along  the  water’),  updTtas-a-  ‘being 
on  the  car’  (-1 mas-),  pard-Zis-a-  (AV.)  ‘away  from  the  eye’  (dps-),  puro-gav-d- 
‘leader’  (‘preceding  the  cows’). 


1  cisva-budh-ya-  ‘based  on  horses’  is 
probably  for  *dsva-budZin-ya-  (from  budZina- 
‘bottom’)  beside  dsva-budhna-  ‘borne  by 
horses’. 

2  The  accent  of  these  words  in  -ya  is 
usually  the  same  as  it  would  be  without  the 
suffix;  for  a  few  exceptions,  see  Wacker- 
NAGEL  21,  47  d  (p.  108). 

3  The  Mss.  (AV.  XX.  1286)  read  anaZdalisa-. 


4  See  Wackernagel  2R  p.  108  (bottom). 

5  See  Bloomfield,  AJPh.  17,  422  ff. 

6  Also  the  f.  vi-mrdh-d-  (TS.  II.  4.  21  B). 

7  On  a  few  doubtful  instances  see  Wacker¬ 
nagel  21,  p.  109  (bottom). 

8  In  TS.  1.  8.  71  =  VS.  ix.  35,36  several 
other  names  of  deities  compounded  with 
- netr-a -  occur. 


1 54 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


b.  A  similar  extension  with  -a  occurs  in  collectives  which  are  allied 
to  Bahuvrlhis:  thus  try-ayus-a-  (VS.)  ‘threefold  lifetime’,  dvi-raj-d-  (A V.)  ‘battle 
of  two  kings’,  sad-rc-a-  ‘aggregate  of  six  stanzas’,  sa?n-udr-d-  ‘collection  of 
waters’  ( *udar -),  ‘sea’,  sa-vidyut-d-  (A V.)  ‘thunderstorm’  (‘accompanied  by 
lightning’).  Akin  to  these  are  compounds  in  which  the  first  member  expresses 
a  part  of  the  last  (with  change  of  gender);  thus  a?-dha-rc-d-  (AV.  VS.)  m. 
‘half-stanza’,  aparahn-a-  (AV.)  m.  ‘afternoon’,  ny-dhn-a-  (AV.)  ‘decline  of  day’, 
purvahn-d-  ‘forenoon’,  prd-pad-a-  ‘tip  of  the  foot’.  There  are  further  some 
neuter  determinatives  which  probably  had  originally  a  collective  sense;  thus, 
with  change  of  gender,  tri-div-d-  ‘third  heaven’,  su-div-d-  (AV.)  ‘fine  day’; 
d-path-a-  (AV.)  ‘pathlessness’,  su-path-a-  ‘good  path’.  From  neuter  stems  in 
- as ,  devainas-d-  (AV.)  ‘curse  of  the  gods’,  manusyainas-d-  (AV.)  ‘sin  {mas-) 
of  men’;  brahma-varcas-d-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘divine  power’,  hasti-varcas-d-  (AV.) 
‘vigour  of  an  elephant’,  brdhmana-varcas-a-  (AV.)  ‘dignity  of  a  Brahman’. 

c.  The  ending  -a  frequently  takes  the  place  of  - an 1  in  the  final 
member  of  Bahuvrlhis,  collectives,  and  Karmadharayas;  thus  deva-karmd- 
‘doing  divine  work’,  visvd-karma-  ‘performing  all  work’,  vird-karma-  ‘per¬ 
forming  manly  work’,  priyd-dhama-  ‘occupying  desirable  places’,  chando-ndtna- 
(VS.)  ‘named  metre’,  ‘metrical’,  vi-parva-  ‘jointless’,  dvi-vrsd- 2  (AV.)  ‘having 
two  bulls’,  ahji-saktha-  (VS.)  ‘having  coloured  thighs’,  ut-saktha -  (VS.)  ‘lifting 
up  the  thighs’,  lomasd-saktha-  (VS.)  ‘having  hairy  thighs’3,  rk-sdmd-  ‘the  Rc 
verses  and  the  Sarnans’,  sad-ahd-  (AV.)  m.  ‘period  of  six  days’;  bhadrdha- 
(AV.)  n.  ‘auspicious  day’,  eka-vrsd-  (AV.)  ‘only  bull’,  maha-vrsd-  (AV.)  ‘great  bull’. 

d.  The  suffix  -a  takes  the  place  of  -/  in  kavd-sakhd-  ‘having  a  niggard 
for  a  friend’  (sdkki-),  in  mandaydt-sakha-  ‘gladdening  his  friend’,  and  in 
dasahgidd-  ‘length  of  ten  fingers’  {angidi-). 

5.  In  Bahuvrlhis  the  suffix  -in  is  sometimes  pleonastically  added;  thus 
ku-nakh-in-  (AV.)  ‘having  bad  nails’,  mahd-hast-in-  ‘having  large  hands’,  yaso- 
bhag-m-  (VS.)  ‘rich  in  glory’,  sa-rath-m -  (VS.)  ‘riding  on  the  same  chariot’. 

257.  Classification  of  Compounds. — The  Indian  grammarians  divided 
compounds  into  three  main  classes  according  to  their  syntactical  relations: 
1)  copulatives,  or  those  in  which  the  members  are  coordinated,  called 
dvandva -4  (‘couple’);  2)  determinatives,  or  those  in  which  the  first  member 
determines  the  second,  called  tat-purusa-  (‘his  man’)5;  3)  those  which  are 
dependent  on  another  word,  called  bahu-vrlhi -6.  The  latter  are  usually 
regarded  as  compounds  of  the  determinative  class  transmuted  to  adjectives,  which 
would  thus  have  a  secondary  character.  They  are  often  called  ‘possessives’ 
since  their  meaning  can  usually  be  rendered  by  ‘possessing’,  as  bahv-anna- 
‘possessing  much  food’.  To  these  may  be  added  three  other  groups  in  order 
to  treat  Vedic  compounds  exhaustively:  4)  governing  compounds,  or 
those  in  which  the  first  member  governs  the  last  in  sense;  e.  g.  ksaydd-vTra- 
‘ruling  men’;  5)  a  certain  remnant  of  irregular  combinations  which  are 
best  dealt  with  together;  6)  iteratives,  or  repeated  words  which  are  treated 
as  compounds  in  the  Samhitas  inasmuch  as  they  have  only  one  accent  and  a 
special  meaning  when  thus  combined;  in  these  the  second  member  is  called 
dmretlita-  ‘repeated’  by  the  Indian  grammarians. 


1  This  -a  probably  started  in  stems  ending 

in  - ??ian ,  representing  see  WaCKER- 

NAGEL  21 2,  p.  118  C. 

2  -vrsa-  for  -vfsan-  occurs  in  the  AV.  after 
other  numerals  also. 

3  For  some  doubtful  examples  see  Wacker- 

nagel  21,  p.  116. 


4  The  word  first  occurs  in  a  B.  passage 
of  the  TS.  (1.  6.  9*)  in  the  form  of  dvandvani 
‘couples’,  and  in  the  AB. 

5  An  example  used  as  the  name  of  the 
class. 

6  ‘Having  much  rice’,  an  example  used 
as  the  name  of  the  class. 


V.  Compounds.  Iteratives.  Copulatives. 


I55 


i.  Iteratives. 

Collitz,  Transactions  of  the  Oriental  Congress  of  Berlin  21 2 * *,  2S7  ff.  —  Delbruck, 
Vergleichende  Syntax.  Dritter  Theil  (1900),  p.  141  — 153:  Iterativcomposita.  — Wacker- 
NAGEL  2^,  p.  I42  —  I48. 

258.  The  repetition  of  an  inflected  form  with  loss  of  accent  in  the  second 
word  is  very  frequent  in  the  RV.  Such  repetitions  are  treated  in  the  Pada 
texts  as  compounds  the  members  being  separated  by  the  Avagraha.  The  word 
thus  repeated  is  generally  a  substantive  and  iteration  is  expressed  chiefly 
in  regard  to  time  or  distribution  in  regard  to  space;  e.  g.  dhar-ahar ,  dive¬ 
dive,  dydvi-dyavi  ‘every  day’;  grhe-grhe ,  ddme-dame ,  vise-vise  ‘in  every  house’ ; 
diso-disah  (AV.)  ‘from  every  quarter’.  Substantives  are  also  thus  repeated  to 
express  frequency  or  constant  succession  in  other  matters:  sdtroh-satroh  ‘of 
every  foe’;  annam-amiam  (AV.)  ‘food  in  perpetuity’;  agnbn-agnim  vah  samidhii 
duvasyata  (vi.  156)  ‘worship  Agni  again  and  again  with  your  fuel’,  ycijndsya- 
yajfiasya  ‘of  every  sacrifice’  (x.  i5),  d/'/gad-angat  ‘from  every  limb’  (x.  1636), 
pdrvani-parvani  ‘in  every  joint’  (x.  1636).  Adjectives  repeated  in  this  way 
are  less  common;  e.  g.  pdnyam-panyam  .  .  d  dhavata  .  .  sdmarn  (vm.  225) 
‘cleanse  Soma  who  is  again  and  again  to  be  praised’;  prdcTm-praclm  pradisam 
(AV.  xii.  37)  ‘each  forward  (eastern)  direction’;  uttaram-uttaravi  sdmarn  (AV. 
xii.  1 33)  ‘each  following  year’,  ‘year  after  year’2. 

a.  The  repeated  word  was  originally  used  in  the  singular  only.  But  the  plural 
meaning  of  this  repetition  led  to  the  beginnings  of  plural  forms,  as  ekam-ekd  sata  daduh 
(v.  52V)  ‘they  have  given  a  hundred  each’  (lit.  ‘hundreds,  each  one’).  But  a  word  thus 
iterated  seems  never  to  be  in  the  plural  except  in  agreement  with  a  plural. 

b.  The  frequency  of  - e  as  locative  of  <z-stems  led  to  the  occasional  use  of  the 
dative  in  consonant  stems;  div-e-div-e  (for  *div-t-divi)  and  vis-e-vis-e  (for  *vis-i-vis-i'\. 

c.  The  transition  from  iteratives  to  regular  compounds,  which  appears  in  B.,  began 
with  numerals.  Thus  the  eka-ekah  of  the  RV.  (ill.  29*5)  appears  in  the  SB.  as  ekaika-\ 
and  from  the  dva-dva  of  the  RV.  (vm.  68 x4)  we  come  to  the  adverbial  dvan-dvdm  ‘in 
pairs’  in  the  MS.,  and  finally  to  dvandvd -  ‘pair’  in  the  TS.  (B). 

d.  Adjective  compounds  in  which  a  word  is  repeated  for  emphasis  are  unconnected 
with  iteratives,  differing  from  them  both  in  sense  and  accent ;  thus  mahd-mahd- 
‘mightily  great’;  esaisi-  f.  of  *esaisd -  {—  esa-esa-')  ‘very  speedy’ 3.  Whether  card-card •  and 
cala-cald-  ‘moveable’  belong  to  this  group  is  somewhat  uncertain. 


2.  Copulative  Compounds. 

Reuter,  Die  altindischen  nominalcomposita,  KZ.  31,  172 — 87:  I.  Copulative  compo- 
sita.  —  Delbruck,  Altindische  Syntax  31. —  Richter,  Die  unechten  Nominalkomposita 
des  Altindischen  und  Altiranischen  :  IF.  9, 23  ff.  —  Whitney,  Sanskrit  Grammar  1252 — 61.  — 
Wackernagel  21,  62—74  (p.  149 — 173). 

259.  Classification  of  Dvandvas. —  This  class  consists  of  compounds 
consisting  of  two  substantives,  far  less  commonly  adjectives,  the  syntactical 
relation  of  which  in  the  sentence  is  the  same  and  which  may  be  regarded 
as  connected  in  sense  by  ‘ana’.  The  successive  stages  in  the  development 
of  this  class  can  be  closely  traced  from  the  beginning  in  the  Samhitas. 
1.  First  we  have  in  the  RV.  the  most  numerous  group  (about  three-fourths 


1  A  vocative  repeated  to  express  em¬ 
phasis  is  not  treated  in  the  same  way: 
in  dranyany  aranyani  (x.  1461)  both  voca¬ 
tives  are  accented,  the  second  being  as 
emphatic  as  the  first. 

2  The  only  repetition  of  a  verbal  form  in 

this  way  is  piba-piba  (11.  II11)  ‘drink  again 

and  again’;  cp.  above  88. 


3  According  to  Geldner,  VS.  2,  15  the 
form  esaisya  (RV1.)  is  the  inst.  sing,  of 
esaisi-  f.  of  *esaisd-;  but  according  to  BR. 
and  Grassmann  it  is  neut.  pi.  of  esaisya- 
(=  esa-esyd-)  ‘to  be  striven  for  with  desire’, 
‘desirable’. 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


of  all  the  Dvandvas)  in  which  the  compound  consists  of  two  co-ordinated 
nouns  in  the  dual,  each  with  its  own  accent.  2.  The  first  member  assumes  an 
unchangeable  form.  3.  Only  one  accent  remains  and  is  restricted  to  the  last 
syllable  of  the  final  member.  4.  The  first  member  assumes  (but  quite  rarely 
in  the  RV.)  the  form  of  the  stem.  5.  The  formation,  becoming  more  general, 
can  assume  plural  endings  (but  the  RV.  has  only  a  few  examples  in  the  last 
book).  6.  In  the  later  Samhitas  this  type  becomes  quite  general,  forming  a 
single  category  with  the  dual  Dvandvas.  7.  The  final  stage  (of  which  the 
examples  are  few)  is  that  of  Dvandvas  which  are  neuter  singulars  of  a 
collective  character. 

260.  In  the  commonest  and  earliest  type  of  the  old  Dvandvas  each 
member  is  dual  in  form  and  has  a  separate  accent.  This  type  seems  to  have 
originated  from  two  grammatical  practices  frequent  in  the  Vedas:  (a)  the  juxta¬ 
position  of  two  coordinate  words  without  ca;  e.  g.  bhdmano  divas  pari 
(ix.  735)  ‘away  from  earth  and  heaven’,  krdtum  ddksain  (vm.  42^)  ‘under¬ 
standing  and  will’;  (b)  the  use  of  the  elliptic  dual1  which  puts  one  of  a 
pair  in  the  dual  to  express  both,  as  dydva  ‘heaven  and  earth’.  This  origin 
is  probable  because  the  dual  Dvandvas  are  found  alternating  with  one  or  both 
of  these  usages;  thus  mitrd-varuna  ‘Mitra  and  Varuna’  appears  beside  both 
mitrd  alone  and  mitro  vdrunah  (or  mitro  vdrunas  ca  and  mitra  s  ca  vdrunas 
ca);  matdra-pitdra  ‘mother  and  father’  beside  matdra  or  pitdra  and  pitre 
rnatrd  and  other  cases,  the  VS.  (ix.  19)  having  pleonastically  even  pitdra- 
matdra  ca  meaning  ‘father  and  mother’.  The  transition  from  the  syntactical 
collocation  divas  . .  prthivyds  (vi.  301)  to  a  dual  compound  is  seen  in  divds- 
prthivyos  ‘of  heaven  and  earth’  (occurring  four  times  in  the  RV.)  where  the 
second  word  is  put  in  the  dual  to  show  clearly  that  an  associated  couple 
is  meant.  In  the  RV.  the  two  duals  of  the  compound  are  often  separated; 
e.  g.  dydva  ha  ksdma  (x.  121)  ‘heaven  and  earth’;  dydva  yajhdih  prthivi 
(vie  531);  indra  no  dtra  varuna  (iv.  411)2;  d  nakfa  barhih  sadatam  usdsd 
(vii.  42^)  ‘let  Night  and  Dawn  seat  themselves  upon  the  litter’;  indra  nu 
pusdna  (vi.  571)  ‘Indra  and  Pusan’;  indra.  nv  agni  (vi.  59^)  ‘Indra  and  Agni’, 
indra  yo  agni  (vi.  601)3;  cdksur  mdhi  mitrdyor  am  cti  priydm  vbrunayoh 
(vi.  5 11)  ‘the  great,  dear  eye  of  Mitra  and  Varuna  conies’.  In  two  or  three 
examples  of  tmesis  the  dual  ending  appears  in  the  first  member  only,  while 
the  singular  remains  in  the  second;  thus  mitrd  ...vdrunah  (vm.  25  s)  and  indra 
yd  vdm  varuna 4  (vi.685)  ‘O  Indra  and  Varuna’.  Generally,  however,  the  two 
duals  are  in  immediate  juxtaposition,  as  indr a-br hasp dtl  ‘Indra  and  Brhaspati’; 
dydva-prthivi  ‘Heaven  and  Earth’;  agni-soma  ‘Agni  and  Sonia’;  gen.  mitrdyor- 
vdrunayoh 5  ‘of  Mitra  and  Varuna’. 

The  characteristic  final  vowel  of  the  first  member  is  - a 6,  as  usdsa-ndkta 
(or  ndktosdsa);  hence  it  even  ousts  -I  as  in  dgna-visnu  (AV.)  ‘O  Agni  and 
Visnu’.  Beside  this  -a  there  sometimes  appears  a  in  the  vocative,  both  in 
tmesis,  as  in  mitra  raj  and  varuna  (v.  6  2  $)  ‘O  kings  Mitra  and  Varuna’  (voc.  of 
rdjana  mitrd-vdruna ,  111.  56";  x.  64s);  and  when  the  members  are  joined,  as 


1  Cp.  Wackernagel,  KZ.  23,  302  ff., 
Reuter,  KZ.  31,  176  ff.,  Delbruck,  Alt- 
indische  Syntax  58  (p.  98),  Vergleichende 
Syntax,  Erster  Theil  41  (p.  137  f.). 

2  In  each  of  the  first  6  stanzas  of  IV.  41 
ijidj'd  and  varuna  are  separated  by  one  or 
two  words  of  two  or  three  syllables. 

3  Also  visnu  agan  varuna-  ‘Visnu  and  Va- 
runa’  in  a  Mantra  in  TB.  II.  8.  45. 


4  The  Pada  text  here  reads  varuna ;  cp. 
indra  ko  vdm  varuna  (iv.  411). 

5  Double  duals  in  -bhydm  do  not  appear 
to  occur. 

6  The  ending  ~au  or  -dv  never  occurs  in 
the  first  member. 


V.  Compounds.  Copulatives.  157 

in  parjanya-vatd  (vi.496),  voc.  of parjanyd-vdta  (vi.  5012),  and  always  in  indra- 
vayii1  ‘0  Indra  and  Vayu’.  The  ending  -z  appears  in  the  first  member  in 
agni-sdmau  ‘Agni  and  Soma’;  and  -u  in  krdtu-daksau  (VS.)2. 

261.  These  coordinate  duals  having  early  come  to  be  regarded  as  a  unit, 
the  commonest  ending  of  the  first  member,  that  of  the  nom.  acc.,  came  to 
be  retained  unaltered  in  other  cases  and  in  derivatives3.  Thus  arose  the 
forms  m  itrd-varun  abhyam ;  m  itrd-va  run  ay  os  beside  m  itrdyor-vd  run  ay  os,  indra- 
vdrunayos ;  in  the  AV.  dydva-prthivibhyam  and  dydvd-prthivyos  (instead  of  the 
divds-prthivyos  of  the  RV.). 

262.  In  a  minority  of  instances,  but  comparatively  oftener  in  the  later 
Samhitas  than  in  the  RV.,  the  first  member  loses  its  accent  and  only 
the  last  syllable  of  the  final  member  (irrespectively  of  its  original  accent)  has 
the  acute4;  thus  indra-pUsnds  (beside  indr a-pus ana) \  soma-pusabhyam) bhavd- 
rudrdu  (AV.)  ‘Bhava  and  Rudra’,  bhava-sarvdu  (AV.)  ‘Bhava  and  Sarva’5; 
vatd-pa rja?iyd  ‘Vata  and  Parjanya’  ( parjdnya -);  surya-candramdsa  ‘sun  and 
moon’  ( candrd-mas -). 

a.  In  the  later  Samhitas  there  are  a  few  examples  in  which  the  nom.  sing,  of  stems 

in  -tr  has,  doubtless  owing  to  identity  in  form  of  the  final  vowel  with  the  Vedic  dual 

ending  -a,  become  fixed  in  the  first  member:  pitd-putrau  (AV.)  ‘father  and  son’;  nesta- 
potfbhydm  (TS.  I.  8.  181)  ‘to  the  Nestr  and  the  Potr’ 6.  They  doubtless  started  from  syn¬ 
tactically  coordinated  nominatives  (like  divds-prthivyos  beside  divas  prthivyds,  vi.  4727)7. 

263.  Dvandvas  with  a  single  accent  having  established  themselves,  the 

stem  form  began  to  encroach  in  the  first  member.  The  only  two 

examples  from  RV.  1.— ix,  are  indra-vayd  (the  transition  being  facilitated  by 
the  more  frequent  occurrence  of  the  vocative  indra-vdyu )  and  satydnrti 8  (vii. 
493)  ‘truth  and  untruth’.  Two  additional  neuters  occurs  in  book  x:  sdsandnasane 
Svhat  eats  ( sa-asana -)  and  does  not  eat’  (an-asana-);  and  rk-sdmdbhyam  ‘with 
hymns  and  chant’.  In  the  later  Samhitas  this  becomes  the  prevailing  type 
regularly  followed  in  new  formations;  prastotr-pratihartrbhyam  (TS.  1.8.  181) 
‘to  the  Prastotr  and  Pratihartr’;  krdtu-ddksau  (VS.);  daksa-kratd  (TS.),  sudrarydu 
(VS.)  ‘a  Sudra  and  an  Arya’9. 

264.  The  stem  form  having  established  itself  in  the  first  member,  the 
compounding  of  Dvandvas  became  freer,  and  not  only  neuters  but  feminines 
began  to  be  admitted,  as  diksa-tapds-os  (VS.)  ‘consecration  and  austerity’. 
Here,  too,  the  final  syllable  of  the  compound  has  the  acute;  the  svarita  of 
the  original  word  is,  however,  retained  in  brahma-raj  any  au  (VS.  xxvi.  2 ;  AV. 
xi.  32s)  ‘a  Brahman  and  a  warrior’. 

265.  Dvandvas  with  plural  ending  are  on  the  whole  later  than  those 
with  dual  ending.  They  would  first  have  been  used  to  express  the  plural 
sense  of  the  pair  in  question,  thus  sal  ahur  dydva-prthivih  (viii.  916) 
‘they  speak  of  six  heaven-and- earths’;  aho-rdtrdni  —  ‘pairs  of  day-and-night’. 

1  This  Dvandva  always  has  a  even  in  the  are  examples  which  may  contain  the  stem 

nom.  indra-vdyu.  form  in  the  first  member  (263). 

2  The  dual  notion  is  sometimes  empha-  5  Wackernagel  21,  p.  153,  also  quotes 

sized  by  the  addition  of  ubhau  ‘both’,  as  !  somd-rudrayos  (TS.),  usniha-kakubhau  (MS.). 
ubha  mitra-varuna ;  suryd-candra?nasav  ubha  6  On  tvastd - varulrT  see  Wackernagel  21 3 4, 
(AV.).  '  64  (p.  154)- 

3  Like  j eder-manns  for  j edes-manns  in  7  The  three  divisions  of  Dvandvas  treated 

German.  Bartholomae,IF. 20,  i6S(Anzeiger)  above  include  masculines  and  feminines  only, 
regards  these  Dvandvas  as  abbreviations  by  Neuters  of  similar  type  first  appear  in  the 
dropping  the  common  ending  in  the  first  Siltras,  as  idhmd-barhisT  ‘fuel  and  litter’, 
member.  8  This  is  the  earliest  example  of  a  neuter 

4  This  accentuation  is  probably  due  to  Dvandva. 

the  influence  of  collective  compounds  which  9  Wackernagel  21,  p.  155,  gives  some 
are  nearly  allied  to  Dvandvas.  Indrdgni ,  further  examples  from  B.  portions  of  the 
indrdgnibhydm ,  indrdgnyos  and  agmndrabhydm  later  Samhitas. 


158  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

A  transition  to  the  use  of  plural  Dvandvas,  that  is,  of  pairs  of  groups,  is 
made  by  indra-marutas  ‘0  Indra  and  Harms’,  where  the  dual  notion  is  made 
up  of  a  singular  on  the  one  hand  and  a  group  on  the  other.  The  older 
type  of  such  plural  Dvandvas  (which  express  two  coordinated  plurals,  the 
first  member  retaining  its  accent  and  the  archaic  ending  -a,  like  the  -a  of 
dual  Dvandvas)  is  represented  by  dnga-pdrumsi  ‘limbs  and  joints’  occurring  in 
a  B.  passage  of  the  TS.  (11.  5.  61).  Examples  of  the  later  type  with  one 
accent  are  uktha-sastrdni  (VS.  xix.  28)  ‘recitations  and  praises’,  uktha-maddtii 
(A V.)  ‘recitations  and  rejoicings’,  and  probably  uktharkd  (vi.  341)  ‘reci¬ 
tations  and  hymns’1.  The  latest  type  of  these  plural  Dvandvas  (like  that  of 
the  duals)  has  the  stem  form  in  the  first  as  well  as  the  acute  on  the  last 
syllable  of  the  final  member.  The  only  examples  of  this  type  in  the  RV. 
occur  in  book  x:  aho-ratrdni 2  ‘days  and  nights’,  ajavdyas  ‘goats  and 
sheep’,  dhatia-bhaksesu  ‘in  riches  and  enjoyments’.  In  the  later  Samhitas  this 
type  becomes  quite  general,  forming  a  single  category  with  the  duals;  e.  g. 
deva-manusyds  (AV.  vm.  io9);  bhadra-papds  (AV.)  ‘the  good  and  the  bad’, 
priyapriydni  (AV.)  ‘pleasant  and  unpleasant  things’3 *. 

a.  The  expression  civirta  martyanam  (I.  269)  appears  to  be  an  abridgment  for 
amftanam  martyanam  ‘of  immortals  (and)  mortals’,  amounting  almost  to  a  plural  Dvandva 

(=  amrta-martyanam)  4. 

266.  A  few  Dvandvas  appear  in  the  Samhitas  with  a  singular  ending, 
these  being  neuter  only.  The  older  type  in  which  a  dual  or  plural  has  been 
turned  into  a  singular  at  the  end,  only  in  order  to  express  a  collective 
meaning,  is  represented  in  the  RV.  by  ista-purtdm 5  ‘what  has  been  offered 
or  given’,  originally  a  pi.  n.  in  both  members  ipistd-purtd)  which  has  become 
a  singular  to  emphasize  its  collective  character6.  Both  owing  to  the  lack  of 
an  early  type  of  neuter  Dvandvas  and  because  of  the  desire  to  express  a 
collective  sense,  nearly  all  the  neuter  Dvandvas  of  the  later  kind  are  singular. 
In  most  instances  both  members  are  neuter;  e.  g.  krtakrta-m  (AV.)  ‘what  has 
been  done  and  not  done’,  cittakutd-m  (AV.)  ‘thought  and  intention’  (dbuta-), 
b  hut a-b  hazy  d-m  (AV.)  ‘the  past  and  the  future’,  samista-yaji'is  (VS.)  ‘sacrifice  and 
sacrificial  formula’;  bhadra-papdsya  (AV.)  ‘of  good  and  evil’,  anjanabhyanjana-m 
(AV.)  ‘unction  and  inunction’  ( abhyanjana -),  kasipupabarhand-m  (AV.)  ‘mat 
and  pillow’. 

a.  In  a  few  instances  the  first  member  is  a  masculine  or  feminine:  kesa- 
smasru  (AV.)  ‘hair  and  beard’,  isv-ayudhe  (loc.  sing.)  ‘arrows  and  weapons’  (AV.). 

267.  Adjectives  also  occur  as  Dvandvas,  but  they  are  of  rare  occur¬ 
rence.  Three  types  may  be  distinguished. 

1.  Adjectives  of  colour  expressing  a  mixture:  e.  g.  mla-lo/iiid-  ‘dark-blue 
and  red’  =  ‘dark  red’;  tamra-dhumrd-  (AV.)  ‘red  and  black’  =  ‘dark  red’; 
aruna-babhru-  (VS.)  ‘ruddy  and  yellow’,  dhumrd-rohita-  (VS.)  ‘grey  and  red’ 7. 


1  Probably  =  nktha-arka,  not  uktha-arka , 
the  gender  of  the  first  member  having  pre¬ 
vailed  over  that  of  the  last. 

2  The  gender  of  the  first  member  here 
prevails  over  that  of  the  second. 

3  Some  other  examples  from  B.  passages 

of  the  Samhitas  in  Wackernagel  2*,  p.  157. 

The  oldest  example  of  a  Dvandva  consisting 

of  three  members  is  pranapdfiodanesu  (TS. 
VII.  3.  31)  ‘in  the  outward,  the  downward 

and  the  upward  airs’,  where  the  plural  results 
from  the  addition  of  three  individual  things 
(not  three  groups). 


4  Cp.  Wackernagel  21,  p.  157. 

5  See  Windisch  in  Festgruss  an  Bohtlingk, 
p.  1 15  ff. 

6  Wackernagel  (21,  68)  quotes  idhma- 
barhts  from  the  MS.,  ‘fuel  and  litter’,  which 
with  its  double  accent  as  well  as  dual  ending 
in  the  first  member  represents  a  still  earlier 
type. 

7  Except  in  these  colour  adjectives  in  the 
VS.,  the  accentuation  of  the  adjective 
Dvandvas  is  the  same  as  that  of  neuter  sub¬ 
stantive  Dvandvas,  that  is,  the  last  syllable 
of  the  final  member  has  the  acute. 


V.  Compounds.  Determinatives.  159 

2.  Adjectives  expressing  a  contrast;  e.  g.  utkula-nikuld  (VS.)  ‘going  uphill 
and  downhill’. 

3.  Adjectives  used  with  dual  or  plural  substantives  to  express  that  each  is 
an  attribute  of  one  unit  of  the  kind;  e.  g.  padbhydm  daksina-savydbhyam  (AV. 
xii.  i2S)  Svith  the  right  foot  and  the  left’;  or  with  the  substantive  to  be 
supplied,  saptamastamtibhyam  svdha  (AV.)  ‘hail  to  the  seventh  and  the  eighth 
(Angirasa)’;  aghasamsa-duhsamsdbhyam  (AV.)  ‘by  those  plotting  evil  and  those 
plotting  ill’;  sdhnatiratrdu  (AV.)  ‘terminating  with  a  day  ( sa-ahna -)  and  ex¬ 
ceeding  a  day’  ( aii-rdtra -). 

268.  As  regards  the  order  of  the  members  in  a  Dvandva,  the  rule 
seems  to  be  that  the  more  important  or  the  shorter  word  comes  first;  thus 
dytiva-ksdma ,  dydva-bhnmi ,  dytiva-prthivi 1  ‘heaven  and  earth’;  sttrya-mdsa  and 
surya-cafidramdsa  ‘sun  and  moon’;  indra-vdruna  ‘Indra  andVaruna’;  ulukhala- 
musale  (AV.)  ‘mortar  and  pestle’.  Indra-  regularly  comes  first  in  the  RV. 
and  the  later  Samhitas  in  some  dozen  Dvandvas1 2 3;  e.  g.  indragnz ;  otherwise 
agjii-  always  precedes;  soma -  comes  after  indra-  and  agnz -,  but  before pusan- 
and  rudra -.  The  longer  word  comes  first,  perhaps,  as  the  more  important, 
in  parjdnya-vdta 3  ‘Parjanya  and  Vata’  and  in  turvdsa-yddu  ‘Turvasa  and  Yadu’. 
This  can  hardly  be  the  reason  in  sambadha-tandryas  (AV.)  ‘oppressions  and 
weariness’.  The  shorter  word  comes  first  in  mitrd-vdruna,  though  Varuna  is 
the  more  important  of  the  two4;  in  rk-samdbhyam  the  shorter  word  is  at  the 
same  time  the  more  important. 

3.  Determinative  Compounds. 

269.  Classification.  —  The  large  class  of  determinative  compounds  in 
which  the  first  member  determines  or  limits  the  sense  of  the  last,  is  best 
divided  into  two  main  groups.  In  the  one,  the  final  member  is  a  verbal 
noun  which  governs  the  first  member  in  meaning,  and  often  even  in  form, 
as  a  verb  governs  its  case.  In  the  other,  the  final  member  is  an  ordinary 
noun  (either  adjective  or  substantive),  the  relation  of  which  to  the  first  member 
is  a  purely  nominal  one. 


a.  Verbal  Noun  as  final  member. 

270.  The  final  member  is  often  a  verbal  noun  either  not  occurring 
as  a  simple  word  or  at  least  not  belonging  to  a  type  used  as  simple  words: 
either  the  bare  roots  or  a  verbal  derivative  formed  with  the  suffixes 
-a,  -ana,  -i,  -in,  -man,  -van.  These  nouns  limited  to  use  as  final  members 
are  agent  nouns;  e.  g.  havir-dd-  ‘eating  the  oblation’,  sam-idh-  ‘flaming’, 
jyotis-kr-t-  ‘producing  light’,  abhi-hru-t -  ‘causing  injury’ ,  go-ghn-d-  ‘cow-slaying’, 
a-kar-d-  ‘scattering’;  amitra-dambh-ana-  ‘injuring  enemies’,  tuvi-gr-i-  ‘devouring 
much’,  uru-cakr-i-  ‘doing  large  work’;  bhadra-vad-in-  ‘uttering  an  auspicious 
cry’;  asu-he-maji-  ‘swiftly  speeding’,  bhuri-dd-van- 6  ‘giving  much’. —  Occasionally 
agent-nouns  limited  to  use  as  final  members  are  formed  with  other  suffixes: 
prati-div-an-  ‘adversary  at  play’,  vi-bhv-an-  ‘far-reaching’  and  vi-bhv-dn -  ‘skil¬ 
ful’;  pra-py-asd-  (AV.)  ‘swelling’,  sva-bhy-asd-  (AV.)  ‘spontaneously  frightened’; 


1  This  form  occurs  79  times  in  the  RV. 
and  prthivi-dyava  only  once. 

2  Otherwise  only  agriindrabhyam  (VS.) 
‘Agni  and  Indra’.  Cp.  the  list  of  dual  divi¬ 
nities  in  Vedic  Mythology,  Grundriss  III,  I  A, 
p.  126. 

3  Once  also  vata-parjanya. 

4  Cp.  Wackernagel  21,  p.  168  (middle). 


5  Appearing  in  its  weakest  form  or,  if 
ending  in  a  short  vowel,  with  determina¬ 
tive  -A 

6  -mant  and  - vant  occasionally  appear  as 
variations  for  -man  and  -van,  as  vi-rnk- 
mant-  ‘shining’;  prdna-da-vant-  (AV.)  ‘life- 
giving’  (cp.  Whitney  on  AV.  iv.  355);  see 
Reuter,  KZ.  31,  560  f. 


160  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


duh-sds-u-  ‘malignant’,  vi-bhind-u-  ‘splitting’,  pra-y'y-u-  ‘used  for  driving’,  go - 


vind-u- 


‘seeking 


cows’,  pari-tatn-iL-  (AY.) 


‘encompassing’, 


pum s-cal-u-  (' VS . ) 


‘prostitute’ ;  piva-spha-kd- 1  (AY1.)  ‘abounding  in  fat’,  ni-hd-ka-  ‘whirlwind’;  vi- 
bhahj-anu-  ‘shattering’;  pra-cet-una-  ‘affording  a  wide  prospect’;  div-l-tmant- 
‘going  to  heaven’;  tuvi-kurm-i{n)-  ‘stirring  mightily’;  vascih-palpul-i-  (VS.) 
‘washing  clothes’. 

a.  The  meaning  of  these  agent-nouns  restricted  in  use  as  final  members  is  chiefly 
active.  But  in  those  of  them  which  consist  of  the  bare  root  (with  or  without  the  determi¬ 
native  -/)  it  is  often  intransitive;  e.  g.  ncimo-vfdh-  ‘growing  by  adoration’;  it  is  not  in¬ 
frequently  passive,  as  mano-yuj -  ‘yoked  at  will’,  su-yuj -  ‘well-yoked '  \  yama-hu-  ‘called  by 
entreaties’,  indra-pa-tama-  ‘most  eagerly  drunk  by  Indra’,  tivra-su-t-  ‘pressed  from  the 
fermenting  mass’,  hrdaya-vidh-  ‘pierced  to  the  heart’  2  (AV.).  The  passive  meaning  also 
appears  in  one  derivative  formed  with  - a :  pari-mar-d-  (TS.)  ‘died  around’  ==  ‘around 
whom  people  die’.  Final  members  formed  with  - a ,  -ana,  ( i)-tu  when  compounded  with 
su-  or  dus-  also  have  a  passive  (gerundive)  meaning  expressive  of  the  ease  or  difficulty 
with  which  the  verbal  action  is  performed;  e.  g.  su-kar-a -  ‘easy  to  be  done’,  su-man-tu - 
‘easily  recognisable’,  su-ved-ana -  ‘easily  acquired’;  dur-ap-and -  ‘hard  to  attain’;  dur-ni - 
yaii-tu-  ‘hard  to  restrain’,  dur-dhdr-l-tu -  ‘irresistible’,  du-ddbha-  ‘hard  to  deceive’  ;  also 
an  isolated  derivative  with  -i,  dur-grbh-i-  ‘hard  to  catch’,  and  one  with  -na,  su-sru-na- 
‘easily  heard’  (beside  su-sru-t-  ‘hearing  easily’). 


271.  A  certain  number  of  verbal  nouns  restricted  to  employment  as  final 
members  which  are  formed  from  the  simple  roof  (with  or  without  deter¬ 
minative  -f)  or  with  the  suffixes  -a,  -ana,  -tha  are  nouns  of  action;  e.g. 
srad-dhd-  ‘belief’,  asTr-dd-  (VS.  TS.)  ‘fulfilment  of  wishes’,  upa-stu-t-  ‘invocation’, 
pari-pdd-  ‘snare’,  sam-ndm-  (AV.)  ‘affection’;  ksudha-mar-a-  (AV.)  ‘death  by 
hunger’,  papa-vad-d-  (AV.)  ‘evil  cry’;  deva-hed-ana -  ‘offence  against  the  gods’, 
baddhaka-moc-ana-  (AV.)  ‘release  of  a  prisoner’;  go-pT-tha-  ‘drink  of  milk’, 
putra-kr-thd-  ‘procreation  of  sons’,  sam-i-thd-  ‘conflict’,  kama-pr-d-  is  both  a 
noun  of  action,  ‘fulfilment  of  desires’  (AV.)  and  an  agent-noun,  ‘fulfilling 
desires’  (RV.) 3. 

a.  A  class  of  secondary  nouns  of  action  is  here  formed  by  adding  the 
suffixes  -ya  and  -yd  to  agent  nouns  formed  from  the  simple  root  (with  or 
without  -/).  These  are  abstracts  (neuter  and  feminine  respectively);  e.g. 
havir-dd-ya-  ‘enjoyment  of  the  oblation’,;  purva-pdy-yi-  and  purva-pd-ya-  ‘preced¬ 
ence  in  drinking’  ( purva-pd -  ‘drinking  first’),  nr-pdy ya-  ‘protection  of  men’, 
bahu-pdy-ya-  ‘protection  of  many’,  ‘large  hall’,  deva-ydj-ya-  n.  and  -yaj-yd-  f. 
‘adoration  of  the  gods’  ( deva-ydj ‘adoring  the  gods’,  VS.),  nr-sdh-ya-  ‘over¬ 
coming  of  men’  ( nr-sdh -  ‘overcoming  men’),  raja-stt-ya-  (AV.)  ‘royal  con¬ 
secration’  ( raj a-s d -  ‘creating  a  king’,  VS.),  madhyama-sthSy-ya-  ‘standing  in  the 
middle’  ( madhyama-sthd -  adj.,  VS.);  su-krt-yd-  ‘righteousness’  ( su-kr-t -  ‘righteous’). 

272.  The  close  verbal  connexion  of  these  final  members  with  the 
roots  from  which  they  are  derived,  shows  itself  formally.  Thus  they  retain 
the  palatal  of  the  verb  where  the  guttural  would  otherwise  appear4.  Again, 
agent  nouns  of  this  kind  are  formed  from  almost  every  kind  of  present  stem. 
The  following  are  examples  of  such  nouns  from  present  stems  of:  1.  the 
first  class:  cakram-a-sajd-  ‘stopping5  the  wheel’;  2.  the  sixth  class:  ut-tudd- 
(AV.)  ‘instigator’  ( tudd-ti ),  sam-gird-  (AV.)  ‘swallowing’  (sdm  girdmi).  3.  stems 
with  -cha:  go-vyaccha-  (VS.)  ‘cow-tormentor’  (from  a  lost  present  stem  *vyaccha-) 


1  For pivas-sphakd the  Mss.  read plbasphakd-m 
(Pada  pibah-phakam) :  see  Whitney  on  AV. 
iv.  73. 

2  But  ‘heart-piercing’  (RV.). 

3  Isolated  examples  of  nouns  of  action 

formed  with  other  suffixes  are  su-papi-ani- 

‘good  flight’,  sam-sres-ind -  (AV.)  ‘conflict’ (?). 


4  See  Wackernagel  21,  76.  Exceptions 
to  this  would  be  tuvi-kurmi-{ri)-  and  diva- 

\  hard-  (AV.)  ‘sun’,  if  these  words  are  derived 
from  car-  ‘fare’. 

5  From  a  sajdmi  ‘I  attach’. 


V.  Compounds.  Determinatives. 


161 


4.  the  fourth  class  or  passive  with  -ya:  akrsta-pacya -1  (AV.  VS.  TS.) 
‘ripening  in  unploughed  ground’,  a-pasyd-  ‘not  seeing’,  ugram-pasya-  (AV.) 
‘fierce-looking’,  mam-pasya-  (AV.)  ‘looking  at  me’,  adhi-pasya-  (AV.  Paipp.) 
‘superintendent’,  punar-manyd -  ‘remembering’  ( mdnya-te  ‘thinks’),  a-risanya- 
‘not  failing’  ( risanyd-ti ),  bala-vi-jnaya-  ‘recognized  by  his  strength’,  a-vi-dasyd- 
‘not  ceasing’  (vi  dasya?iti  ‘they  cease’),  a-vi-driya-  ‘not  bursting’  (dr-  ‘split’). 

5.  stems  with  -ay a:  vacam-ifikhayd-  ‘stirring  the  voice’,  samudram-lhkhaya- 
(only  voc.)  ‘stirring  the  vat’  ( inkhaya-nti  ‘they  shake’),  z nsvam-ejaya-  (only  voc.) 
‘exciting  all’  ( ejdya-ti  ‘sets  in  motion)’,  ati-parayd-  ‘putting  across’.  6.  the 
fifth  (-nu)  and  ninth  (-net)  classes:  visvam-inva-  ‘all-urging’  ( ino-ti ,  inv-a-ti 
‘urges’),  dhiyam-jinva-  ‘stirring  devotion’  and  visva-jinvd  (voc.  du.)  ‘all- 
quickening’  (j inv-a-ti  ‘stirs’),  a-daghnd-  ‘reaching  to  the  mouth’2 3  (dagh-nu-yat 
‘may  reach’,  K.),  dura-dabhnd-  (AV.)  ‘eluding  doors’  =  ‘not  to  be  kept  by 
bars  and  bolts’  (dabhnuv-anti  ‘they  deceive’),  danu-pinvd-  ‘swelling  with  drops’ 
(pinv-and-  ‘swelling’),  sada-prnd-  ‘always  giving’  (prnd-ti  ‘fills’,  ‘bestows’), 
a-mind-$  (beside  a-minant -)  ‘undiminishing’  ( mind-ti  ‘diminishes’),  pra-mrnd- 
‘destroying’  (pra-mrnant-  ‘crushing’,  pra  mrna  ‘destroy’),  a-sinva -4  (beside 
d-sinvant-)  ‘insatiable’,  a-sunv-a-  ‘not  pressing  Soma’  (beside  a-sunv-ant-). 

7.  the  sixth  and  seventh  classes:  agnim-indhd-  ‘fire-kindling’  (indh-dte  ‘they 
kindle’),  pra-krnta-  (TS.iv.  5.31)  and  vi-krntd-  (VS.)  ‘cutting  to  pieces’  (krnta-ti 
‘cuts’),  bhumi-drmhd-  (AV.)  ‘firmly  fixed  on  the  ground’  (drmha-ta  ‘make  firm’), 
ni-limpa-  (AV.)  a  kind  of  supernatural  being  (ni  limpami  ‘I  besmear’,  AV.). 

8.  the  root  class:  vratya-bruvd-  (AV.)  ‘calling  himself  a  Vratya’  (bruv-dnti 
‘they  say’).  9.  the  reduplicating  class:  anu-jighra-  (AV.)  ‘snuffing  at’ 
(jighrantl  ‘smelling’),  sam-pibd-  (AV.)  ‘swallowing  down’  (sdm  pibami,  AV.)5. 

a.  In  a  few  instances  verbal  nouns  which  are  final  members  of  compounds  in  the 

RV.  or  the  later  Samhitas  subsequently  appear  as  independent  words.  Thus  jdta-vidyd- 

‘knowledge  of  things’,  vidya-  (AV.  TS.)  ‘knowledge’6.  On  the  other  hand,  verbal  nouns 
derived  from  roots  without  suffix,  which  in  the  RV.  appear  both  as  independent  words 
and  as  final  members  of  compounds,  often  survive  in  the  later  Samhitas  in  their  com¬ 
pound  form  only;  such  are  tur-  ‘racing’,  da-  ‘giver’,  su-  m.  ‘begetter’,  f.  ‘mother’,  sthd- 
‘standing’.  As  a  rule  verbal  nouns  which  occur  independently  have  the  same  general 
meaning  as  when  they  form  the  final  member  of  a  compound.  But  those  formed  without 
any  suffix  generally,  and  those  formed  with  -a  occasionally,  have  the  sense  of  agent 

nouns  at  the  end  of  compounds,  but  of  action  nouns  or  of  designations  of  things  con¬ 

ceived  as  feminine,  when  they  are  used  independently.  Thus  grbh -  f.  ‘act  of  seizing’, 
jiva-gfbh -  adj.  ‘seizing  alive’;  vid-a  ‘with  knowledge’,  hotra-vid-  adj.  ‘knowing  the  obla¬ 
tion’,  yudh-  f.  ‘fight’,  pra-yudh -  adj.  ‘assailing’;  bkar-a-  (AV.)  ‘act  of  carrying’,  fiustim- 
bhard-  ‘bringing  prosperity’.  Sometimes  the  simple  word  has  the  meaning  of  an  agent 
noun  as  well  as  of  an  action  noun;  e.  g.  drs-  adj.  ‘seeing’  and  f.  ‘act  of  seeing’;  bhuj- 
adj.  ‘enjoying’  and  f.  ‘enjoyment’;  stubh-  adj.  ‘shouting’  and  f.  ‘shout’;  but  at  the  end  of 
a  compound  these  three  words  express  the  agent  only.  Similarly  grab h- a -  m.  ‘seizer’ 
(AV.)  and  ‘grasp’,  but  grbva-grabh-d-  ‘handling  the  Soma  stones’ 7. 

273.  Independent  verbal  nouns.  —  Several  kinds  of  verbal  nouns  which 
are  also  capable  of  independent  use  occur  as  final  member  of  compounds. 
Among  these  the  only  ones  of  frequent  occurrence  are  those  in  -ta  which 
are  adjectives  (often  used  as  substantives)  and  the  corresponding  abstract 


1  Wackernagel  21,  p.  179  (bottom),  refutes  [ 
the  view  that  this  -ya  is  identical  with  that 
of  the  gerundive. 

2  -daghna-  forms  the  last  member  of 
several  other  compounds  in  the  later  Sam¬ 
hitas.  See  Wackernagel  21,  p.  181. 

3  Cp.  Wackernagel  21,  p.  181,  note. 

4  From  a  lost  root  *si-no-ti  ‘satisfies’. 

5  There  is  also  a  transition  form  (leading 

to  the  later  - dada -)  in  ayur-dad-am  (AV.) 

Indo-arische  Philologie.  I.  4. 


acc.  f.  ‘life-giving’  (beside  dytcr-da -,  AV.  VS. 
TS.):  ddd-ati  ‘they  give’. 

6  For  examples  of  verbal  nouns  which 
assume  an  independent  character  in  the 
later  language,  see  Wackernagel  21,  77  a. 

7  On  the  origin  of  these  verbal  compounds 
and  the  relation  of  the  final  member  to  the 
independent  word,  see  Wackernagel  21, 
78  b  and  note  (p.  1 86  f.). 


11 


1 62  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


substantives  in  -//;  e.  g.  purd-hita-  adj.  ‘placed  in  front’,  m.  ‘domestic  priest’; 
puro-hiti-  f.  ‘domestic  priesthood’. 

1.  Agent  nouns.  Those  which  are  formed  with  -aka  and  -snu  are 
compounded  with  prepositions  only:  abhi-krds-aka-  (VS.)  ‘one  who  cries  out’, 
vi-ldy-aka-  (VS.)  ‘melter’;  abhi-socayi-smt-  (AV.)  ‘causing  heat’,  ni-sat-snu-  ‘sitting 
firmly’.  Agent  nouns  in  -tr  may  be  compounded  with  adverbs,  as  pura-etr- 
‘going  before’,  purah-sthatf-  ‘standing  at  the  head’,  and  rarely  with  substan¬ 
tives,  as  nr-pdtr-  ‘protecting  men’,  man-dhatf- 1  ‘applying  (his)  mind’,  ‘thoughtful 
man’.  Agent  nouns  formed  with  -u  from  secondary  present  stems  are  in  a 
few  instances  compounded  with  substantives:  gir-vanasy-u-  ‘fond  of  hymns’, 
deva-piy-u-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘hating  the  gods’,  rastra-dips-u-  (AV.)  ‘wishing  to  injure 
the  country’. 

2.  Action  nouns.  A  few  action  nouns  formed  with  -a,  from  adjectives 
in  -ic  derived  from  secondary  verbal  stems,  begin  in  late  passages  of  the 
RV.  to  appear  in  composition  with  a  substantive:  mamsa-bhiks-d -  (1.  16212) 
‘request  for  flesh’,  sraddha-manasy-d-  ‘faithful  intent’  (x.  1139);  sajata-vanasy-d- 
(TS.  11.  6.  67)  ‘desire  to  rule  over  relatives’.  Much  more  common  are  the 
abstracts  in  -ti  (corresponding  to  adjectives  in  - ta ),  which  may  be  compounded 
with  indeclinables  or  nouns  (adjective  or  substantive)1 2 3;  e.  g.  an-uti-  ‘no  help’, 
d-s'asti-  ‘curse’,  nir-rti-  ‘dissolution’,  sd-huti-  ‘joint  invocation’,  su-uti-  ‘good  aid’; 
soma-plti-  ‘drinking  of  Soma’,  soma-suti-  ‘pressing  of  Soma’.  Some  of  these 
are  becoming  or  have  become  agent  nouns;  thus  jardd-asti-  ‘attaining  great 
age’  as  well  as  ‘attainment  of  old  age’;  vdsu-d/iiti-  ‘bestowing  wealth’  as  well 
as  ‘bestowal  of  wealth’;  but  vasu-nTti-  (AV.)  only  ‘bringing  wealth’.  Others, 
even  in  the  RV.,  approximate  to  the  type  of  the  non-verbal  determinatives, 
as  dsu-nlti-  ‘world  of  spirits’,  rju-mti-  ‘right  guidance’,  devd-hiti-  ‘divine  ordi¬ 
nance’,  namo-vrkti-  ‘cleansing  for  adoration’,  purvd-citti-  ‘foreboding’ :  these  can, 
however,  be  understood  as  abstracts  to  corresponding  compounds  in  -ta\ 

3.  Gerundives.  The  gerundives  formed  with  - ya  are  ordinarily  compounded 
with  adverbial  prepositions,  as  puro-  nuvakya-  (sc.  fc-  AV.)  ‘(verse)  to  be 
repeated  beforehand’.  In  the  later  Samhitas  a  noun  here  sometimes  appears 
as  first  member:  mvi-bharya-  (AV.)  ‘to  be  worn  in  a  skirt’,  prathama-vasya- 
(AV.)  ‘worn  formerly’.  The  Proper  Names  kunda-pdyya-,  puru-mayya ,  vrsti- 
havya-,  if  they  are  formed  with  the  gerundive  suffix  -ya,  would  be  examples 
from  the  RV.4.  —  Gerundives  formed  with  -aniya  and  -enya$  are  compounded 
with  prepositions  and  a{?i)~  only:  a-mantraniya-  (AV.)  ‘to  be  asked’;  sam- 
caretiya-  ‘suitable  for  walking  on’,  a-dvisenyd-  ‘not  malevolent’.  —  Gerundives  in 
-tva  are  not  compounded  at  all  except  with  a(n)-. 

4.  Participles.  Besides  prepositions  and  a(n)-,  only  indeclinable  words 
occurring  in  connexion  with  verbs  are  found  compounded  with  participles 
(exclusive  of  the  past  passive  participle):  thus  alala-bhdvant-  ‘murmuring’ 
(waters)  and  jahjand-bhavant-  ‘crackling’  (flame),  astam-yd/it-  (AV.)  ‘setting’ 
and  astam-esydnt-  (AV.)  ‘about  to  set’,  d-putiar-dlyamana-  (AV.)  ‘not  being 
given  back’,  dvis-krnvand-  ‘making  visible’,  dur-vidvams-  ‘ill-disposed,  su¬ 


'd  dv  avis-  ‘knowing  well’. 


1  From  manas-  through  *?nanz-dhair-. 

2  The  verbal  force  is  strongest  when  the 
preceding  substantive  has  the  sense  of  an 
object. 

3  As  deva-hiti-  ‘act  of  ordaining  by  the 

gods’  beside  devd-hita-  ‘ordained  by  the 
gods’.  ^  ^ 

4  The  compounds  ama-vasya-  (AV.)  sc. 
ratrT-  ‘night  of  the  new  moon’,  eka-vddya- 


(AV.)  ‘uttering  a  single  sound’,  a  kind  of 
spectre,  and  var-kdrya-  (1.  884)  are  obscure 
in  their  formation. 

5  A  few  gerundives  in  -tavya  begin  to  be 
compounded  with  prepositions  or  particles 
in  the  B.  portion  of  the  TS.  and  MS. :  prci- 
vastavyam  (TS.)  ‘one  should  go  on  a  jour¬ 
ney’;  a-bhartavya-  (MS.)  ‘not  to  be  borne’, 
sv-etavyam  (TS.)  ‘easy  to  go’. 


V.  Compounds.  Determinatives. 


163 


a.  By  far  the  commonest  verbal  nouns  occurring  as  final  member  are 
the  past  participles  in  - ta 3  which  are  compounded  with  nouns  as  well  as 
prepositions  and  other  indeclinables.  The  meaning  is  mostly  passive.  It  is, 
however,  sometimes  active,  but  in  the  RV.  almost  exclusively  when  a  pre¬ 
position  precedes,  as  ud-ita-  ‘risen’ ;  when  a  noun  precedes,  only  in  saiga- 
takta-  ‘speeding  with  a  rush’  and  sdrgd-pratakta-  ‘darting  forth  with  a  rush’. 
In  the  AV.  a  noun  appears  also  in  uda-plutd-  ‘swimming  in  the  water’;  occa¬ 
sionally  even  transitively  governing  the  first  member  in  sense:  krtd-dvista- 
(AV.)  ‘hating  what  has  been  done’  (by  another) T. 

b.  The  past  participle  in  -na  is  less  frequent  and  occurs  in  the  RV. 
only  compounded  with  prepositions,  a(n)-  and  su-;  e.  g.  pdri-cchinna-  ‘lopped 
around’;  a-bhinna-  ‘not  split’;  su-purna-  ‘quite  full’.  But  it  is  found  a  few 
times  in  the  later  Samhitas  with  a  preceding  substantive:  agni-nunna-  (SV.) 
‘driven  away  by  fire’,  resma-cchinna-  (AV.)  ‘rent  by  a  storm’;  and  with  active 
(transitive)  sense  gara-girnd-  (AV.)  ‘having  swallowed  poison’. 

5.  There  are  besides  some  verbal  adjectives  in  -ra  or  (after  a  vowel) 
- tra ,  -la  and  - ma ,  the  first  of  which  occurs  compounded  with  nouns  as  well 
as  prepositions:  d-sk-ra-  ‘united’2,  ni-mrg-ra -  ‘attached  to’,  tanU-subh-ra-  ‘shining 
in  body’,  hari-scand-ro-  ‘shining  yellow’;  vi-bhr-tra-  ‘to  be  borne  about  in 
various  directions’ ;  d-mis-la -,  ni-mis-la -,  sdm-mis-la-  ‘commingling’;  dva-ksa-ma- 
(AV.)  ‘emaciated’,  uc-chus-ma-  (TS.  1.  6.  22)  ‘hissing  upwards’,  ni-sus-ma-  (TS. 
1.  6.  2 2)  ‘hissing  downwards’. 

6.  Comparatives  and  superlatives  in  - Tydms  and  -istha  having 
originally  been  verbal  adjectives  are  found  in  composition  with  prepositions 
and  sdm-  when  they  still  retain  their  verbal  meaning:  ud-yamlyams-  ‘raising 
excessively’,  pari-svajlydms-  (AV.)  ‘clasping  more  firmly’,  prdti-cyaviya ms- 
‘pressing  closer  against’,  z n-klediyams-  (AV.)  ‘moistening  more’;  d-gamistha- 
‘coming  quickly’,  sdm-bhavistha-  ‘most  beneficial’. 


First  member  in  verbal  determinatives. 

274.  a.  Prepositions.  At  the  beginning  of  determinatives  prepositions 
are  employed  in  accordance  with  their  use  in  verbal  forms;  e.  g.  pra-ni-  and 
prd-n'Ui-  ‘furtherance’,  pra-netf-  ‘leader’,  prd-nita-  ‘furthered’,  pra-neni-  ‘guiding 
constantly’.  Even  in  the  many  instances  in  which  the  corresponding  verbal  com¬ 
bination  has  not  been  preserved,  it  may  be  assumed  to  have  existed;  e.  g. 
in  abhi-pra-mur-  ‘crushing’  and  abhi-pra-bhangin-  ‘breaking’.  Occasionally,  how¬ 
ever,  the  preposition  has  a  meaning  which  otherwise  occurs  only  before  non¬ 
verbal  nouns;  e.  g.  ati-yajd-  ‘sacrificing  excessively’3.  A  preposition  belonging 
to  the  second  member  is  once  prefixed  to  the  first  in  sam-dhana-ji-t  (AV.) 
‘accumulating  (=  sam-ji-t-)  ‘wealth’. 

b.  Adverbs.  Various  kinds  of  adverbs  occur  in  this  position,  as  puro- 
ydvan-  ‘going  before’,  aksnaya-druh-  ‘injuring  wrongly’;  amutra-bhdya-  (AV .VS.) 
‘state  of  being  there’  (i.  e.  in  the  other  world).  The  privative  a(n)-  though 
belonging  in  sense  to  the  final  member  always  precedes  the  first;  e.  g.  dn- 
agni-dagdha-  ‘not  burnt  by  fire’;  d-pascad-daghvan-  'not  remaining  behind’; 
d-dara-sr-t  (AV.)  ‘not  falling  into  a  crack’. 

c.  Nouns.  The  first  member,  when  a  noun,  expresses  various  relations 
to  the  last. 


1  Cp.  Wackernagel  21,  p.  195;  but  also  3  In  TS.  11.  5.  44  (B.)  ati-yaj-  means  ‘to 

Whitney  on  AV.  vn.  1131.  pass  over  in  sacrificing’. 

2  From  sac-  ‘be  associated’. 


11* 


164  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

It  expresses:  1.  the  object,  which  is  the  prevailing  meaning  when  the  final 
member  is  an  agent  noun  or  an  action  noun;  e. g.  ab-jl-t-  ‘winning  waters’,  asva- 
hayd-  ‘urging  on  steeds’,  nr-pdtr-  ‘protecting  men’,  vdja-sdti-  ‘act  of  winning 
booty’,  vrtra-hdtya-  n.  ‘act  of  slaying  Vrtra’  \  When  the  final  member  is  a  verbal 
noun  formed  from  kr-  ‘make’,  the  first  member  does  not  necessarily  express 
the  product,  but  may  mean  the  material  with  which  the  activity  is  concerned; 
thus  hiranya-kard -  (VS.)  is  not  ‘gold-maker’  but  ‘worker  in  gold’,  ‘goldsmith’. 

2.  the  agent  when  the  last  member  has  a  passive  sense;  e.  g.  indra-pd- 
tajna -  ‘most  drunk  by  Indra’,  soma-sita-  ‘excited  by  Soma’;  occasionally  also 
when  the  final  member  is  an  action  noun,  as  devd-hiti-  ‘ordinance  of  the 
gods’,  parna-sadd-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘fall  of  leaves’,  mitra-tfirya-  (A V.)  ‘victory  of 
friends’. 

3.  the  instrument,  the  source,  or  the  locality  when  the  final  member 
is  an  agent  noun  or  a  past  passive  participle;  e.  g.  ddri-dugdha-2  ‘milked 
with  stones’,  aritra-parana-  ‘crossing  with  oars’;  go-jdta-  ‘produced  from  kine’, 
tivra-su-t-  ‘pressed  from  the  fermenting  mass’;  uda-pluta-  (AV.)  ‘swimming  in 
the  water’,  dhar-jata-  (AV.)  ‘born  in  the  day’,  puru-bhd-  ‘being  in  many 
places’,  bandhu-ksi-t-  ‘dwelling  among  relatives’,  pfsni-ni-presita- 3  ‘sent  down 
to  earth’. 

4.  in  an  appositionally  nominative  sense,  that  as  or  like  which  the 
action  of  the  final  member  is  performed;  e.  g.  Tsdna-kr-t-  ‘acting  as  a  ruler’, 
purva-pd-  ‘drinking  first’,  vdma-jdta-  ‘born  as  one  dear’  =  ‘dear  by  nature’; 
dhara-vakd-  ‘sounding  like  streams’,  sycna-juta-  ‘speeding  like  an  eagle’. 

5.  in  the  sense  of  a  predicative  nominative  before  a  past  participle, 
or  a  predicative  accusative  before  an  agent  noun  expressive  of ‘saying’;  e.  g. 
bhaksdm-krta-  (TS.)  ‘enjoyed’,  stoma-tasta-  ‘fashioned  as  a  hymn  of  praise’; 
vrdtya-bruvd-  (AV.)  ‘calling  oneself  a  Vratya’. 

6.  adverbially  the  manner  in  which  an  action  is  done,  sometimes  by 
means  of  a  substantive,  more  often  by  means  of  an  adjective;  e.  g.  rtv-ij- 
‘sacrificing  at  the  proper  time’,  that  is,  ‘regularly’,  sdrga-takta-  ‘speeding  with 
a  rush’;  asu-pdtvan-  ‘flying  swiftly’,  dhruva-ksi-t-  (VS.)  ‘dwelling  securely’,  satya- 
yaj-  ‘sacrificing  truly’;  with  a  numeral  in  dvi-ja-  (AV.)  ‘twice-born’. 

275.  Before  a  verbal  noun  a  nominal  first  member  very  often  appears 
with  a  case-ending4,  generally  with  that  which  the  corresponding  verb 
would  govern  in  a  sentence.  The  accusative  is  here  the  commonest  case, 
the  locative  coming  next,  while  the  other  cases  are  rarer.  A  singular  case¬ 
ending  (the  acc.  or  inst.)  may  here  indicate  a  plural  sense;  e.  g.  dsvam-isti- 
‘seeking  horses’,  pura/n-dard-  ‘destroyer  of  forts’,  sunesita-  ‘driven  by  dogs’ 
( su?ia -).  Plural  (acc.)  endings  sometimes  occur,  but  dual  endings  are  never 
found  in  these  compounds. 

The  accusative  case-ending  is  very  common,  generally  expressing  the 
object  of  a  transitive  verb,  as  dhanam-jayd -  ‘winning  booty’.  But  it  also  ex¬ 
presses  other  senses,  as  that  of  the  cognate  accusative;  e.  g.  subha  m-yd-iyian)- 
‘moving  in  brilliance’;  or  of  an  adverbial  accusative,  e.  g.  ugram-pasya -5 


1  Wackernagel  21,  p.  198,  quotes  loka- 
jit-am  svargam  (AV.  IV.  34s)  as  showing  that 
the  first  member  was  felt  to  have  an  accu¬ 
sative  sense  =  ‘winning  the  heavenly  world’ 
[svargam  /ok dm) ;  but  the  Paipp.  Ms.  has  the 
reading  svargyam,  which  Whitney  regards 
as  better,  translating  ‘world-conquering, 
heaven-going’. 

*  When  the  first  member  is  a  part  of 


the  body  it  expresses  the  sense  of  ‘with 
reference  to’,  as  bahujuta -  ‘quick  with  the 
arms’. 

3  The  local  sense  here  is  that  of  the 
accusative  of  the  goal. 

4  Cp.  Lindner,  Nominalbildung  p.  28. 

5  Occasionally  the  -m  is  inorganic,  as  in 
maksum-gamd -  and  asum-gd-  (AV.)  ‘going 
swiftly’.  In  patam-gd-  ‘bird’, patarn-  probably 


V.  Compounds.  Determinatives.  165 

(AY.)  ‘looking  fiercely’;  or  of  a  predicative  accusative,  e.  g.  ayaksmam-kdrana - 
(AY.)  ‘producing  health’,  srtam-kartf-  (TS.  in.  1.  44)  ‘making  cooked’1.  The 
acc.  pi.  occurs  in  ka-cit-kard-  ‘doing  all  manner  of  things’,  pdsva-isli-2  ‘desiring 
kine’,  vipas-cit-  ‘understanding  eloquence’,  vipo-dhd-  ‘granting  eloquence’,  huras- 
c:t-^>  ‘intending  evil’4. 

a.  The  accusative  form  is  commonest  before  agent  nouns  ending  in  -a 
or  -i  which  begin  with  a  single  consonant  and  the  first  syllable  of  which  is 
short;  that  is,  the  -m  here  appears  in  a  syllable  in  which  rhythmic  lengthening 
would  be  allowed5.  This  accusative  form  is  the  regular  rule  in  the  RV. 
when  the  stem  of  the  first  member  ends  in  -a>  being  found  before  -kara- 
‘making’,  -caya-  ‘collecting’,  -jaya-  ‘conquering’,  -tara-  ‘overcoming’,  -dara- 
‘cleaving’,  -bhara-  ‘bearing’,  -ruja-  ‘breaking’,  -sani-  ‘winning’,  -sa/ia-  ‘over¬ 
whelming’;  e.  g.  abhayam-kard-  ‘procuring  security’.  The  only  exceptions  to 
this  rule  in  the  RV.  are  asva-hayd-  ‘urging  on  steeds’,  sukra-dugha-  ‘emitting 
clear  fluid’.  In  the  RV.  the  ending  -im  also  occurs  in  pustim-bhard-  bringing 
prosperity’  and  harim-bhara -6  ‘bearing  the  yellow-coloured  (bolt)’;  and  -urn 
inorganically  in  maksum-gama-  ‘going  quickly’.  In  the  later  Samhitas  also  occur 
iratn-madd-  (VS.)  ‘rejoicing  in  the  draught’,  duram-gamd-  (VS.)  ‘going  far’, 
devam-gamd -  (TS.)  ‘going  to  the  gods’,  yudhim-gamd-  (AV.)  ‘going  to  battle’, 
visvam-bhara-  (AV.)  ‘all-sustaining’,  sakarn-bhard-b  (AV.)  ‘bearing  ordure’8. 

b.  The  accusative  form  in  -am  is  not  uncommon  before  a  final  member 
with  initial  vowel  (coalescence  of  the  two  vowels  being  thus  avoided);  e.  g, 
cakrcim-asajd-  ‘obstructing  the  wheel’,  visvam-invd-  ‘all-moving’,  asvam-isti- 
‘desiring  horses’,  vacam-Tiikhayd-  ‘word-moving’,  satnudram-mkhaya-  (only  voc.) 
‘stirring  the  vat’,  visvatn-ejayd-  ‘all-exciting’;  in  -im:  agnim-indha-  ‘fire-kindler’; 
in  -dm:  tvdm-ahuti-  (TS.)  ‘offering  oblations  to  thee’. 

c.  The  accusative  form  is  common  when  the  final  member  is  formed 
from  a  present  stem,  owing  to  the  close  connexion  of  such  verbal  nouns 
with  the  verb;  e.  g.  dhiyam-jinvd-  ‘exciting  meditation’,  t/gram-pasyd-  (AV.) 
‘looking  fiercely’,  mam-pasya-  (AV.)  ‘looking  at  me’. 

d.  Apart  from  the  conditions  stated  above  (a,  b,  c)  the  accusative  case¬ 
ending  rarely  occurs  in  the  first  member  of  verbal  determinatives;  e.  g. 
vanam-kdrana -,  a  particular  part  of  the  body;  dhiyam-dhd-  ‘devout’,  subhain- 
yd-{ya?i)-  ‘moving  in  brilliance’9. 

a.  In  the  great  majority  of  instances  the  first  member,  if  it  has  the  accusative 
case-form,  ends  in  -am,  mostly  from  stems  in  -a,  but  also  from  monosyllabic  consonant 
stems  {ptir-arn-  etc.)10,  and  from  one  stem  in  -T  ( dhiy-am -).  Otherwise  there  are  three  or 


represents  IE.  petn--,  while  in  puravi-dhi- 
‘fertile  woman’  and  vfsan-dhi-  ‘bold’,  the 
origin  of  the  nasal  is  doubtful ;  cp.  Wacker- 
NAGEL  21,  p.  202. 

1  In  B.  this  predicative  accusative  some¬ 
times  comes  to  have  the  value  of  a  predi¬ 
cative  nominative  when  compounded  with  a 
gerundive  or  a  derivative  of  bhu-,  as  sriani- 
kftya-  (TS.)  ‘to  be  made  cooked’,  nagnam- 
bhavtika-  (TS.)  ‘becoming  naked’. 

2  pasvds  acc.  pi. 

3  Here  huras-  might  be  a  genitive  as  \ a t- 
governs  that  case  as  well  as  the  acc. 

4  puro-ha  ‘destroying  forts’  may  contain 
an  acc. ;  also  isa-stut-  ‘praise  of  prosperity’, 
which  the  Pada  analyses  as  is  ah- s  tut-. 

5  How  much  the  use  of  these  forms  is 
dependent  on  rhythm  is  seen  in  the  alter¬ 


nation  of  pnam-caya-  and  riia-cit-  ‘paying  a 
debt’,  khaj am-kara-  and  khaj a-kft-  ‘causing 
the  din  of  battle’,  dhanam-j aya-  and  dhana- 
ji-t-  ‘winning  booty’,  janam-saha-  ‘overcoming 
beings’  and  vrdta-saha-  ‘conquering  crowds’. 

6  Beside  kavi-vrdha-  ‘prospering  the  wise’. 

7  Here  the  acc.  of  an  a-stem  is  substituted 
for  sakcin-. 

8  The  compound  nardm- dhisa-  (VS.)  is  of 
doubtful  meaning  and  irregular  accent. 

9  For  several  other  examples  occurring  in 
Brahmana  passages  of  the  later  Samhitas 
see  Wackernagel  21,  p.  207  d,  e. 

In  hrd-am-sani-  ‘winning  the  heart’  the 
neuter  hrd-  is  treated  as  if  it  were  a  masc. 
or  fern. 


1 66 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


four  in  -im  ( agnirn -  etc.),  one  in  -um  ( maksum -),  and  two  pronominal  accusatives  in 
-am  (mam-,  tvam-).  Polysyllabic  consonant  stems  never  have  the  accusative  case-ending 
in  the  first  member*. 

276.  The  locative  case-ending  is  in  the  RV.  almost  limited  to  em¬ 
ployment  before  agent-nouns  formed  from  the  simple  root  with  or  without 
determinative  -/:  agre-ga-  ‘going  before’,  agre-gd-  (VS.)  ‘moving  forwards’, 
agre-iii-  (VS.)  ‘leader’,  agre-pd-  ‘drinking  first’,  agre-pd -  (VS.)  ‘drinking  first’, 
afige-sthd- 2  (AV.)  ‘situated  in  a  member  of  the  body’,  rte-jd ‘produced  at 
the  sacrifice’,  krcchre-sri-t-  ‘running  into  danger’,  gahvare-stha-  (VS.)  ‘being  at 
the  bottom’,  divi-ksi-t-  ‘dwelling  in  heaven’,  divi-yaj-  ‘worshipping  in  heaven’, 
divi-sri-t -  (AV.)  ‘sojourning  in  heaven’,  divi-sdd-  (AV.)  ‘sitting  in  heaven’, 
dure-dfs-  ‘visible  afar’,  dosani-sr/s-  (AV.)  ‘leaning  on  the  arm’,  rathe-subh- 
‘fiying  along  in  a  car’,  rathe-sthd-  ‘standing  in  a  car’,  vane-rdj-  ‘shining  in  a 
wood’,  vane-sdh-  ‘prevailing  in  woods’,  sute-grbh-  ‘taking  hold  of  the  Soma’, 
hrdi-spfs-  ‘touching  the  heart’1 2 3 4. 

2.  The  RV.  has  only  two  examples  of  a  locative  before  an  agent  noun 
formed  with  the  suffix  -a:  divi-ksaya -  ‘dwelling  in  heaven’,  vahye-sayd-  ‘resting 
in  a  litter’5.  There  are  several  others  in  the  later  Samhitas:  agre-vadhd-  (VS.) 
‘killing  what  is  in  front’,  talpe-sayd-  (AV.)  ‘resting  on  a  couch’,  divi-cara-  (AV.) 
‘faring  in  heaven’,  divi-stambhd -  (AV.)  ‘supported  on  the  sky’,  dure-vadhd- 
(VS.)  ‘far-striking’,  hard-say d-6  (MS.  1.  27)  ‘resting  in  gold’.  In  the  AV.  also 
occurs  an  example  of  the  locative  before  an  agent  noun  formed  with  -in: 
parurne-sth-in-  ‘standing  in  the  highest  (place)’. 

3.  The  locative  plural  is  much  rarer  than  the  singular  in  the  first  member: 
apsu-ksi-t-  ‘dwelling  in  the  waters’,  apsu-jd-  ‘born  in  the  waters’,  apsuji-t-  ‘van¬ 
quishing  in  the  waters’,  apsu-sad-  ‘dwelling  in  the  waters’,  apsu-vdh-  (SV.) 
‘driving  in  water’,  apsu-samsita-  (AV.)  ‘excited  in  the  waters’,  gosu-yudh- 
‘fighting  in  (=  for)  kine’,  prtsu-tur-  ‘conquering  in  battles’,  bharesu-jd-  ‘pro¬ 
duced  in  fights’,  hrtsv-ds-  ‘piercing  to  the  heart’. 

a.  In  these  locative  compounds  the  second  member  is  most  commonly  -stha-  or 
•stha-  in  the  RV.,  while  the  first  member  is  most  usually  agre-,  dure-  or  vane-.  The 
locative  in  -e  is  the  predominant  one,  even  displacing  -i  in  pathe-sthd-  ‘standing  on  the 
road’  beside  pathi-stha-  (AV.). 

277.  The  instrumental  case- ending  occurs  several  times  in  the  first 
member  of  verbal  determinatives:  ksamd-cara-  (VS.)  ‘being  in  the  ground’, 
gira-vfdh-  ‘rejoicing  in  song’,  dhiya-jur-  ‘aging  in  devotion’,  yuvd-datta-  ‘given 
by  you  two’,  yuva-nita-  ‘led  by  you  two’,  yusmd-dat/a-  ‘given  by  you’,  yusmd- 
mta-  ‘led  by  you’,  sunesita-  ‘driven  by  dogs’  ( suna ).  When  the  stem  of  the 
first  member  ends  in  -a  there  is  some  doubt  whether  -d  here  represents  the 
instrumental  ending  or  lengthening  of  the  vowel7;  thus  sapha-ruj-  may  mean 
‘breaking  with  the  hoof’  or  ‘hoof-breaker;  and  in  yuva-yuj-  ‘yoked  by  you 
two’  the  vowel  may  be  simply  lengthened.  In  diva-hard-  (AV.)  ‘sun’  the  first 
member  is  an  old  instrumental  used  adverbially8. 

a.  The  examples  of  the  ablative  case-ending  are  rare:  daksinat-sad- 


1  sakan-  substitutes  the  acc.  of  an  <z-stem ; 
above  p.  165,  note  7. 

2  There  are  several  other  locatives  com¬ 
pounded  with  -stha-. 

3  There  are  several  other  locatives  com¬ 
pounded  with  -ja-. 

4  In  nare-sfha-  (RV1.),  an  epithet  of  the 

car,  the  first  member  may  be  a  locative 

(Sayana),  but  it  may  also  be  a  dative  of  nf- 

(BR.,  Grassmann),  ‘serving  for  a  man  to 

stand  on’. 


5  In  sute-kara -  ‘active  in  (offering)  Soma’, 
the  accent  shows  that  the  final  member  has 
an  adjectival,  not  a  verbal  sense.  In  the 
name  mdtari-svan-  the  first  member  is  inter¬ 
preted  in  RV.  ill.  2911  as  a  locative;  cp. 
Richter,  IF.  9,  247,  note ;  Macdonell, 
Grundriss  in.  1  A,  p.  72  (middle). 

6  In  VS.  v.  8  hari-sayd-’,  hard-  here  is  the 
locative  of  hari-. 

1  Cp.  Wackernagel  21,  56. 

8  See  Wackernagel  21,  213  a,  note. 


V.  Compounds.  Determinatives. 


167 

(MS.  11.  63)  ‘sitting  in  the  south’;  divo-jd-  ‘produced  from  heaven’,  divo-duh- 
(SV.)  ‘milking  from  the  sky’,  divo-nic-  ‘shining  from  the  sky’. 

b.  The  ending  of  the  genitive  would  naturally  appear  only  before  deri¬ 
vatives  from  verbs  governing  the  genitive.  There  seem  to  be  no  certain 
examples:  diva-ksas-  ‘ruling  over  the  sky’  (divas)  however  seems  probable1 2. 

b.  1.  Ordinary  Adjective  as  final  member. 

278.  Ordinary  adjectives  which  are  not  of  a  verbal  character  may  appear 
as  final  member  of  determinatives  much  in  the  same  way  as  past  participles 
in  -ta  and  - ?ia  (273,  4).  But  adjectives  ending  in  -u  are  almost  exclusively 
compounded  with  the  privative  a(n)~  and  prepositions;  e.  g.  an-dsd-  ‘not  swift’, 
an-rju-  ‘dishonest’,  d-da.su-  ‘impious’,  d-bhJru-  ‘not  terrible’;  prasit-  ‘very  (prd) 
swift’  (dsu-).  The  only  final  members  otherwise  compounded  are  -vasu-  ‘rich’ 
in  vibhd-vasu-  ‘radiant’  and  other  compounds,  and  -raghu-  ‘swift’,  in  mdde- 
raghu-  ‘quick  in  exhilaration’. 

a.  The  first  member  may  be  a  substantive  in  the  relation  of  a  case 
to  the  last;  e.  g.  tand-subhra-  ‘shining  in  body’,  yajna-dhira-  ‘versed  in 
sacrifice’,  vakmardja-satya-  ‘faithful  to  the  ordainers  of  hymns’,  visva-sambhu- 
‘salutary  for  all’.  The  relation  is  sometimes  expressed  by  the  case-ending :  the 
locative  in  gavi-sthira-  (AV.)  ‘strong  in  kine  (gdmf  as  a  name,  mdde-raghu- 
‘quick  in  exhilaration’,  sute-kara-  ‘active  in  (offering)  Soma’,  sumnd-dpi-  ‘united 
in  affection  (siwine'y ;  instrumental 2  in  dhiyd-vasu-  ‘rich  in  devotion’, 
vidma?idpas-  ‘working  (apds-)  with  wisdom  ( vidmana )’.  The  first  member  may 
also  appositionally  express  a  comparison  as  representing  a  type:  suka-babhru- 
(VS.)  ‘reddish  like  a  parrot’3. 

b.  The  first  member  may  be  an  adjective  qualifying  the  final  member 
in  an  adverbial  sense;  thus  aprdmi-satya  (voc.)  ‘eternally  true’,  urdhvd-prsni- 4 
(YS.)  ‘spotted  above’,  try-cirusa-  ‘reddish  in  three  (parts  of  the  body)’,  mahd- 
nagjii -5  (AV.)  ‘courtezan’  (‘very  naked’),  mahd-mahi-vrata-  ‘ruling  very  mightily’, 
mahd-vaturin-  ‘very  broad’,  visva-sca?idra-  ‘all-glittering’0. 

c.  Adverbs  and  particles  often  appear  as  first  member;  e.  g.  au-dsu- 
‘not  swift’,  anyata-em-  (VS.)  ‘variegated  on  one  side  (anydtas)\  evdra-  ‘quite  (evd) 
ready  (dra-)\  duh-seva-  ‘unfavourable’,  pi'mar-nava-  ‘renewing  itself’,  satd-mahant- 
‘equally  (sa-tds)  great’,  satd-brhatT-  (VS.)  ‘the  equally  great’  (a  metre),  satyam- 
ugra-  ‘truly  mighty’,  su-priya-  (AV.)  ‘very  dear’. 

d.  Several  prepositions  appear  as  first  member,  mostly  with  their  original 
adverbial  meaning;  e.  g.  ati-krsna- 7  (VS.)  ‘very  dark’;  d-viisla-tama-  ‘mixing 
very  readily’8;  upottamd-  (AV.)  ‘penultimate’;  ni-dhruvi -  (‘fixed  down’)  ‘per¬ 
severing’,  nis-kevalya-  (VS.)  ‘belonging  exclusively’;  prdsu-  ‘very  swift’,  pra- 


1  But  it  has  also  been  otherwise  explained; 
cp.  Wackernagel  21,  p.  213  c,  note;  who 
also  quotes  d-kasya-vid-  ‘knowing  nothing’ 
from  the  MS. 

2  The  word  jdtu-sfhira -  probably  contains 
an  old  instrumental  =  ‘naturally  solid’;  in 
nabha-ncdistha-  ‘nearest  in  kin’  as  a  name, 
the  first  member  though  looking  like  a  loca¬ 
tive,  probably  represents  an  Ilr.  stem  nab  ha- ; 
cp.  Richter,  IF.  9,  209.  The  compounds 
t'd-sama-,  an  epithet  of  Indra,  and  ghdse- 
ajra-  (VS.)  are  Bahuvrlhis. 

3  A  transition  to  this  compound  use  appears 

in  mano  javistham  (RV.  Vi  95)  ‘very  swift  as 

thought’. 


4  Here  the  adjectival  stem  is  used  for  the 
adv.  iirdhvam. 

5  From  this  is  formed  the  m.  maha-nagna- 
(AV.)  ‘paramour’. 

6  The  meaning  of  sddhv-arya-  ‘truly  faith¬ 
ful’ (?),  which  occurs  only  once,  is  doubtful; 
cp.  Wackernagel  21,  p.  237  (top). 

7  ati  in  the  sense  of  ‘very’  does  not  occur 
in  the  RV.,  but  in  the  later  Samhitas  it  is 
the  commonest  of  the  prepositions  com¬ 
pounded  with  adjectives. 

8  ‘Very  slightly  mixed’,  Geldner,  VS.  3, 
18 1.  —  a-tura -  ‘suffering’  is  obscure  in  origin. 


i6S 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

sardha-  (voc.)  ‘bold’;  vl-mahi-  ‘very  great’,  vi-sama-  (VS.)  ‘uneven’,  vi-sadrsa- 
‘dissimilar’,  vy-eni-  Variously  tinted’  (dawn);  sdm-vasu-  ‘dwelling  together’, 
sdm-priya-  (VS.)  ‘mutually  dear’. 

b.  2.  Ordinary  Substantive  as  final  member. 

279.  Determinatives  with  ordinary  non-verbal  substantives  as  their  final 
member  1  are  not  common  in  the  earliest  period  of  the  language.  In  the  first 
nine  books  of  the  RV.,  except  the  frequent  compounds  in  -pati-  and  - patnl 
there  are  not  many  more  than  three  dozen  examples2;  the  tenth  book  has 
quite  two  dozen  more,  and  the  AV.  seven  dozen  more. 

The  first  member  is  frequently  a  substantive  also.  Its  relation  to 
the  final  member  seems  to  be  limited  to  the  genitive  sense  in  the  Samhitas. 
This  genitive  sense  appears  when  the  final  member  is  a  word  expressive  of 
relationship,  or  -pati-  ‘husband’  or  ‘lord’;  e.  g.  raja-putra-  ‘king’s  son’,  mrtyu- 
bandhu-  ‘companion  of  death’,  vis-pati-  ‘lord  of  the  tribe’.  It  sometimes  ex¬ 
presses  the  material,  as  dru-padd-  ‘post  of  wood’,  hiranya-ratha-  ‘car  of  gold’ 
or  ‘car  full  of  gold’.  In  deva-kilbisa-  ‘offence  against  the  gods’  we  have  an 
example  of  an  objective  genitive.  There  seems  to  be  no  instance  in  the  RV. 
of  a  Proper  Name  appearing  as  the  first  member  of  a  determinative  in  the 
genitive  sense3  except  in  in  dr  a- send-  (x.  1  o  2 2)  ‘Indra’s  missile’4,  which  compound 
is  itself  perhaps  a  Proper  Name5.  In  camas ddhvaryu-  (AV.)  ‘the  priest  of 
the  cups’,  the  first  member  expresses  quite  a  general  genitive  sense  of 
relation  =  ‘the  priest  who  is  concerned  with  the  cups’. 

280.  As  in  determinatives  with  verbal  noun  as  final  member,  the  case¬ 
ending  may  appear  in  the  first  member.  But  it  is  less  common  here,  and 
owing  to  the  purely  nominal  character  of  the  final  member,  is  almost  restricted 
to  the  genitive.  The  ending  of  this  case  is  very  common  before  -pati- 
‘lord’  or  ‘husband’:  amhas-as-pati-  (VS.)  ‘lord  of  distress’,  N.  of  an  intercalary 
month,  gnd-s-pdti- 6  ‘husband  of  a  divine  woman’,  jd-s-pdti-  ‘lord  of  the  family’, 
brh-as-pati-1 *  and  brdhman-as-pati-  ‘lord  of  devotion’,  manas-as-pdti-  ‘lord  of  mental 
power’,  vdn-as-pati-*  ‘lord  of  the  wood’,  ‘tree’,  vac-ds-pati-  ‘lord  of  speech’, 
vdstos-pati-  ‘lord  of  the  dwelling’,  subh-as-pati-  ‘lord  of  splendour’,  sddas-as - 
pati-9  ‘lord  of  the  sacrificial  seat’.  According  to  the  analogy  of  these  com¬ 
pounds  which  end  in  - s-pati -,  were  also  formed  from  ^-sterns  rta-s-pati-  (only 
voc.)  ‘lord  of  pious  works’  and  rdtha-s-pdti-  ‘lord  of  the  car’.  The  word 
dam-pati-  may  stand  for  *dam-s-pati- 1 0  ‘lord  of  the  house’  {dam-,  the  gen.  pi. 
of  which,  dam-din,  occurs). 


1  Bahuvrihis  with  ordinary  substantives 
as  final  member  were  common  from  the 
beginning;  hence  combinations  which  appear 
as  Bahuvrihis  in  the  older  period,  are  often 
only  found  later  as  Tatpurusas,  the  latter 
being  thus  occasionally  affected  by  the 
formal  peculiarities  of  Bahuvrihis. 

2  See  Wackernagel  21,  p.  241  (97  note). 

3  If  this  compound  is  a  Proper  Name,  it  is 
the  only  instance  with  the  stem-form  in  the 
first  member;  but  the  genitive  case-ending 
appears  in  the  first  member  of  a  few  deter¬ 
minative  Proper  Names;  see  below,  280  a. 

4  ‘Indra’s  missile’  (BR.),  ‘Indra’s  army’ 
(Grassmann). 

5  This  is  the  opinion  of  Geldner,  VS. 

2,  I,  and  of  Delbruck,  Vergl.  Syntax  3,  p.202. 

5  An  anomalous  f.  gnas-patm-  was  formed 


from  this  word  after  the  etymology  had 
been  forgotten,  as  conversely  the  m.  sapatna- 
‘rival’  was  formed  from  sa-pdtm-  ‘co-wife’. 

7  *bfh-  here  is  synonymous  with  brahman -, 
brdhmanaspdti-  being  a  parallel  and  explana¬ 
tory  formation.  On  bp'has-pdti-  and  cognate 
compounds  see  Otto  Strauss,  Brhaspati  im 
Veda  (Leipzig  1905),  p.  14  — 17. 

8  van-  ‘wood’  appears  also  in  the  pi.  G. 
van-am ,  L.  vdm-su. 

9  It  is  unnecessary  to  assume  the  existence 
of  a  stem  sad-  to  explain  sadas-paii-  and 
sdt-pati-  since  the  stem  sadas-  occurs ;  nor 
is  rddh-  necessary  to  explain  rddhas-pati - 
(only  voc.)  as  rddhas -  is  frequent. 

10  Pischel,  VS.  2,  93  ff.,  307  ff.,  rejects  any 
connexion  between  dampati-  and  dam-  ‘house’. 
Cp.  Wackernagel  21,  p.  249  e,  note. 


V.  Compounds.  Determinatives. 


169 

a.  These  compounds  in  - pati -  are  treated  by  the  Pada  text  in  three  different  ways : 
1.  gnaspati bfhaspdti -,  vdnaspati -,  vispati -  (and  vispalm-)  appear  as  simple  words;  2.  gnah - 
patni-,  jdh-pdti -,  sacT-pati-,  rta-pate  (voc.),  rddhas-pate  (voc.),  and  those  with  a  single  accent 
(except  vispati-)  as  compounds  separated  by  the  Avagraha  sign;  3.  all  other  doubly 
accented  compounds  (e.  g.  brahman as-pdti-)  as  two  separate  words;  even  rathas-pdtis  is 
written  rdthah  j  patih  |  as  if  rdthah  were  a  nom.  sing. 1 

a.  Otherwise  the  genitive  ending  appears  only  two  or  three  times  in 
the  RV.  in  Proper  Names:  divo-dasa-  ‘Servant  of  heaven’ (?),  simah-sepa-2 
‘Dog’s  tail’,  and  (with  gen.  pi.)  ndrd-samsa-  (for  * tidram-samsa -)3  ‘Praise  of 
men’,  an  epithet  of  Agni.  The  VS.  has  also  rayas-posa-  ‘increase  of  wealth’ 
in  rayas-posa-dti-  ‘bestowing  increase  of  wealth’  and  rayas-posa-vdni-  ‘procuring 
increase  of  wealth’. 

b.  Other  case-endings  are  very  rare  in  such  determinatives.  The  locative 
appears  in  svapne-dusvapnyd-  (AV.)  ‘evil  dreaming  in  sleep’4;  the  instrumental 
in  vacd-stena-  ‘thief  by  speech’,  ‘one  who  makes  mischief  by  Ms  words’;  the 
dative  in  dasyave-vrka-  (voc.)  ‘Wolf  to  the  Dasyu’,  N.  of  a  man;  and  possibly 
ddsyave  sahah  (1.  3618)  may  be  meant  as  a  name  with  double  accent. 

281.  In  a  few  instances  the  first  member  is  a  substantive  used  appo- 
sitionally  to  express  sex  or  composite  nature:  purusa-mrgd-  (VS.)  ‘male 
antelope’;  uluka-yatu-  ‘owl  demon’  (=  demon  in  form  of  an  owl),  susulftka- 
yatu-  ‘owlet  demon’;  purusa-vyaghrd-  ‘man-tiger’,  a  kind  of  demon,  vrsd- 
kapi-  ‘man-ape’. 

282.  An  adjective  may  appear  as  first  member  determining  the  sense 
of  the  following  substantive.  This  type,  which  is  called  Karmadharaya  by 
the  Indian  grammarians,  is  uncommon  in  the  Samhitas.  Among  the  oldest 
are  candrd-mas -5  ‘(bright)  moon’°  and  purnd-mas-a-  (TS.  111. 4.41)  ‘full  moon’. 
Besides  these  occur  eka-vird-  ‘unique  hero’,  krma-sakuni -  (AV.)  ‘raven’  7, 
nava-jvara-  ‘new  pain’,  maha-grama-  ‘great  host’,  maha-dhand-  ‘great  booty’, 
ttiahd-vTra-  ‘great  hero’8,  sapta-rsayas  ‘the  Seven  Seers’,  N.  of  a  group  of 
ancient  sages  (beside  the  separate  words  sapid  rsayah  and  fsayah  saptd  in 
Books  1— ix),  sapta-grdhrdh  (AV1.)  ‘the  seven  vultures’9. 

a.  A  variety  of  Karmadharaya  is  that  in  which  the  first  member  expresses 
a  part  of  the  last:  ad/iara-kanthd-  (V S.)  ‘lower  part  of  the  neck’,  ardha-devd-10 
‘demi-god’,  ardha-masd-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘half-month’,  mad/iydni-dina-  ‘midday’;  also 
with  change  of  gender:  agra-jihvd-  (VS.)  n.  ‘tip  of  the  tongue  {ji/ivd-y ;  with 
the  suffix  -a:  ardha-rc-d-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘hemistich’,  purvahn-a-  ‘forenoon’11. 

283.  Prepositions  frequently  occur  as  first  member,  all  except  prd 
in  their  ordinary  adverbial  senses.  Those  which  are  thus  used  in  the  RV. 


1  See  Wackernagel  21,  p.  241  (97  a  a, 
note). 

2  This  name  occurs  once  with  tmesis, 

st’cnas  cic  chiepam  (v.  7?). 

3  Cp.  naram  na  sdtnsa-  (i.  I739  etc.)  and 
sdtnso  naram  (vi.  242);  see  Wackernagel  21, 
p.  248  d,  note. 

4  hrade-caksus  ‘mirrored  in  the  lake’  is 
regarded  by  Geldner  (VS.  1,  173)  as  a  Tat- 
purusa  =  ‘eye  in  the  lake’.  For  one  or  two 
doubtful  examples  of  locative  pi.  see  Wacker¬ 
nagel  21,  p.  249  (bottom). 

5  That  this  is  a  very  old  combination  is 
shown  by  the  fact  that  mas-  ‘moon’  occurs 
almost  exclusively  in  compounds  ( surya.-md.sd 
and purnd-mds ,  SB.),  only  two  or  three  times 
alone  (though  often  in  the  sense  of  ‘month’), 
and  is  therefore  obsolescent  in  the  RV. 

6  In  the  later  Samhitas  candrd-  comes  to 


mean  ‘moon’  as  an  abbreviation  of  candrd- 
mas-. 

I  With  change  of  meaning  from  ‘black 
bird’. 

8  In  K.  appears  the  dative  visva-devdya, 
the  expression  visve  devtih  having  become  a 
Karmadharaya. 

9  Translated  by  Whitney  (AV.  vm.  918) 
as  a  Bahuvrihi,  ‘seven-vultured’. 

10  ardhd-  ‘half’  is  here  used  in  a  figurative 
sense. 

I I  pitd-mahd-  (AV.  TS.  VS.)  and  tatd-mahd- 
(AV.)  ‘grandfather’  and  pra-pitamaha-  (VS. 
TS.)  and  pra-tatdmaha-  (AV1.)  ‘great  grand¬ 
father’  (only  voc.)  are  probably  not  Karraa- 
dharayas,  but  formed  in  imitation  of  maha- 
maha-  which  appeared  to  be  a  gradation  of 
mahant-;  cp.  Wackernagel  21,  p.  255,  note. 


170 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


are  ddhi  ‘over’,  ni  ‘down’,  pari  ‘around’,  /r# ‘forward’ J,  ‘front  part  of’1 2 3,  ‘extreme’ 
(of  high  degree),  ‘great’  (in  names  of  relationship),  prdti  ‘against’,  vi ‘asunder’ 3, 
sd?n  ‘together’  (also  sa-  in  the  same  sense);  and  in  the  later  Samhitas,  antdr 
“between’,  dpa  ‘away’,  d  ‘at  hand’,  ud  ‘up’,  dp  a  ‘beside’,  upari  ‘above’.  The 
following  are  examples  in  the  alphabetical  order  of  the  prepositions:  ddhi-pati( AY. 
VS.) ‘over-lord’,  ddhi-patm-  (AV.VS.)  ‘sovereign  lady’,  ddhi-bhojana-  ‘additional 
gift’,  adhi-rajd-  ‘supreme  king’;  antar-desd-  (AV.)  ‘intermediate  region’,  antah- 
patra-  (AV.)  ‘inner  (==  interior  of  the)  vessel’;  dpa-rupa-  (AV.)4  ‘absence 
of  form’,  ‘deformity’;  d-pati-  (VS.  MS.  1.  2 7)  ‘the  lord  here’;  *ut-surya- 
‘sunrise’  in  otsurydm  (AV.)  ‘till  sunrise’  ( a-utsuryd?n );  upa-pati-  (VS.)  ‘paramour’ 
(lit.  ‘sub-husband’);  upari-sayand-  (AV.)  ‘elevated  couch’;  ni-dhdna-  (AV.) 
‘conclusion’,  ni-paksati-  (VS.)  ‘second  rib’,  ni-padd-  ‘low  ground’,  ny-dJma- 5  (AV.) 
‘close  of  day’;  pdri-pati -  ‘lord  (of  all)  around’,  pari-vatsard-  ‘full  year’;  pra- 
gathd-  (VS.)  ‘fore-song’,  a  kind  of  stanza,  pra-dis-  ‘region’  and  (AV.)  ‘inter¬ 
mediate  quarter’,  pra-dhdna-  ‘prize  of  battle’,  pradhvand-  (‘forward  course’, 
ddhvan-)  ‘bed  of  a  river’,  prdrtha-  (AV.)  ‘preparation’,  ‘implement’;  prd-pada -6 * 
‘tip  of  the  foot’,  prd-uga-  ‘forepart  of  the  shafts  (of  a  chariot)’  7;  prd-napat- 
‘great-grandson’,  pra-tatamaha-  (AV1.)  and  prd-pitamaha-  (VS.  TS.)  ‘great¬ 
grandfather’;  pra^div-  (AV.)  ‘third  (or  fifth)  heaven’,  prd-patha-  ‘distant  path’, 
prd-maganda-  ‘arch-usurer’,  prd-vira-  ‘great  hero’,  prdyus-  (MS.  1.  54)  ‘long 
life’  (dyus);  prati-jand-  (AV.)  ‘adversary’,  prati-divan-  ‘adversary  at  play’; 
vi-dis-  (VS.)  ‘intermediate  region’,  vl-madhya-  ‘middle’,  vi-manyu-  ‘longing’8, 
vi-vac-  ‘opposing  shout’,  ‘contest’,  vy-ddana-  (RV1.)  ‘different  food’  9;  sa-patnT- 
‘co-wife’,  sam-grama-  (AV.)  ‘assembly’,  ‘encounter’,  sam-amkd-  ‘battle-array’ I0, 
sam-bdndhu-  ‘akin’,  sam-vatsard- 1 1  ‘full  year’. 

284.  Other  indeclinables  sometimes  occur  as  first  member,  but  very 
rarely  in  the  RV.  They  include  a  few  adverbs  and  the  particles  a(n)-,  dus-, 
su- ,  kim -,  ku-\  pasca-dosd-  (VS.)  ‘late  evening’,  puro-ag?ii-  (VS.)  ‘fire  in  front’; 
a-mitra-  ‘enemy’,  a-hotr-  (AV.)  ‘incompetent  Hotr’;  duc-chutia-  ‘calamity’12; 
su-brahmana-  (AV.)  ‘good  Brahman’,  su-bhesaja-  (AV.  TS.)  ‘good  remedy’, 
su-vasa?ia - 13  ‘fair  garment’;  kim-purusd-  (VS.)  a  kind  of  mythical  being,  ku- 
sara-  (RV1.),  a  kind  of  reed. 


4.  Bahuvrihi  Compounds. 

285.  The  term  Bahuvrihi,  employed  by  the  Indian  grammarians  to 
designate  this  type,  is  perhaps  the  most  convenient  name  for  these  secon¬ 
dary  adjective  compounds,  as  it  represents  their  general  character  both 
in  form  and  meaning.  For  the  final  member  is  practically  always  a  sub¬ 
stantive,  and  the  relation  of  the  first  member  to  the  last  is  mostly  attributive 


1  Without  perceptibly  changing  the  meaning 
of  the  final  member. 

2  This  and  the  following  meanings  do  not 
occur  in  the  combination  of  prd  with  verbs. 

3  Expressing  separation,  extension,  deri¬ 
vation. 

4  In  apa-kamci-  ‘aversion’  the  final  member 
is  a  verbal  noun.  There  seem  to  be  no  cer¬ 
tain  instances  of  this  kind  of  compound  with 
dpi-,  cp.  Wackernagel  2t,  p.  259  |9,  note. 

5  In  ny-arthd-  ‘destruction’  the  second 

member  is  a  verbal  noun.  On  the  relation 

of  ny-arbuda-  (AV.  VS.)  and  ny-drbudi-  (AV.) 

to  drbuda-  and  arbudi -,  see  Wackernagel 

21,  p.  260  (top). 


6  Once  prd-pad-  in  AV. 

7  Probably  for  pra-ynga-. 

8  From  manyu •  ‘zeal’. 

9  This  is  Sayana’s  explanation  [vividhe 
3 tine )  of  the  word  in  vm.  529. 

10  From  ariika •  ‘front’. 

11  sam  in  this  compound  expresses  com¬ 
pleteness. 

12  Cp.  sunam  ‘with  success’.  On  the  Sandhi 
see  p.  31,  note  4. 

13  Though  vasana-  has  a  concrete  sense 
here,  the  compound  may  have  arisen  when 
the  word  had  a  verbal  meaning. 


V.  Compounds.  Bahuvrihis.  17  i 


(Karmadharaya),  less  commonly  dependent  (Tatpurusa),  and  very  rarely 
coordinative  (Dvandva).  The  best  name  otherwise  is  ‘possessive’1 2 3,  as  this 
is  their  meaning  in  the  vast  majority  of  instances.  In  a  few  examples,  how¬ 
ever,  the  more  general  sense  of  ‘connected  with’  (which  may  usually  be  ex¬ 
pressed  more  specifically)  is  required  to  explain  the  relation  between  the 
substantive  and  the  Bahuvrlhi  which  agrees  with  it;  thus  asva-prstha-  ‘borne 
on  horse-back’,  deva-psaras-  ‘affording  enjoyment  for  the  gods’,  parjanya-retas- 
‘sprung  from  the  seed  of  Parjanya’,  z nsva-krsti-  ‘dwelling  with  all  peoples’, 
visvd-nara- 2  ‘belonging  to  or  existing  among  all  men’,  vJrd-pastya -  ‘belonging 
to  the  abode  of  a  hero’,  satd-sarada-  ‘lasting  a  hundred  autumns’,  sttra-vira- 
(AY.)  ‘characterized  by  heroic  men’  =  ‘making  men  heroic’  (amulet). 

286.  Attributive  Bahuvrihis.  —  The  commonest  form  of  Bahuvrlhi  is 
that  in  which  an  attributive  noun  is  the  first  member.  It  is  most  fre¬ 
quently  an  adjective,  as  ugra-bahu-  ‘powerful-armed’,  urvy-uti- 3  ‘giving  wide 
aid’,  jlva-putra-  ‘having  living  sons’,  sukra-varna-  ‘bright-coloured’4.  The  first 
member  is  also  often  a  past  passive  participle  in  -ta  or  - na ,  the  action 
expressed  by  which  is  usually  performed  by  the  person  denoted  by  the  sub¬ 
stantive  with  which  the  Bahuvrlhi  agrees;  e.  g.  prdyata-daksina-  ‘he  by  whom 
the  sacrificial  fee  has  been  presented’,  ratd-Ziavis-  ‘who  offers  an  oblation’5 *. 
The  action  is,  however,  not  infrequently  supposed  to  be  performed  by 
others,  always  in  the  case  of  hata-  ‘slain’;  e.  g.  hata-vrsn-i-  ‘whose  hus¬ 
band  has  been  slain’,  hatd-matr-  ‘whose  mother  has  been  slain’.  Both  senses 
appear  in  ratd-havya -  ‘he  by  whom’  and  ‘to  whom  offerings  have  been  made’. 
An  outside  agent  is  sometimes  expressed  by  an  additional  member  at  the 
beginning  of  the  compound,  as  jivd-pita-sarga-  ‘whose  streams  have  been 
drunk  by  the  living’0.  A  present  participle  occasionally  occurs  as  first 
member;  e.  g.  a-ydd-vasu-  (AV.)  and  sam-yad-vasu-  (AV.)  ‘to  whom  wealth 
comes’,  bhrdjad-rsti-  ‘having  glittering  spears’,  rusad-vatsa-  ‘having  a  shining 
calf’,  sucdd-rathci-  ‘having  a  brilliant  car’7 * *;  also  a  perfect-participle  in  dadrs- 
ana-pavi-  ‘whose  felly  is  visible’,  yuyuj ana-sapti-  ‘whose  steeds  are  yoked’. 

a.  The  first  member  is  further  often  a  substantive  used  predicatively; 
e.  g.  asva-parna-  ‘horse-winged’  =  ‘whose  wings  are  horses’  (car) ;  indra-satru- 
, whose  foe  is  Indra’;  tad-!d-art/ia-z  ‘having  just  that  as  an  aim’,  dronahava- 
3 whose  pail  ( ahdva -)  is  a  trough’,  sisnd-deva-  ‘whose  god  is  a  phallus’, 
surodaka-  (AV.)  ‘whose  water  is  spirit’  {sura-).  The  final  member  is  here 
sometimes  a  comparative  or  superlative  (including  para-)  used  substan¬ 
tively:  avaras-pard -9  (VS.)  ‘in  which  the  lower  is  higher’  =  ‘topsy-turvy’10, 
asthi-bhuyams-  (AV.)  ‘having  bone  as  its  chief  part’  —  ‘chiefly  bone’,  indra- 
jyestha-  ‘having  Indra  as  chief’,  ‘of  whom  Indra  is  chief’,  yamd-srestha-  (AV.) 
‘of  whom  Yama  is  best’,  sdma-srestha-  (AV.)  ‘of  which  Soma  is  best’. 


1  For  other  names  see  Wackernagel  21, 
p.  273  (107  a,  note). 

2  For  several  other  examples  formed  with 
vik’d-  see  Whitney  1294  b. 

3  Cp.  p.  145,  note  3. 

4  Cp.  Whitney  1298. 

5  The  sense  is  thus  identical  with  verbal 

determinatives  or  verbally  governing  com¬ 

pounds  such  as  vajam-bhara -  and  bharad- 
vaja -  ‘bearing  booty’.  In  vlti-hotra -  ‘having 

an  invitation  sacrifice’  =  ‘inviting  to  sacri¬ 

fice’,  a  stem  in  -ti  is  used  almost  like  a 
past  participle  in  - ta\  cp.  viid-havya -  as  a 

name. 


6  Cp.  Whitney  1299  a. 

7  Cp.  Whitney  1299  b. 

8  Here  a  pronoun  appears  instead  of  a 
substantive  in  the  first  member. 

9  Here  the  first  member  retains  the  -s  of 
the  nom.  surviving  from  the  use  of  the  two 
words  in  syntactical  juxtaposition;  the  first 
member  also  is  used  substantively  in  this 
compound. 

10  On  eka-pard-  (said  of  dice)  see  now 
Luders,  Das  Wiirfelspiel  im  alten  Indien 
(Abh.  d.  K.  Ges.  der  Wiss.  zu  Gottingen 
9,  2)  p.  64. 


17  2 


I.  Allgemeines  tjnd  Sprache.  4.  Yedic  Grammar. 


A  comparison  is  sometimes  implied  between  the  first  substantive  and  the 
second:  varsdjya  (AV.)  ‘whose  rain  is  like  butter’,  vrksd-kesa-  ‘tree-haired’ 
—  ‘whose  trees  are  like  hair’  =  ‘wooded’  (mountain). 

The  first  member  further  sometimes  expresses  the  material  of  which  the 
second  consists;  e.  g.  rajata-nabhi-  (VS.)  ‘whose  naval  is  (made  of)  silver’; 
hiranya-nemi-  ‘whose  fellies  are  (made  of)  gold’;  or  something  closely 
connected  with  and  characteristic  of  it,  as  niyud-ratha-  ‘whose  car  is  (drawn 
by)  a  team’. 

287.  Dependent  Bahuvrihis. — The  first  member  is  dependent  on  the 
last  in  the  sense  of  a  case-relation,  the  case-ending  being  sometimes  retained. 

a.  It  has  often  a  genitive  sense1,  as  pdti-kama-  (AV.)  ‘having  desire  for  a 
husband’;  with  genitive  ending,  rayds-kama-  ‘having  a  desire  of  wealth’.  Here 
the  first  member  often  implies  a  comparison  (when  it  never  has  the  case¬ 
ending)  :  agni-tejas-  (AV.)  ‘having  the  brightness  of  fire’,  ‘fire-bright’,  fksa-grlva- 
(AV.)  ‘having  the  neck  of  a  bear’  (demons),  gd-vapus-  ‘having  the  form  of  a 
cow’,  jhati-mukha-  (AV.)  ‘having  the  face  of  (=  like)  relatives’,  mdno-javas- 
‘having  the  swiftness  of  thought’  =  ‘swift  as  thought’,  771  ay  dr a-r 0771  an-  ‘having 
the  plumes  of  peacocks’  (Indra’s  steeds). 

b.  In  a  few  instances  it  has  the  sense  of,  and  then  always  the  ending  of, 
the  instrumental:  a-giraukas-  ‘not  to  be  kept  at  rest  (okas-)  by  a  song 
(gird)’,  krdtva-mag/ia-  ‘constituting  a  reward  (gained)  by  intelligence’,  b/iasd- 
ketu-  ‘recognisable  by  light’2.* 

c.  The  locative  sense  is  more  frequent,  being  often  accompanied  by 
the  case-ending:  asdnn-isu-  ‘having  arrows  in  his  mouth’,  divl-yoni-  ‘having 
origin  in  heaven’;  also  several  formed  with  dure-  ‘in  the  distance’,  as  dure- 
anta-  ‘ending  in  the  distance’,  dure-gavyuti-  (AV.)  ‘whose  sphere  is  far  away’ 3. 

There  are  further  examples  in  which  the  last  member  has  the  locative 
sense  when  it  is  a  part  of  the  body  and  what  is  expressed  by  the  first 
member  appears  in  or  on  it:  asru-mukhi-  (AV.)  ‘having  tears  on  her  face’, 
‘tear-faced’,  kildlodhn-T-  (AV.)  ‘having  sweet  drink  in  her  udder’,  ghrta-prstha- 
‘butter-backed’,  pdtra-hasta-  (AV.)  ‘having  a  hand  in  which  is  a  vessel’,  7nani- 
griva-  ‘having  pearls  on  the  neck’,  7nddhu-jihva-  ‘having  a  tongue  on  which 
is  honey’,  vdjra-bahu-  ‘having  an  arm  on  which  is  a  bolt’. 

288.  Coordinate  Bahuvrihis.  —  No  example  is  found  in  the  RY.  and 
hardly  any  in  the  other  Samhitas  of  the  first  and  last  members  of  Bahuvrihis 
being  coordinated  in  sense.  The  VS.  has  sto77ia-prstha-  ‘containing  Stomas 
and  Prsthas’;  also  dhar-divd-  (xxxvm.  12)  ‘daily’,  which  is  a  kind  of  Dvandva 
Bahuvrlhi,  being  formed  from  the  adverb  dhar-divi  ‘day  by  day’.  The  form 
so7)ie7idrd-  ‘belonging  to  Soma  and  Indra’,  occurs  only  in  B.  passages  of  later 
Samhitas  (TS.  MS.  K.). 

289.  Indeclinables  as  first  member.  —  In  a  number  of  Bahuvrihis 
the  first  member  is  not  a  noun,  but  an  indeclinable  word,  either  a  preposition 
or  an  adverb. 

a.  Prepositions  are  common  as  first  member  of  Bahuvrihis,  expressing 
the  local  position  of  the  final  member  in  relation  to  the  substantive  with 
which  the  Bahuvrlhi  agrees.  Some  sixteen  prepositions  are  thus  used,  the  most 
frequent  being  vi  which  occurs  as  often  in  the  RV.  as  all  the  rest  put 
together.  They  are  dti  ‘beyond’,  ddhi  ‘on’,  aTitdr  ‘within’,  dpa  ‘away’,  abhi 


1  An  accusative  in  sense  and  form  appears 
in  tvdm-kama -  ‘having  a  desire  for  thee’. 

2  The  compound  vidmanapas -  ‘working  | 
with  skill’  ( yidmdna )  is  probably  a  determi¬ 

native  formed  with  the  adj.  apas-  ‘working’, 


not  a  Bahuvrlhi  with  apas-  ‘work’;  cp.  27S  a 
and  91  B. 

3  On  a  fewr  doubtful  instances  of  such 
locative  compounds  see  Wackernagel  21, 
p.  278  (bottom). 


Y.  Compounds.  BahuvrThis. 


i73 


‘around’  and  ‘toward’,  ava  ‘down’,  ‘away’,  d  ‘near’,  ud  ‘upward’,  up  a  ‘near’, 
ni  ‘down’,  nis  ‘away’,  pari  ‘around’,  prd  ‘in  front’,  ‘very’,  prdti  ‘against’,  vi 
‘apart’,  sdm  ‘together’.  Of  these  upa  is  used  thus  in  the  RV.  only,  while 
antdr,  dva ,  ni  appear  in  the  later  Samhitas  only.  The  following  are  examples 
of  compounds  thus  formed  in  the  alphabetical  order  of  the  prepositions: 
dty-urmi-  ‘overflowing’,  dti-cchandas -  (VS.)  ‘having  redundant  metres’  (verse); 
ddhi-nirnij-  ‘having  a  garment  on’,  ddhy-aksa-  ‘having  an  eye  on’,  ‘overseer’ ; 
antar-ddva-  (AV.)  ‘having  fire  within’;  dpodaka-  ‘waterless’,  apa-rtu-  (AV.)  ‘un¬ 
seasonable’;  abhi-vira-  and  abhi-satvan -  ‘having  heroes  around’,  abhi-rupa- 
(AY.)  ‘beautiful’,  abhi-send-  ‘directing  arrows’;  ava-kesd-  (AV.)  ‘having  hair 
hanging  down’,  dva-toka-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘miscarrying’;  d-deva-  ‘having  the  gods 
near’,  ‘devoted  to  the  gods’,  d-manas-  (AV.  TS.)  ‘kindly  disposed’;  ut-saktha- 
(V S.)  ‘having  the  thighs  raised’,  ud-ojas-  ‘highly  powerful’;  upa-manyu-  ‘having 
zeal  at  hand’,  ‘zealous’,  upa-vasu-  ‘bringing  riches  near’;  ni-manyu-  (AV.) 
‘whose  anger  has  subsided’,  ni-vaksas-  (TS.  v.  6.  231)  ‘having  a  sunken  breast’, 
ni-kuld-  (VS.)  ‘going  down  hill’,  ni-kilbisa -  ‘deliverance  from  sin’  (‘that  in 
which  sin  has  subsided’);  nir-jardyu-  (AV.)  ‘having  cast  its  skin’,  nir-maya- 
‘powerless’,  nir-hasta-  (AV.)  ‘handless’;  pari-mard-  (TS.v. 6.211)  ‘having  death 
around’  ==  ‘round  whom  people  have  died’,  pari-manyu-  ‘very  angry’;  pra-srngd- 
(VS.  TS.)  ‘having  prominent  horns’,  pra-tvaksas-  ‘very  energetic’;  prd-manas- 
(AV.)  ‘very  thoughtful’;  prati-rupa-  ‘having  a  corresponding  form’,  ‘like’,  prati- 
vartmdn-  (AV.)  ‘having  an  opposite  course’,  prdti-vesa-  ‘neighbour’  (‘living 
opposite’);  vi  =  ‘apart’:  vi-karnd-  (AV.)  ‘having  ears  far  apart’,  vi-sdkha- 
(AV.)  ‘branched’,  vy-amsa-  ‘having  the  shoulders  apart’,  ‘broad-shouldered’; 
=  ‘extensive’ :  vi-manas-  ‘wide-minded’,  ‘sagacious’,  vi-hayas-  ‘of  extensive 
power’;  =  ‘divided’:  vy-adhvd -  (AV.)  ‘having  a  divided  course’  =  ‘being 
midway  between  zenith  and  earth’;  =  ‘various’:  vy-ailaba-  (AV.)  ‘making 
all  kinds  of  noises’;  =  ‘divergent’:  vi-pathi -  ‘following  wrong  paths’,  vi- 
vrata-  ‘refractory’;  =  ‘distorted’:  vi-grlva-  ‘having  a  twisted  neck’,  vy-anga- 
(AV.)  ‘having  distorted  limbs’;  =  ‘different’:  vi-rupa-  ‘having  a  different 
form’,  vi-vdcas-  (AV.)  ‘speaking  differently’;  =  ‘devoid  of’,  ‘less’:  vi-mdya- 
‘devoid  of  magic’,  vy-enas-  ‘guiltless’;  sdm-hanu-  (AV.)  ‘striking  the  jaws 
together’. 

b.  Adverbs  with  a  local  meaning,  which  are  akin  to  prepositions, 
also  frequently  appear  as  first  member  of  BahuvrThis,  being  generally  speaking 
equivalent  in  sense  to  predicative  adjectives.  Examples  of  such  BahuvrThis  in 
the  alphabetical  order  of  the  adverbs  are  the  following:  ad/ias  ‘below’  :  adhb- 
varcas-  (AV.)  ‘powerful  below’;  anti  ‘near’  :  dnti-mitra-  (VS.)  ‘having  friends 
at  hand’,  anti-sumna-  (AV.)  ‘having  benevolence  at  hand’,  dnty-uti-  ‘having 
aid  at  hand’;  avds  ‘down’  :  avd-deva-  ‘attracting  the  gods  down’;  are  ‘afar’  : 
are-agha-  ‘having  evil  far-removed’,  are-satru -  (AV.)  ‘whose  foes  are  far  away’; 
it  as  ‘hence’  :  ita-uti-  ‘helping  from  hence’;  ihd  ‘here’  :  iheha-matr -  ‘whose 
mothers  are,  the  one  here,  the  other  there’;  ihd-kratu-  (AV.)  ‘whose  will  is 
hitherward’,  ihd-citta-  (AV.)  ‘whose  thought  is  hitherward’;  rdhak  ‘apart’  : 
fdhaii-mantra -  (AV1.)  ‘having  a  special  sacred  text’1;  kuhayd  ‘where?’  :  ku/iayd- 
krti-  (only  voc.)  ‘where  active?’;  daksina-tas  ‘on  the  right’  :  daksinatds-kaparda- 
‘having  a  coil  of  hair  on  the  right’;  nlcd  ‘downward’  :  nTcd-vayas-  ‘whose 
strength  is  low’;  puras  ‘in  front’  :  puro-rathd-  ‘whose  car  is  in  front’,  puro- 
vasu-  (TS.  hi.  2.  51)  ‘preceded  by  wealth’  (only  voc.);  pracd  ‘forward’  : pracd- 
iihva-  ‘moving  the  tongue  forward’,  praca-manyu-  (only  voc.)  ‘striving  forward’. 


1  According  to  Whitney  on  AV.  v.  i1;  BR.,  p\v.  ‘lacking  speech’;  Ludwig  ‘of 

distinguished  meditations’. 


174  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

a.  Eahuvrlhis  are  also  formed  with  a  few  adverbs  of  another  kind  as  first  member: 
ittha-dJu-  ‘having  such  thought’,  ‘devout’,  nana-siiryci -  ‘illuminated  by  various  suns’,  punar- 
magha-  (AV.  TS.)  ‘repeatedly  offering  oblations’,  purudhd-prafika-  ‘having  various  aspects’, 
sadya-itti-  ‘helping  at  once’1.  There  are  also  several  formed  with  saha-,  sum  ad-,  smctd -2 
‘together  with’,  as  sahd-gopa-  ‘having  the  cowherds  with  them’,  saha-purusa-  (AV.)  ‘accom¬ 
panied  by  the  men’,  sumdj-jani-  ‘accompanied  by  his  wife’,  sumad-gu-  (AV.)  ‘accompanied 
by  the  cows’,  sniad-abklsu -  ‘provided  with  reins’,  smad-ista -  ‘having  an  errand’,  smad- 
udhan-  ‘provided  with  an  udder’. 

c.  Certain  particles  frequently  appear  as  the  first  member  of  Bahu- 
vrihis.  These  are  the  privative  a-  or  an-,  ku -3  expressing  depreciation,  dus- 
‘iir,  su-  Svell’;  e.  g.  a-pdd-  Tootless’,  a-sapatnd-  ‘having  no  rivals’,  an-ndakd- 
‘having  no  water’,  ‘waterless’;  ku-yava-  ‘causing  a  bad  harvest’,  dus-pdd- 
‘ill-footed’;  su-parnd-  ‘having  beautiful  wings’. 

290.  Bahuvrihis  are  very  frequently  used  as  m.  (sometimes  f.)  sub¬ 
stantives  in  the  sense  of  Proper  Names,  in  many  instances  without  the 
adjectival  sense  occurring  at  all;  thus  brhdd-uktha-  m.,  as  the  N.  of  a  seer 
and  adj.  ‘having  great  praise’;  brhad-diva-  m.,  N.  of  a  seer  ( brhad-divd -  f., 
N.  of  a  goddess)  and  adj.  ‘dwelling  in  high  heaven’;  but  priyd-medha-  m. 
(‘to  whom  sacrifice  is  dear’)  and  vamd-deva-  m.  (‘to  whom  the  gods  are  dear’) 
only  as  the  names  of  seers. 

a.  Bahuvrihis  are  further  not  infrequently  used  as  neuter  substantives 
with  an  abstract  and  a  collective  sense,  especially  when  the  first  member 
is  the  privative  particle  a-  or  an-  and  sdrva-  ‘all’;  e.  g.  a-satru-  ‘free  from 
foes’,  n.  (AV.)  ‘freedom  from  foes’,  a-sapatnd-  ‘having  no  rivals’,  n.  (AV.) 
‘peace’,  a-sambadhd-  (AV.)  n.  ‘non-confinement’,  a-skambhana-  (AV.)  n.  ‘lack 
of  support’,  an-apatyd-  ‘childless’  (AV.),  n.  ‘childlessness’,  an-amitra-  (AV.) 
‘foeless’,  n.  (AV.  VS.)  ‘freedom  from  foes’;  sarva-rathd -  ‘the  whole  line  of 
chariots’,  sarva-vedasd-  (AV.  TS.)  ‘whole  property’;  ni-kilbisa -  n.  ‘deliverance 
from  sin’,  pitr-bandhu-  (AV.)  ‘paternal  kinship’,  matr-bandhu-  (AV.)  ‘maternal 
kinship’,  rikta-kumbha- 4  (AV1.)  ‘empty-handedness’,  su-mrgd-  (AV.)  ‘good 
hunting’ 5. 

b.  A  special  category  of  Bahuvrihis  used  as  substantives  are  those  in 
which  the  first  member  is  a  numeral  from  dvi-  ‘two’  upwards6.  They  ex¬ 
press  a  collection  or  aggregate  and  are  singular  neuter7  except  those  formed 
with  -aha-  ‘day’,  which  are  singular  rnasc.;  e.  g.  tri-yugd-  n.  ‘period  of  three 
lives’,  tri-yojana-  (AV.)  n.  ‘distance  of  three  Yojanas’,  try-ndayd-  n.  ‘threefold 
approach  to  the  altar’,  dasafguld-  n.  ‘length  of  ten  fingers’,  dasantarusya-  n. 
‘distance  of  ten  stations’,  dvi-rajd-  (AV.)  n.  ‘battle  of  two  kings’,  panca- 
yojana-  (AV.)  n.  ‘distance  of  five  Yojanas’,  sad-ahd-( AV.  TS.)  m.  ‘series  of 
six  days’.  These  numeral  collectives  always  end  in  accented  -a8. 

291.  Origin  of  Bahuvrihis.  —  Considering  that  Bahuvrihis,  which  are 
adjectives,  are  far  commoner  than  the  corresponding  determinatives,  which 
are  substantives,  it  cannot  be  assumed  that  the  former  always  passed  through 


1  The  Bahuvrihi  compound  avir-rjlka-  is  ! 
of  uncertain  meaning;  see  Wackernagel 

21,  p.  287  (middle). 

2  Compounds  formed  with  these  three 
words  might  also  be  explained  as  belonging 
to  the  ‘governing’  class. 

3  Also  the  cognate  kim-  in  him-sila-  (VS. 
TS.)  (land)  ‘having  small  stones’. 

4  See  Whitney’s  note  on  AV.  xix.  84. 

5  Accentuation  of  the  final  syllable  (as  in 

the  cognate  singular  Dvandvas)  prevails  in 

these  n.  Bahuvrihis;  exceptions  are  a-bhaya -, 


n.  ‘safety’  (adj.  ‘free  from  danger’),  and  vi- 
hrdaya-  (AV.)  ‘lack  of  courage’. 

6  These  are  called  Dvigu  by  the  Hindu 
grammarians,  and  are  classed  by  them  as  a 
subdivision  of  Tatpurusas. 

7  A  few  numeral  collectives  are  determi¬ 
natives  used  in  the  pi.  and  the  original 
gender :  saptarsdyas  ‘the  seven  seers’,  sapta- 
grdhrds  ‘seven  vultures’  (AV.);  tri-kadru-ka- 
pl.  ‘three  soma-vessels’  (from  kadru-  f.  > 

8  With  the  suffix  -ya  is  formed  sahasrahn-yd- 
n.  (AV.)  ‘a  thousand  days’  journey’. 


V.  Compounds.  Governing  Compounds.  175 

the  process  of  transmutation  from  the  latter.  They  must  in  the  vast  majority 
of  instances  have  been  formed  directly  and  independently  in  conformity  with 
the  type  of  these  secondary  adjectives  which  had  come  down  from  the  Hr. 
period1.  Wackernagel  (21,  112)  adopts  the  view  that  the  origin  of  Bahu¬ 
vrlhis  is  not  to  be  explained  by  transmutation  from  determinatives,  but  from 
the  predicative  or  appositional  use  of  groups  of  words  characterizing  a  sub¬ 
stantive2 3.  This  use  he  exemplifies  by  the  following  quotations  from  the  RV. : 
un'th  kdkso  na  gangyaZi  (vi.  4531)  ‘like  the  broad  shoulder  dwelling  on  the 
Ganges’,  that  is,  for  *uru-kaksah  ‘Broad-shoulder’  as  a  Proper  Name;  sd 
jdyase  sdho  mahat  (v.ii6)  ‘thou  art  born  a  great  power’  ( =  *mahd-sahdh  ‘one 
having  great  power’);  tvacam  krsndm  arandhayat  (1.  1308)  ‘he  delivered  over 
the  black  skin’  (that  is,  ‘those  having  a  black  skin’,  ‘the  black-skins’);  droghaya 
cid  vdcasa  dnavaya  (vi.  62?)  ‘to  Anava,  deceitful  speech’,  that  is,  ‘who  utters 
deceitful  speech’ 3;  and  nardtn  . .  samsah  (11.  34s)  ‘praise  of  men’  as  repre¬ 
senting  an  earlier  stage  than  nara-samsa-  ‘receiving  the  praises  of  men’  as  a 
Bahuvrlhi.  Appositional  Bahuvrlhis,  he  thinks,  similarly  arose  from  explanatory 
clauses,  as  indra-jyesthd  devdh  ‘the  gods  having  Indra  as  their  mightiest’  from 
devdh  indro  jyesthah  ‘the  gods  —  Indra  their  mightiest’.  The  first  step  here 
would  have  been  assimilation  in  case  and  number  to  the  main  substantive, 
involving  change  to  a  compound  (with  stem-form  and  single  accent),  followed 
by  assimilation  in  gender.  The  change  to  the  Bahuvrlhi  had  already  become 
the  rule  in  the  pre-Vedic  period. 

5.  Governing  Compounds. 

292.  In  a  considerable  number  of  compounds  the  first  member  governs 
the  last  in  sense,  being  either  a  preposition  (prepositional  adverb)  or  a  verbal 
noun.  These  compounds  being  adjectives  are  allied  to  Bahuvrlhis. 

1.  In  the  prepositional  group  the  first  member  is  a  preposition  or  adverb 
capable  of  governing  a  case.  There  are  about  twenty  examples  in  the  RV. 
In  some  instances  they  seem  to  have  arisen  from  the  corresponding  syntactical 
combination,  as  ddhi-ratha-  n.  ‘wagon-load’  from  ddhi  rathe  (x.  6412)  ‘on  the 
wagon’.  In  other  instances  they  seem  to  have  originated  from  the  corresponding 
adverb;  thus  the  adjective  in  pra-div-a  ketuna  (v. 608)  ‘with  long-existing  light’ 
has  been  changed  from  the  adverb  pra-divas  ‘from  of  old’  to  agree  with  a 
substantive  in  the  instrumental.  The  ending  of  the  second  member  has  been 
preserved  for  the  most  part  only  when  it  was  -a\  otherwise  the  suffix  -a  or 
-ya  is  generally  added.  Like  Bahuvrlhis,  compounds  of  this  type  may 
become  neuter  substantives;  thus  updnas-a-  ‘being  on  the  wagon’,  n.  (AV.) 
‘space  in  a  wagon’. 

a.  All  prepositions  which  govern  cases  (except  dva)  as  well  as  prd 
(though  it  never  governs  a  case),  besides  several  adverbs  capable  of  being 
used  with  a  case,  are  employed  as  first  member  in  these  compounds4.  The 
following  are  examples  of  prepositional  governing  compounds:  ati-mdtra- 
(AV.)  ‘beyond  measure’,  ati-rdtra-  ‘lasting  overnight’,  aty-amhas-  (VS.)  ‘beyond 
the  reach  of  distress’,  dty-avi-  ‘running  over  the  wool’;  ddhi-gart-ya-  ‘being 
on  the  car-seat’,  adhi-gav-a -  (AV.)  ‘derived  from  cows’;  adhas-pad-d-  ‘being 


1  Cp.  Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  p.  88;  IF. 
18,  63  ff. 

2  On  substantives  used  instead  of  adjec¬ 
tives  cp.  Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  p.  89. 

3  Cp.  drogha-vdc-  ‘uttering  deceitful  speech’. 

4  This  type  of  governing  compound  is 


similar  in  form  to  the  prepositional  Bahu- 
vrlhis;  the  meaning,  however,  is  quite 
different,  as  in  the  latter  the  preposition 
does  not  govern  the  following  member,  but 
refers  adverbially  to  the  substantive  with 
which  the  Bahuvrlhi  agrees. 


176  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

under  the  feet’,  adho-aksa-  ‘remaining  below  the  axle’;  anu-path-a-  and  dnu- 
vartman-  (AV.  VS.)  ‘along  the  road’,  amc-kama-  ‘according  to  wish’,  dnu- 
vrata-  ‘obedient’;  dntas-path-a-  ‘being  within  the  path’;  api-prdna-  ‘being  on 
(=  accompanying)  the  breath’,  api-sarvard-  ‘bordering  on  night’  ( sarvarl -); 
abhi-dyu-  ‘directed  to  heaven’,  abhl-rdstra-  ‘overcoming  dominion’;  d-jaras-d-1 2 
‘reaching  to  old  age’,  d-pathi-  and  d-pathi-  ‘being  on  the  way’,  d-bhaga -  ‘taking 
part  in’,  ‘participator’;  upa-kaksa-  ‘reaching  to  the  shoulder’,  upanas-a-  ‘being 
on  a  wagon’,  upa-trn-ya-  (AV.)  ‘lurking  in  the  grass’,  upa-mas-ya-  (AV.) 
‘occurring  every  month’;  upari-budhna-  ‘raised  above  the  ground’,  upan-martya- 
‘being  above  men’;  urdhvd-nabhas-  (VS.)  ‘being  above  the  clouds’,  urdhva-barhis- 
(VS.)  ‘being  above  the  litter’;  tiro-ahn-ya-  (‘being  beyond  a  day’  =)  ‘belonging 
to  the  day  before  yesterday’;  pari-panth-in- 2  (‘lying  around  the  path’)  ‘adver- 
sary’,  pari-hastd-  (AV.)  (‘put  round  the  hand’)  ‘hand-amulet’;  paro-matra- 
(‘being  beyond  measure’)  ‘excessive’,  paro-ks-a-  (AV.)  (‘lying  beyond  the  eye’) 
‘invisible’;  puro-gav-d-  (‘going  before  the  cows’)  ‘leader’;  prati-kamya-  (AV.) 
‘being  in  accordance  with  desire’;  s  cun-gay  a-  ‘blessing  the  household’. 

2.  In  verbal  governing  compounds  the  first  member  is  either  an 
agent  noun  or  an  action  noun  governing  the  last  member  as  an  object. 
The  abnormal  position  of  the  verbal  form  before  the  object  in  this  class  is 
probably  to  be  explained  by  the  first  member  having  originally  been  an 
imperative,  which  usually  has  this  position.  These  compounds  are  an  old 
formation,  two  types  going  back  to  the  Indo-European  period,  and  one  to 
the  Indo-Iranian.  They  are  adjectives,  but  the  final  member  never  adds  a 
compositional  suffix  except  in  siksa-?iar-a-  ‘helping  men’.  Three  types  are  to 
be  distinguished. 

a.  The  first  member  consists  of  a  present  stem  or  the  root,  which 
probably  represents  an  imperative3;  of  this  type  there  are  few  examples: 
trasa-dasyu-  m.,  N.  of  a  man  (‘terrify  the  foe’),  radd-vasu -4 5  (only  voc.) 
‘dispensing  wealth’,  siksd-nara- 4  ‘helping  men’,  sthd-rasman- 5  ‘loosening 
bridles’6. 

b.  Examples  of  the  second  type  are  more  numerous.  Here  the  first 
member  ends  in  -at,  but  the  participle,  being  formed  from  present  stems 
in  -a,  -a  or  -ay a,  which  appears  in  these  compounds,  in  a  few  instances 
does  not  occur  in  independent  use.  This  type,  which  is  almost  entirely 
restricted  to  the  RV.,  is  also  Iranian.  It  seems  to  have  taken  the  place  of 
the  older  one  (a),  which  owing  to  its  form  was  apt  to  be  confused  with 
Bahuvrlhis  though  differing  from  them  in  meaning.  The  form  which  they 
assumed  was  probably  aided  by  the  analogy  of  Bahuvrlhis  with  a  present 
participle  as  their  first  member,  like  sucad-ratha-  ‘having  a  brilliant  car’, 
which  are  formed  from  intransitive  verbs,  while  those  in  the  governing  com¬ 
pounds  are  of  course  transitive.  Examples  of  this  type  are  the  following: 
rdhad-ray- 7  (‘increasing  wealth’)  m.,  N.  of  a  man,  and  rdhdd-vara- 7  ‘increasing 
goods’,  ksaydd-vira 8  ‘ruling  men’,  coday dn-mati- 9  ‘stimulating  devotion’,  jamdd-xo 


1  Occurs  only  in  the  dative  as  an  adverb 
meaning  ‘up  to  old  age’. 

2  Formed  with  the  suffix  -in  which  is  not 
properly  attached  to  compounds;  cp.WACKER- 
NAGEL  21,  53  (p.  121  bottom). 

3  See  Brugmann,  IF.  18,  76;  Delbruck, 

Vergleichende  Syntax  3,  174;  Jacobi,  Com- 
positum  und  Nebensatz  (1897),  46 — 82; 

Wackernagel  2 i,  p.  315. 

4  Rhythmically  lengthened  for  rada-,siksa-. 

5  The  Bada  has  sthah-rasman-.  The  meaning 

•  e> 


is  doubtful;  it  may  be  a  simple  Bahuvrlhi, 
‘having  firm  bridles’  (Grassmann). 

6  krpa-nida -  would  be  another  example  if 
it  means  ‘arranging  his  abode’,  but  the 
meaning  of  the  first  member  is  doubtful. 

7  rdhat-  is  an  aorist  participle  of  rdh- 
‘increase’. 

8  From  ksayati  ‘rules’. 

9  From  codayaii  ‘urges’. 

i°  jarnat-  a  palatalized  form  from  gam- 
‘go’. 


V.  Compounds.  Syntactical  Compounds.  177 


agni-  (Agoing  to  Agni’),  N.  of  man,  tarad-dvesas -1  ‘overcoming  foes’,  dravayat- 
sakha-2 3  ‘speeding  the  comrade’,  dharayat-kavi-  ‘supporting  the  wise’  and 
dharayat-ksiti- 3  ‘supporting  men’,  bhardd-vaja-  (‘carrying  off  the  prize’)  m., 
N.  of  a  man,  and  a-bhardd-vasu -4  ‘bringing  wealth’,  mamhaydd-rayi -5 6  ‘lavishing 
wealth’,  mandd d-vlra - 6  ‘gladdening  men’,  *viddd-awa- 7  ‘possessing  steeds’, 
viddd-vasu -8  ‘winning  wealth’,  sravaydt-pati-  ‘making  his  lord  famous’,  and 
sravaydt-sakhi -9  ‘making  his  friend  famous’,  sandd-rayi-  ‘bestowing  possessions’ 
and  sandd-vaja -IO 11  ‘bestowing  booty’,  sadad-yoni ‘sitting  in  one’s  place’,  sprhaydd- 
varna -12  ‘striving  after  lustre’.  Two  such  governing  compounds  are  once  com¬ 
bined  in  such  a  way  that  the  final  member  common  to  both  is  dropped  in 
the  first:  pataydn  mandayat-sakham  (1.  47)  ‘causing  his  friend  to  fly  ( patdya -) 
and  to  be  glad’  ( manddya -)13. 

c.  In  the  third  type,  which  goes  back  to  the  Indo-European  period14,  the  first 
member  is  a  noun  of  action  variously  accented.  There  are  some  half-dozen 
examples  in  the  RV. :  ddti-vara-  ‘giving  treasures’,  pusti-gu-  (‘rearing  kine’)  m., 
N.  of  a  man,  rity-ap- 15  ‘causing  waters  to  flow’,  vTtl-radhas-  ‘enjoying  the  oblation’, 
7 nti-hotra-  ’enjoying  the  sacrifice’,  vrsti-dyiv-  ‘causing  the  sky  to  rain’16. 

6.  Syntactical  Compounds. 

293.  There  are  some  irregular  formations  in  which  words  not  in  coordi¬ 
nate,  attributive,  dependent  or  governing  relation  are  compounded  owing  to 
constant  juxtaposition  in  the  sentence. 

1.  The  relative  word  yat  (abl.)  ‘in  so  far  as’  is  compounded  with  a 
superlative  in  RV.  in.  5321:  utibhih  . . .  yac-chresthdbhih 17  ‘with  the  best  possible 
aids’,  lit.  ‘with  aids  in  so  far  as  (they  are)  the  best’.  The  adverb  yad-radhydm 
(11.  38s)  ‘as  quickly  as  possible’,  lit.  ‘in  so  far  as  possible’,  is  analogous. 

2.  The  initial  words  of  a  text  begin  to  be  compounded  in  the  later 
Samhitas  as  a  designation  of  that  text;  thus  ye-yajamaha-  (VS.)  in  the  nom. 
pi.  m.  means  the  text  beginning  with  the  words  ye  ydjamahe l8. 

3.  Phrases,  almost  always  consisting  of  two  words,  used  in  connexion 
with  certain  actions  are  compounded;  thus  aham-uttard -Ig  (AV.)  ‘dispute  for 
precedence’,  from  the  phrase  used  by  each  disputant  ahdm  uttarah  ‘I  (am) 
higher’;  mama-s  atyesu  ‘in  disputes  as  to  ownership’,  in  which  every  one  says 
mama  satyam  ‘(it  is)  certainly  mine’;  mam-pasya-  (AV.)  as  the  name  of  a 
plant  used  by  a  woman  to  secure  the  love  of  a  man  with  the  words  ??idm 
pasya  ‘look  at  me’20.  Similarly  in  connexion  with  persons,  as  kuvitsa-  ‘some 


1  From  tara-ti  ‘overcomes’. 

2  From  dravaya-  causative  of  dru-  ‘run’. 

3  From  dhdrdya-  causative  of  dhr-  ‘sup¬ 
port’. 

4  From  bhara-ti  ‘bears’. 

5  From  mam  hay  a-  causative  of  mamh-  ‘be 
great’. 

6  From  manda-ti  ‘gladdens’.  The  SV.  has 
the  wrong  variant  van  da  d-vlra-. 

7  To  be  inferred  from  the  patronymic 
vaidadasvi-. 

8  From  vida-ti  ‘finds’. 

9  From  srdvaya-  causative  of  sru-  ‘hear’. 

*°  From  sana-ti  or  sana-li  ‘wins’. 

11  Lengthened  for  sadad-  from  sada-ti ‘sits’. 

12  From  sprhaya-ti  ‘desires’. 

On  the  doubtful  examples  arcad-dhuma -, 

krtad-vasu,  praldd-vasu,  bhuvad  vasuk  (vm. 

1937),  vrsad-ahji-  (voc.)  see  Wackernagel 

21,  p.  319  note. 

Indo-arische  Philologie.  I,  4. 


x4  See  Wackernagel  21,  p.320  (bottom). 
!5  This  is  the  only  example  recognized 
by  BR.  as  belonging  to  this  type;  Grass- 
mann  explains  them  all  as  Bahuvrihis. 

16  Brugmann,  IF.  18,  70  f.,  explains  these 
compounds  as  having  originated  in  impera¬ 
tives,  while  Jacobi,  Compositum  und  Neben- 
satz  p.  64  b,  thinks  the  first  member  re¬ 
presents  an  original  3.  pers.  sing. 

x7  In  AV.  vil.  3 11  ydvac-chrestkdbhis  is  a 
corrupt  variant.  Compounds  formed  with 
ydvat-  do  not  otherwise  occur  till  the  Sutras. 

18  In  the  TS.  also  occurs  idam-madhu-  m. 
as  a  designation  of  the  text  idam  evd 
saraghdm  mddhu.  This  kind  of  compound 
becomes  common  in  the  ancillary  literature 
when  particular  hymns  are  referred  to. 

*9  Used  in  the  locative  only. 

20  One  or  two  doubtful  examples  are  dis¬ 
cussed  by  Wackernagel  21,  p.  327  (top). 

12 


i7« 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


one’  from  the  phrase  kuvit  sd  ‘is  it  he?’.  This  type  is  more  commonly  based 
on  phrases  used  by  people  about  themselves;  thus  dham-sana 1  (voc.)  ‘rapa¬ 
cious'’,  that  is,  one  who  says  aham  saneyam  ( dhdnani )  ‘may  I  obtain  (wealth)’; 
aham-purvd-  ‘eager  to  be  first’,  that  is,  one  who  says  aham  pfiruah  ( syd?n ) 
‘I  (should  be)  first’;  kim-tva-  (VS.)  ‘asking  garrulously’  that  is,  one  who  con¬ 
tinually  says  ‘what  (are)  you  (doing)?’. 


VI.  DECLENSION. 

Benfey,  Vollstandige  Grammatik  707 — 7S0.  —  Whitney,  Grammar  261  —  526. 

294.  General  character. —  Declension  means  the  inflexion  of  nominal 
stems  by  means  of  endings  which  express  the  various  relations  represented 
by  what  are  called  cases.  The  stems  belonging  to  the  sphere  of  declension 
are  most  conveniently  divided,  owing  to  difference  of  meaning,  form,  and 
use,  into  nouns,  pronouns,  and  numerals.  Pronouns  have  to  be  treated 
separately  because  they  have  certain  peculiarities  of  inflexion,  besides  to  some 
extent  lacking  the  distinction  of  gender.  Numerals  again  show  other  pecu¬ 
liarities  of  form  as  well  as  partial  lack  of  gender.  Nouns  are  divided  into 
substantives  as  names  of  things  and  adjectives  as  names  of  attributes.  But 
as  no  definite  line  of  demarcation  can  be  drawn  between  substantive  and 
adjective  in  any  of  the  classes  of  declension  in  the  Vedic  language,  these  two 
categories  are  nowhere  treated  separately  in  the  present  work. 

I.  Nouns. 

Lanman,  Noun-inflection  in  the  Veda,  JAOS.  vol.  x  (1880),  p.  325 — 600. 

295.  Owing  to  considerable  divergencies  of  inflexion,  nominal  stems  are 
best  grouped  in  the  two  main  divisions  of  consonant  and  vowel  de¬ 
clension.  Stems  ending  in  semivowels  form  a  transition  from  the  former  to 
the  latter.  The  stems  contained  in  the  two  main  classes  have  further  to  be 
sub-divided,  owing  to  difference  of  derivation  and,  in  part,  consequent  variety 
of  inflexion,  into  radical  and  derivative  stems. 

a.  Like  other  Aryan  tongues,  the  Vedic  language  distinguishes  in  declen¬ 
sion  the  three  genders,  masculine,  feminine,  and  neuter.  It  also  distinguishes 
three  numbers,  the  singular,  dual,  and  plural,  the  dual  being  in  full  and 
regular  use2 * *. 

b.  There  are  eight  cases:  nominative,  vocative,  accusative,  instrumental, 
dative,  ablative,  genitive,  locative,  all  in  regular  and  unrestricted  use.  The  same 
ending,  however,  is  to  a  limited  extent  employed  to  express  the  sense  of  two  and 
sometimes  of  three  cases.  Thus  the  eight  cases  of  the  dual  have  among 
them  only  three  endings;  in  the  plural  the  single  ending  -bhyas  does  duty 
for  both  dative  and  ablative;  while  in  the  singular  the  same  ending  -as  appears 
for  both  ablative  and  genitive  in  all  but  the  a- declension. 

c.  The  normal  endings  of  cases  are  the  following: 

Singular:  nom.  m.  f.  -s,  n.  none;  voc.  of  all  genders,  none;  acc.  m.  f. 
- am ,  n.  none;  inst.  -a,  dat.  -e,  abl.  gen.  -as,  loc.  -i. 

Dual:  nom.  voc.  acc.  m.  f.  - a ,  -au,  n.  -1,  inst.  dat.  abl.  bhyarn ,  gen.  loc.  -os. 

Plural:  nom.  voc.  acc.  m.  f.  -as,  neut.  -i;  inst.  -bhis,  dat.  abl.  -bhyas, 
gen.  -d?n,  loc.  -su. 


1  RV.  Viu.  6l9;  cp.  aham  sand  v.  752. 

2  But  while  the  employment  of  the  dual 

is  generally  strict,  the  plural  is  often  used 

instead  of  the  dual  of  natural  pairs  in 


the  ‘hieratic’  parts  of  the  RV. ;  see  Bloom¬ 
field,  Johns  Hopkins  University  Circular  for 
1905,  p.  1 8  f.,  Oliphant,  ibid.  p.  22 — 31. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Consonant  Stems. 


179 


d.  A  distinction  is  often  made  in  the  stem  between  strong  (or  full) 
and  weak  (or  reduced)  case-forms.  It  appears  in  its  full  development 
only  in  derivative  consonant  stems,  affecting  the  suffixes  - anc 1;  -an,  -man, 
- van ;  -ant,  -mant,  -vant;  -tar;  -yams;  -vams.  The  strong  form  of  the  stem 
appears  in  the  masculine  110m.  voc.2  acc.  singular  and  dual,  and  in  the  nom. 
voc.  plural;  and  in  the  neuter  nom.  voc.  acc.  plural  only.  The  weak  form 
of  the  stem  appears  in  the  remaining  cases.  But  in  the  first  four  and  in 
the  last  of  the  above  suffixes  the  weak  stem  which  appears  before  endings 
with  initial  consonant  is  further  weakened  before  endings  with  initial  vowel. 

e.  The  way  in  which  the  normal  endings  are  attached  to  the  strong 
and  the  weak  stem  with  accompanying  shift  of  accent,  may  be  illustrated  by 
the  inflexion  of  the  stem  ad-ant-  ‘eating’  in  the  masc.: 

Singular:  N.  ad-an.  V.  ad-an.  A.  ad- ant  am.  I.  ad-at-d.  D.  ad-at-e. 
Ab.  G.  ad-at-ds.  L.  ad-at-i. 

Dual:  N.  A.  ad-d?it-a ,  -an.  V.  dd-ant-a,  -au.  I.  D.  Ab.  ad-ad-bhyam. 
G.  L.  ad-at-ds. 

Plural:  N.  ad-dnt-as.  V.  ad-ant-as.  A.  ad-at-ds.  I.  ad-dd-bhis.  D.  Ab.  ad- 
dd-bhyas.  G.  ad-at-dm.  L.  ad-at-sti. 

The  neuter  differs  only  in  the  N.  A.  V.  of  all  numbers :  Sing. :  N.  A.  ad-dt; 
V.  dd-at.  Du.:  N.  A.  ad-at-i.  PL:  N.  A.  ad-ant-i. 

A.  Consonant  Stems. 

296.  Among  these  stems  there  are  none  ending  in  gutturals3  and  only 

two  ending  in  the  cerebral  d.  Those  which  end  in  the  labials  p,  bh,  m  are 
fairly  numerous.  The  majority  end  in  dentals,  the  only  class  of  consonants 
in  which  every  sound  contained  in  the  group  ( t ,  t/i,  d,  dh,  n)  is  represented. 
Of  the  semivowels,  y  is  represented  by  one  stem,  v  by  three  stems,  and  r 

by  a  large  number  of  stems.  There  are  many  stems  ending  in  the  sibilants 

s',  s,  s,  and  several  in  the  breathing  h  as  representative  of  both  a  new  and 
an  old  palatal. 

1.  Palatal  Stems. 

297.  1.  Radical  stems  in  -c.  —  All  uncompounded  stems  (being 

of  course  monosyllabic)  are,  with  very  few  isolated  exceptions,  feminine 

substantives.  The  exceptions  are:  tvdc-  ‘skin’,  otherwise  f.,  occurs  twice  in 
the  L.  sing,  tvaci  as  a  m. ;  arc-,  in  its  only  occurrence,  I.  sing,  arc-d,  is  a 
m.  adj.  in  the  sense  of  ‘shining’;  and  krimc-,  ‘curlew’  (VS.)  is  a  m.  sub¬ 
stantive. 

Compounds,  as  being  adjectives,  are  often  m.;  but  excepting  those 
formed  with  anc-  the  only  n.  is  a-prk  (from  prc-  ‘mix’),  used  adverbially. 
Compounds  ending  in  - anc 4  regularly  distinguish  strong  and  weak  forms. 
This  distinction  elsewhere  appears  to  a  limited  extent  only  in  compounds 
ending  in  the  three  roots  vyac-  ‘extend’,  vac-  ‘speak’,  sac-  ‘accompany’:  the 
first  by  nasalization  in  uru-vydncam 5  ‘far-extending’,  the  other  two  by 
lengthening  the  radical  vowel  in  several  compounds. 


1  Though  in  origin  a  radical  element, 
•aiic  is  practically  a  suffix;  cp.  298. 

2  The  voc.  sing.,  however,  generally 
assumes  a  somewhat  shortened  form  owing 
to  the  accent  invariably  shifting  to  the 
initial  syllable  in  this  case. 

3  The  gutturals  as  finals  of  nominal  stems 

having  become  the  new  palatals  c,j 2  and  /z2 


(as  distinguished  from  the  old  palatals  /r 
and  fc). 

4  These  compounds  formed  with  the  root 
anc-  will,  owing  to  the  peculiar  changes 
which  the  stem  undergoes,  be  treated  apart 
from  other  words  ending  in  radical  c. 

5  Through  the  influence  of  compounds 
formed  with  mhc,  like  praty-dhcam. 


i8o  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Yedic  Grammar. 


Inflexion. 

The  forms  actually  occurring,  if  made  from  vie-  f.  ‘speech’,  would  be 
the  following: 

I.  vaci.  D.  vaci.  Ab.  G.  vacas.  L.  vaci.  — 
I.  vagbhyim  (VS.).  — -  Plur.:  N.  V.  vicas. 
D.  vagbhyds  (VS).  Ab.  vagbhyds  (A V.). 


Sing.:  N.  V.  vdk.  A.  vacant. 

Dual :  N.  A.  V.  vied  and  vicau. 

A.  vicas  and  vacas.  I.  vagbhis. 

G.  vacim. 

a.  The  forms  actually  occurring  are: 

Sing.  N.  f.  rk  (A V.)  ‘stanza’,  tvdk  ‘skin’,  vik  ‘speech’,  silk  (A V.  VS.) 
‘flame’,  sriik  ‘ladle’;  ni-niruk  (AV.)  ‘sunset’,  purusa-vik  (VS.  xxiv.  33)  ‘human¬ 
voiced’,  puro-ruk  (TS.vii.  3. 131)  ‘forward  light’,  sam-vik  (VS.  ix.  12)  ‘argument’. 
—  m.  kriih  (VS.  xix.43)  ‘curlew’;  anrta-vik  (AV.)  ‘speaking  untruth’,  upa-prk 
‘adhering  to’,  tri-suk  (VS.  xxxvm.  22)  ‘having  triple  light’,  yata-sruk  ‘extending 
the  ladle’,  sUrya-tvak  (AV.)  ‘having  a  covering  (bright)  as  the  sun’,  hiranya- 
tvak  ‘coated  with  gold’. 

A.  f.  ream ,  tvacam ,  ritcam  (VS.  TS.)  ‘lustre’,  vicam ,  sue  am  (AV.), 
sic  am  ‘hem’,  sriicam  (AV.);  d-sicam  ‘oblation’,  vi-mucam  ‘unyoking’,  sirya- 
tvacam.  —  m.  amho-miicam  ‘delivering  from  distress’,  adrogha-vacam  ‘free 
from  treacherous  speech’,  kuya-vacam  ‘speaking  ill’,  tanu-rucam  ‘brilliant  in 
person’,  dhdnarcam  ‘shining  (ream)  with  booty’,  puro-rucam  ‘shining  in  front’, 
madhu-pream  ‘dispensing  sweetness’,  mrdhrd-vacam  ‘speaking  injuriously’,  su- 
riicam  ‘shining  brightly’,  su-vicam  ‘very  eloquent’,  sirya-tvacam  (Kh.  iv.  63). 
With  strengthened  stem:  uru-vyaheam;  satya-vicam  ‘truth- speaking’;  apatya- 
sicam  ‘accompanied  with  offspring’,  abhi-sdeam  ‘accompanying’,  drona-sicam 
‘clinging  to  the  trough’,  dhdma-sicam  ‘keeping  his  place’,  rdti-sicam  ‘bestowing 
gifts’.  —  n.  (adv.)  a-prk  ‘in  a  mixed  manner’. 

I.  f.  red,  tvaci ,  mrei  ‘injury’,  rued,  vded,  sued,  siei,  sruci ;  puro-nied 
(VS. xx.  36)  ‘forward  light’,  su-ruca. — -m.  arci  ‘shining’;  uru-vyacd ,  sirya-tvacd. 

D.f.  rce  (VS.xiii.  39),  tuee1, offspring’,  tvaci  (AV.),  nice,  vaci  (VS.xxn.  23), 
suci  (VS.  xxxix.  12);  uru-vydee  (AV.).  —  m.  amho-muce  (TS.  1.  6.  123),  udyata- 
sruce  ‘extending  the  ladle’,  yatd-sruce,  visva-siice  ‘all-enlightening’. 

Ab.  f.  tvacds,  s needs  (AV.  VS.);  ni-mrucas . 

G.  f.  reds,  tvacds,  vacas;  vi-mucas  ( napdt ,  V.).  —  m.  puru-riicas  ‘shining 
brightly’,  su-rucas. 

L.  f.  tvaci,  vaci,  sruci;  a-tuci  ‘evening’,  ud-rci  ‘end’,  ni-mruci,  vi-vdei 
‘crying  aloud’.  —  m.  tvaci  ‘skin’  (ix.  69 3,  10116). 

V.  m.  akrtta-ruk  ‘possessing  unimpaired  lustre’  (x.  84 4). 

Du.  N.  A.  V.  f.  vicau,  sicau;  ghrta-prca  ‘sprinkling  fatness’,  tanu-riicd. 
—  With  strengthened  stem:  satya-vied.  —  m.  kruncau  (VS.  xxx.  6); 
tanu-riicd,  yatd-sruca,  su-vied;  sam-preau  (VS.  ix.  4)  ‘united’. 

I.  m.  ati-riigbhyam  (VS.  xxv.  3)  ‘fetlocks’. 

PI.  N.  f.  rcas,  preas  ‘food’,  ritcas ,  vacas,  sicas  (AV.),  sriicas 1 ;  a-preas 
‘filling’  (vm.  40 9)2,  divo-riicas  ‘shining  from  heaven’,  ni-mrucas  (AV.  VS.), 
vi-miicas  (AV.),  V.  bhadra-vacas  ‘speaking  auspiciously’.  —  m.  dudhrd-vacas 
‘speaking  confusedly’,  yatd-srucas ,  vasu-rueas  ‘bright  as  the  Vasus’,  vi-preas 
(VS.  xix.  1 1)  ‘parted’,  vi-vdeas,  sam-sicas  (AV.)  ‘shedding  together’,  sam-preas 
(VS.  xix.  11),  su-riicas,  su-vicas,  suktd-vacas  ‘uttering  good  speech’,  V.  surya- 
tvacas.  —  With  strengthened  stem:  abhi-sicas ,  dyajha-sacas  ‘not  performing 
sacrifice’,  drogha-vicas  ‘speaking  maliciously’,  V.  nr-sdeas  ‘befriending  men’, 


*  AV. 


srueds. 


once  (xix.  422)  with  wrong  accent  2  According  to  BR.,  infinitive  of  a-pre- 

‘satiate  oneself. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Consonant  Stems.  181 


ranya-vdcas  ‘speaking  agreeably’,  rayi-sdcas  ‘possessing  wealth’,  rdii-sdcas , 
satya-vdcas ,  smad-rati-sacas  ‘attended  by  liberal  men’,  hari-sdcas  ‘occupied 
with  the  tawny  (Soma)’. 

A.  f.  rucas ,  vdcas  and  (once)  vacds ,  sheas  (AV.),  wVzzt  (AV.),  sn'icas 
and  (once)  srucds  (A V.) ;  dur-vficas  (AV.)  ‘having  a  bad  voice’,  mrdhrd-vacas , 
su-riicas.  —  m.  an-fcas  ‘hymnless’,  a-rucas  ‘lustreless’,  mrdhrd-vacas ,  vddhri- 
vdcas  ‘talking  idly’,  vi-vacas. 

I.  f.  rgbhis.  —  D.  f.  srugbhyas  (VS.  n.  i).  —  Ab.  f.  rgbhyds  (AV.)  — 
G.  f.  rcdm ,  tvacfim  (AV.);  madhu-pfcam  (AV.). 

298.  Stems  in  -firfic.  A  considerable  number  of  compounds  is  formed 
by  adding  as  final  member  the  root  anc-  ‘bend’,  which  almost  assumes  the 
character  of  a  suffix 1  expressing  the  meaning  of ‘-ward’;  e.  g.prdhc-  (— prd-ahc-) 
‘for-ward’.  Strong  and  weak  forms  are  regularly  distinguished,  the  nasal 
which  appears  in  the  former  being  always  lost  in  the  latter.  If  -ahc  is 
preceded  by  a  word  ending  in  i  or  u,  the  syllables  ya  and  va  thus  produced 
are  further  weakened  to  T  and  u  before  vowel  endings,  and  if  bearing  the  accent, 
shift  it  to  those  endings2;  e.  g.  Sing.  A.  m. pratyahcam,  N.  n.  pratyak,  G. pratlcds. 

In  these  compounds  -ahc  is  added  to  words  ending  in  1.  a,  with  which  it  coalesces  : 
adharahc-  ‘tending  downward’  (adhara-)3,  apdhc-  ‘backward’  ( dpa ),  arvahc-  ‘hitherward’ 
(arvd-),  avanc-  ‘downward’  ( ava ),  asmatrdnc -  ‘turned  toward  us’,  ghrtdhc- 4  ‘filled  with 
ghee’  ( ghrta -),  devahc-  ‘directed  toward  the  gods’  [deva-),  parade-  ‘turned  away’  (para), 
prahe-  ‘forward’  {pra\  visvdhc-  ‘universal’  (visva-)  5,  satrdhc-  ‘going  together’  ( saira)6 . 
2.  -i  :  akudhryanc-  7  ‘going  nowhere’  ( aku-dhri -),  asmadryanc-  ‘turned  towards  us’  {as??iad-r'i-)l , 
udanc- 8  ‘turned  upward’  (ud),  kadryahc-1  (turned  towards  what’  pad-),  tirydne-  ‘going 
across’  {iiri-)  9,  aadhydne-  ‘sprinkling  curds’  {dad hi-),  deradryanc-  7  ‘turned  towards  the  gods’ 
( devd -),  nydne-  ‘turned  down’  [id),  pratyahe-  ‘turned  towards’  {prali),  madrydhc-  7  ‘turned 
towards  me’  ( mad-ri -),  visva  dry  ah  c-  ‘going  everywhere’  ( visn-a-dri -),  svilyauc-  ‘whitish’ 
( ivit-i -),  sadhryauc-l  ‘coming  together’  ( sa-dhri -  ‘the  same  goal’),  samydhc-  ‘going  together’ 
[sam-i-).  3.  -u:  anvahe-  ‘going  after’  ( anu ),  rjvduc-  ‘moving  straight  forward’  (rju-),  visvahe- 

■going  in  all  directions’  ( visa -),  svahe-  ‘going  well’  (su).  The  two  feminines  puriic-t- 
‘abundant’  and  tiruc-i-  ‘far-reaching’  presuppose  similar  stems  ( ppuru-dhc -  and  *uru-dhc-). 

Inflexion. 

299.  These  stems  are  inflected  in  the  m.  and  n.  only,  as  they  form  a 
f.  in  -T  from  the  weak  or  contracted  stem,  e.  g.  prdne-,  f.  prdc-I-;  pratyahe -, 
f.  pratlc-i-.  The  only  cases  occurring  in  the  pi.  are  the  N.  A.  and  in  the 
du.  the  N.  A.  and  L. 

The  forms  actually  found,  if  made  from  pratyahe -,  would  be  as  follows: 
Sing.  N.  m.  pratydh ,  n.  pratydk.  A.  m.  pratydheam.  I.  praticd.  D.  pratTce. 
Ab.  G.  pratieds.  L.  pratici.  —  Du.  N.  A.  m.  praty dried,  pratydheau  (AV.), 
n.  pratici .  L.  m.  pratlcds.  —  PL  N.  m.  pratydheas .  A.  m.  pratlcds  and 
praticas  (AV.). 

a.  The  forms  actually  occurring  are  the  following: 

Sing.  N.  m.  adhardh  (AV.),  apah ,  arvdh ,  avail  (TS.m.  2.  53 4 5),  udah^ AV.), 


1  Cp.  Whitney  407;  Lindner,  Nominal- 
bildung,  Addenda  p.  167,  prefers  to  treat 
■ahe  as  a  suffix. 

2  The  accent  is  similarly  shifted  to  the 
suffix  with  which  the  f.  of  these  stems  is 
formed  (cp.  86  B  11,  p.  87)).  This  rule  of 
accentuation  applies  to  the  RV.  only,  not  to 
the  later  Samhitas;  cp.  A.  pi.  below  (p.  182). 

3  With  shifted  accent. 

4  In  this  and  some  other  of  these  com¬ 
pounds  only  the  weak  unnasalized  form  of 
the  stem  occurs. 

5  With  shift  of  accent. 


o  The  f.  nardc-t-  (AV.),  N.  of  a  plant,  is 
doubtless  based  on  a  similar  stem  formed 
from  ndra-  ‘man’,  with  shift  of  accent. 

7  The  suffix  -ri-  in  these  compounds 
perhaps  spread  from  sadhri-ahc -  (the  dh  also 
to  akudhryanc-),  while  the  d  of  deva-diydhc- 
and  visvadryahe-  may  be  due  to  the  pro¬ 
nominal  forms  mad-  and  asm  ad-. 

8  The  weak  stem  udic-  being  formed  as 
if  from  *ud-i-anc-. 

9  tiri-  appearing  instead  of  tiras-  ‘across’ 
from  which  the  weak  stem  tirasc-  (=  liras- ac-) 
is  formed. 


I  82 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


tiryan  (AV.),  dadhydh T,  pctran  (AV.),  pratydn1  2,  prdii ,  visvafi ,  sadhryah 

(AV.),  su-prdn .  —  n.  Nearly  all  the  following  forms  are  used  adverbially: 
akudhryak ,  adhardk  (AV.),  dpak ,  arvak  and  arvdk  (AV.),  asmadryak ,  udak , 
tiryak  (AV.),  nyak,  pdrak  (AV.),  pratydk ,  prdk ,  madrycik ,  vtsvak,  visvadryak , 
sadhryak ,  samyak 3. 

A.  m.  adharahcam  (AV.),  ahvancam  (AV.),  dpancam  (AV.),  arvdncam , 
udahcam ,  tirydncam  (VS.  x.  8),  nyancam ,  pdrancam  (AV.),  pratydncam , 
prdncam ,  madryancam ,  visvcinccim ,  samydncam ,  svdncam . 

I.  m.  arvdca.  —  n.  devadrica ,  satrdcd;  used  adverbially  with  shifted 
accent:  ti rased,  riled ,  pracd 4. 

D.  m.  dad/nce \  svitlce.  —  Ab.  m.  pratlcds.  —  G.  m.  dadhlcds ,  visa  die  as 5. 
—  L.  rn.  prdci. 

Du.  N.  A.  m.  dpaneau  (AV.),  arvdhca  and  arvancau  (AV.),  visvancau 
(AV.),  sadhryanca ,  samydnea  and  samydneau  (AV.  VS.).  —  n.  pratlci ,  samlet 
(VS.  1.  31,  TS.  iv.  1.  3  2).  —  L.  m.  visiicos. 

PL  N.  m.  adhardneas  (AV.),  dpancas  (AV.),  arvdneas 6,  asmatrdheas , 
asmadryancas,  udancas ,  rjvahcas ,  tirydheas  (AV.),  parade  as,  pratyancas , 
prdneas ,  z nsvaneas,  svitydneas1 ,  sadhryancas,  samydneas ,  svdncas. 

A.  m.  adhardcas ,  anueds  and  arnicas  (AV.),  dpacas ,  arvdeas ,  dvacas , 
udlcas ,  77/azx  (AV.),  pdracas,  pratlcds  and  pratteas  (AV.),  prdeas,  visucas , 
satrdcas. 

300.  Radical  stem  in  -cA.  —  Only  one  stem  ending  in  eh,  which  occurs 
in  a  single  form  as  a  noun,  has  been  found.  This  is  made  from  the  root 
prcch-  ‘ask’,  in  the  compound  N.  du.  m.  bandhu-prcch-ct  ‘asking  after  kinsmen’. 
The  D.  and  A.  of  the  same  stem  also  appear  as  infinitives  in  the  forms 
preehe  ‘to  ask’,  sam-prcche  ‘to  greet’;  vi-prccham  and  sam-prccham  ‘to  ask’. 

301.  Stems  in  radical  -y.  —  These  stems  are  inflected  in  all  three 
genders  alike.  The  neuter  would  of  course  differ  in  N.  A.  V.  dual  and  plural, 
but  these  forms  do  not  occur.  When  uncompounded  these  stems  are 
f.  substantives  except  jvy-  and  rdj-,  which  appear  as  m.  also;  bhrdj-,  which 
occurs  as  a  m.  adj.  as  well  as  a  f.  substantive;  aj -,  which  is  found  once 
(AV.)8,  and  vij-  twice  as  a  m.  only.  Neuter  cases  occur  from  bhdj-,  yi'ij 
rdj-  and  vrj-  as  final  members  of  adj.  compounds,  but  no  distinctively 
neuter  forms  (N.  A.V.  du.  pi.)  are  met  with  even  here. 

The  only  stem  showing  traces  of  the  distinction  of  strong  and  weak 
cases  is  ydj-,  which  has  the  nasalized  form  yunj-  beside  the  unaltered  stem 
in  the  N.  A.  sing,  and  du. 

In  the  N.  sing,  the  /,  when  derived  from  a  guttural,  appears  as  /£,  but 
when  it  represents  an  old  palatal,  it  becomes  the  cerebral  /  except  in  rtv-ij 9 
‘priest’;  but  before  the  of  the  L.  pi.  both  alike10  become  Z\ 


1  On  the  doubling  of  the  h  before  vowels, 
see  Lanman  456. 

2  pratyahk -  before  in  TS.  1.  8.  21 x. 

3  The  forms  tvadrik ,  madrik and  madryadrik, 
yuvadrik ,  ‘towards  thee,  —  me,  —  you’,  are 
doubtless  shortened  forms  of  - dryak ,  which 
pronunciation  is  favoured  by  the  metre  in 
some  instances :  Lanman  456  (bottom). 

4  pracd  is  probably  used  adverbially  in 
in.  31”  also.  As  an  adj.  the  form,  being  a 
compound,  would  be  accented  pracd. 

5  N.  of  a  demon,  formed  with  from 

visva-,  an  extension  oivisu-,  as  in  visva-drydne- . 


6  The  weak  form  arvdeas  seems  to  be 
used  for  arvdneas  in  vii.  4S1. 

7  A  transition  form,  N.  m.  svifleayas  (x. 46' ) 
=  svitydneas,  is  made  from  an  z-  stem 
svitlci -  based  on  the  regular  f.  svitlcl-. 

8  In  AV.  xix.  505,  where  the  reading 
djam  is  somewhat  doubtful;  see  Whitney’s 
note. 

9  Which  is  derived  from  yaj ■  ‘sacrifice’  : 
rtu-ij -  ‘sacrificing  in  due  season’. 

See  above  34,  I. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Consonant  Stems.  183 


Inflexion. 

302.  Sing.  N.  1.  with  -k\  m.  yuii 1  (VS.  x.  25)  ‘associate’;  a-bhuk  ‘not 
having  enjoyed’,  ardha-bhdlz  (AV.)  ‘sharer’,  rta-yuk  ‘duly  harnessed’,  rtv-ik 
‘priest’,  ghrta-nirnik  ‘having  a  garment  of  fat',  candrd-nirnik  ‘having  a  brilliant 
garment’,  para-vfk  ‘outcast’,  b/ii-sdk2  ‘healing’,  sata-bhisak  (AV.)  ‘requiring 
a  hundred  physicians’,  sam-vrk  ‘overpowering’,  sa-yuk  ‘companion’,  hiranya- 
sralz  (AV.)  ‘having  a  golden  garland’. —  f.  ftrk  (VS.  iv.  10)  ‘vigour’,  nir-nik 3 
‘bright  garment’,  hiranya-nirnik.  —  n.  N.  A.  sv-d-vrk  ‘easily  acquired’,  su-yuk 
‘well-joined’  (adv.). 

2.  with  - i :  m.  bhrdt 4  ‘shining’,  rdt  ‘king’;  elza-rdt  ‘monarch’,  jana-rdt 
(VS.  v.  24)  ‘lord  of  men’,  vane-rdt  ‘shining  in  a  wood’,  vi-bhrdt  ‘resplendent’, 
vi-rdt  ‘ruling  far  and  wide’,  visva-bhrdt  ‘all-illuminatingf  satra-rdt  (VS.  v.  2 ) 
‘king  of  a  Soma  sacrifice’,  sam-rdt  ‘universal  ruler’,  sarva-rdt  (VS.  v.  24) 
‘ruler  of  all’,  sva-rdt  ‘self-ruler’.  —  With  anomalous  loss  of  the  final  of  the 
root  and  retention  of  the  N.  -s:  dva-yas 5  (1.  1625),  a  priest  who  offers  the 
share  of  the  oblation  ( ava-ydj -).  —  f.  rdt  ‘mistress’;  vi-rdt.  —  With  anomalous 
loss  of  the  final  of  the  root  (yaj-)  and  retention  of  the  N.  -s:  ava-yds 6 
‘share  of  the  sacrificial  oblation’  (1.  1 7  3 1 2) • 

A.  m.  ajam  (AV.)  ‘driver’,  y unjam 7,  yujam ;  rtv-ijam ,  jyestha-rdjam 
‘sovereign’,  tri-bhujam  (AV.)  ‘threefold’,  deva-ydjam  (VS.  1.  17)  ‘sacrificing  to 
the  gods’,  pard-vrjam ,  puskara-srajam  (VS.  11.  33)  ‘wearing  a  lotus  wreath’, 
purva-bhajam  ‘first  sharer’,  prtandjam  ‘rushing  (-ajam)  to  battle’,  praihama- 
bhdjani  ‘receiving  the  first  share’,  prdtar-yujam  ‘yoking  early’,  bhi-sdjam  (VS. 
xxviii.  9),  yuva-yujam  ‘yoked  by  both  of  you’,  ratha-yujam  ‘yoking  to  a  chariot’, 
vi-rdjam ,  sapha-rujam  ‘destroying  with  hoofs’,  satya-ydjam  ‘worshipping  truly’, 
sam-rdjam ,  sa-yuja?n,  su-tydjam  ‘easily  letting  loose’,  su-ydjam  ‘worshipping 
well’,  su-yujam  ‘well-yoked’,  su-srdjam  (AV.)  ‘wearing  a  beautiful  garland’, 
sva-rdjam ,  sva-vrjam  ‘appropriating  to  oneself’.  —  f.  fir  jam ,  tujam  ‘offspring’, 
bhitjam  ‘enjoyment,  bhrdjam  (VS. iv.  17)  ‘splendour’,  srdjam  ‘garland’;  upa- 
spijam 8  (x.  88 l8)  ‘emulation’,  nir-mjam ,  pari-vrjam  ‘avoiding’,  pra-yujam 
(VS.  xi.  66)  ‘impulse’,  mano-yujam  ‘yoked  by  thought’,  vi-rdjam ,  sa/idsra- 
nirnijam  ‘having  a  thousand  adornments’,  sva-rdjam  (AV.). 

I.  m.  yujd ;  bhi-saja  (VS.  AV.),  mano-yuja ,  vaco-yuja  ‘yoked  by  a  mere 
word’,  sa-yujd  (AV.),  sahdsra-nirnija,  su-ydja  (VS.  TS.)  ‘good  sacrifice’, 
su-yuja.  —  f.  urjd ,  tujd ,  bhrajd  ‘lustre’;  nir-nija ,  mano-yuja  (AV.),  vi-rdja.  — 
n.  svatra-bhdja  ‘strengthening’. 

D.  m.  qvqff  (AV.);  mrta-bhrajd*  (AV.)  ‘whose  virility  is  dead’,  rakso-yuje 
‘associated  with  demons’,  vi-rdje  (VS.  AV.),  sam-rdje ,  sva-rdje10.  —  f.  z7r//, 
/zz//1  T,  bhuje ’;  nir-nije .  —  Ab.  m.  yujds;  vi-rdjas.  —  f.  nir-nijas. 

G.  m.  sam-rdjas ,  sva-rdjas.  —  f.  fir j as,  bhrajds  12  (AV.)  ‘virility’,  yujds; 
pra-yujas  ‘team’,  ratna-bhdjas  ‘dispensing  gifts’,  vi-rdjas  (AV.)  —  n.  sva-rdjas. 


1  For  yunk\  cp.  VPr.  iv.  104. 

2  Probably  ‘one  who  conjures’,  cp.  in  the 
later  language,  abhi-sajati  ‘utters  an  impre¬ 
cation’;  cp.  Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  p.  8, 
bottom;  Uhlenbeck,  Etymologisches  Wor- 
terbuch,  rejects  this  etymology  in  favour 
of  a  derivation  connected  with  Av.  wVf 
‘healing’. 

3  From  nir-nij-  ‘wash  out’. 

4  There  is  also  the  transition  form 
bhrajd-s  (ix.  170^). 

5  See  Lanman  463. 

6  See  above  66  c  j3  (p.  61). 


7  Strong  form  (301). 

8  According  to  Sayana,  used  adverbially 
in  the  sense  of  ‘emulously’. 

9  -bhraj-  is  probably  a  reduced  form  of 
bhraj- :  cp.  the  later  meaning  of  tejas - 
‘lustre’. 

10  There  is  also  the  transfer  form  bhrdjdya 
(VS.  VIII.  40)  ‘for  the  bright  one’. 

11  There  is  also  the  transfer  form  tujaye 
(v.  467)  from  tuj-i-. 

12  Probably  a  reduced  form  of  bhrdj- 
‘lustre’.  Cp.  Whitney  on  AV.  vii.  902. 


184  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  Vedic  Grammar. 

L.  m.  dsva-nirniji  ‘adorned  with  horses’.  —  f.  sam-srji  ‘collision’. 

V.  m.  ghrta-nirnik ,  sam-rat. 

Du.  N.  A.  V.  m.  yunja  x,  yujd ;  rtv-jd ,  tanu-tyajd  ‘risking  one’s  life’, 
puru-bhujd  (V.)  ‘enjoying  much’,  puskara-srajd ,  prdtar-yujd ,  brahma-yuja 
‘harnessed  by  prayer’,  bhi-sajd ,  mano-yu/a  (VS.  AV.),  vaco-yujd ,  sam-raja , 
sa-yuja ,  sdkam-yu/d  ‘joined  together’,  su-yitjd ;  anu-vrjau  (AV.)  a  part  of  the 
body  near  the  ribs,  apna-rdjau  ‘ruling  over  wealth’  ( apna -  =  apnas ),  bhi-sajau 
(V.),  sam-rdjau ,  sa-yujau  (AV.),  su-yujau  (AV.).  —  f.  asva-yujau  (AV.) 
‘harnessing  horses’. 

D.  m.  bhi-sdgbhyam  (AV.).  —  G.  m.  sam-rdjos. 

PI.  N.  m.  yujas ;  d-yujas  (AV.)  ‘joining  on’,  rtv-jas ,  V.  rtv-ijas  (AV.), 
krta-dhvajas  ‘furnished  with  banners’,  giri-bhrdjas1  2  ‘glittering  on  the  mountains’, 
ghrtd-nirnijcis ,  tanu-tydjas ,  divi-ydjas  ‘worshipping  in  heaven’,  dur-yujas 
‘difficult  to  be  yoked’,  nih-srjas  ‘pouring  out’,  pitu-bhdjas  ‘enjoying  food’, 
purva-bhdjas ,  prta?idjas  (-a/as),  pra-yujas  (AV.),  brahma-yuj as ,  b/ii-sdjas ,  mano- 
ydjas ,  mitra-yujas  ‘joined  in  friendship’,  ratha-yujas ,  varsd-nirnijas  ‘clothed 
with  rain’,  vdma-bhdjas  ‘partaking  of  goods’,  visva-srjas  (AV.)  ‘all-creating’, 
sam-rdjas,  V.  sam-rdjas ,  su-yujas ,  sva-yujas  ‘allies’,  sva-rdjas,  hdrita-srajas  (AV.) 
‘wearing  yellow  garlands’.  —  f.  firjas,  tujas ,  bhujas ;  abhi-yujas  ‘assailants’, 
go-bhdjas  ‘bestowing  cows’,  nir-nijas ,  prksa-prayajas  ‘in  which  oblations  begin 
to  be  offered’,  pra-yujas ,  vi-rdjas  (VS.  xvn.  3),  stana-bhujas 3  ‘enjoying  the 
udder’,  sv-d-yujas  ‘easy  to  yoke’. 

A.  m.  vfjas  ‘stakes’  (at  play);  adhi-nirnij as  ‘covered  over’,  asva-yujas , 
catur-yujas  ‘yoked  as  (a  team  of)  four’,  saphd-rujas ,  sa-yujas ,  su-yujas.  — 
f.  ////hx,  bhujas ,  srajas;  abhi-yujas. 

I.  m.  aruna-yugbhis  ‘furnished  with  ruddy  (rays)’,  rta-yugbhis ,  vi-yi'igbhis 4 
(AV.),  su-yugbhis,  sva-yugbhis. 

D.  f.  pra-yugbhyas  (VS.xxx.  8)  ‘impulses’.  —  Ab.  m.  bhi-sdgbhyas  (AV.)  — 
G.  m.  r tv- jam,  bhi-sajam.  —  f.  urjdm ,  bhujdm\  nir-majdm 5.  —  L.  f.  sraksu ; 
pra-ydksu  (AV.)  ‘offerings’6. 

303.  Stems  in  derivative  -j.  —  There  are  seven  m.  and  f.  adjectives 
or  substantives  formed  with  the  suffixes  -<2/  and  -ij\  d-svapnaj-  ‘sleepless’, 
trsndj-  ‘thirsty’,  dhrsaj-  ‘bold’,  sandj-  ‘old’;  us-j  ’desiring’,  bhur-ij-  f.  ‘arm’, 
vaii-ij-  m.  ‘trader’.  There  is  also  the  n.  dsrj-7  ‘blood’,  which  is  of  obscure 
etymology,  but  the  -j  of  which  is  probably  a  reduced  suffix.  The  forms 
occurring  are  the  following: 

Sing.  N.  m.  usik ,  vanik.  —  n.  tfbri.  —  A.  m.  us  jam,  trsndjam ,  van  jam 
(AV.)  —  I.  usijd  (VS.  xv.  6)  ‘ghee’.  —  D.  m.  trsndj e,  vanje.  — -  G.  m.  us'i/as. 

Du.  N.  f.  sand/a.  —  G.  f.  bhurjos.  —  L.  f.  bhurjos. 

PI.  N.  m.  zisjas,  trsnajas,  a-trsnajas ,  dhrsdjas,  a-svapnajas.  —  f.  usjas.  — 
A.  m.  usjas.  —  I.  m.  usigbhis.  —  D.  m.  usigbhyas.  —  G.  usjd?n. 

2.  Cerebral  Stems. 

304.  There  is  only  one  doubtful  derivative  stem  in  raghdt-,  which 
occurs  in  the  single  form  raghdtas  (AV.  vm.  724),  possibly  a  mistake  for 
raghavas 8  ‘swift’. 


1  Strong  form  (301). 

2  Occurring  once  (x.  681),  bhraj -  being  a 
reduced  form  of  bhraj--,  cp.D.m.  mrta-bhraje, 
G.  f.  bhraj  as  (AV.);  cp.  p.  183,  notes  9  and  I2. 

3  The  Pada  text  reads  siana-bhujas. 

4  See  Whitney’s  note  on  AV.  vn.  41. 

5  A  word  of  doubtful  derivation  and 

meaning,  occurring  only  once  (vm.  420). 


^  The  corresponding  form  is  pra-ydtsu  in 
TS.  iv.  1.  81  and  VS.  xxvil.  14. 

7  Cp.  Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  p.  559, 
560. 

8  See  Lanman  466,  and  Whitney,  note 
on  AV.  vm.  724. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Consonant  Stems.  185 

There  are  besides  only  two  radical  stems  ending  in  -*/,  id- 1  ‘praise’, 
and  id-2  ‘refreshment’.  Of  the  former  occurs  only  the  sing.  I.  Tdd ;  of  the 
latter  only  the  sing.  I.  ida  and  the  G.  id  as 3. 

3.  Dental  Stems. 

305.  Stems  ending  in  all  the  dental  mutes  as  well  as  the  nasal  are  of 
frequent  occurrence  except  those  in  -th.  There  are  radical  stems  ending  in 
each  of  the  dentals,  but  no  derivative  stems  in  -th  or  - dh .  The  distinction 
of  strong  and  weak  appears  with  slight  exceptions  only  in  the  derivative 
stems  in  - ant  and  -an. 

306.  Stems  in  radical  -t.  —  The  only  four  monosyllabic  stems  occurring 
are  feminine  substantives:  dyiit-  ‘splendour’,  nft-  ‘dancing’,  pft-  ‘battle’,  vft- 4 
‘hostile  array’.  There  are  also  two  reduplicated  stems,  which  are  primarily 
adjectives:  cikit-  ‘knowing’  ( ] f c it-)  and  didyiit-  ‘shining’.  The  rest  are  com¬ 
pounds,  used  mostly  in  the  masculine  or  feminine.  Neuter  cases  occur  from 
only  four  of  them:  aksi-pat-  ‘falling  into  the  eye’,  an-apa-vrt-  ‘not  turning 
away’,  tri-vft-  ‘three-fold’,  sam-yat- 5  ‘continuous’. 

Inflexion. 

The  forms  occurring  would,  if  made  from  tri-vft -,  be  as  follows: 

Sing.  N.  m.  f.  tri-vft  (also  n.).  —  A.  m.  f.  tri-vftam.  —  I.  m.  f.  tri-vftd 
(also  n.).  —  D.  m.  f.  tri-vfte.  —  Ab.  G.  m.  f.  tri-vftas.  —  L.  n.  tri-vfti  (AV.). 

Du.  N.  A.  m.  f.  tri-vfta ,  tri-vftau.  —  L.  f.  tri-vftos. 

PI.  N.  A.  m.  f.  tri-vftas.  —  I.  n.  tri-vfdbhis  (AV.).  —  G.  m.  f.  tri-vftam. 
—  L.  f.  tri-vftsu.  —  V.  m.  f.  tri-vrtas. 

The  forms  actually  ocurring  are  the  following: 

Sing.  N.  m.  and-vft  ‘not  returning’,  dbandhu-krt 0  (AV.)  ‘not  cutting  off 
kin’,  eka-vft  { AV.)  ‘one-fold’,  ‘simple’,  cikit  ‘knowing’,  tri-vft  (VS.  x.  10)  ‘triple’, 
pra-vft  (VS.  xv.  9),  manas-cit  ‘thinking  in  the  mind’,  mula-kft  (AV.)  ‘cutting 
roots’,  vipas-cit  ‘inspired’,  vi-vft  (VS.xv.9),  visu-vft  ‘rolling  in  various  directions’, 
sa-vft  (VS.  xv.  9),  su-vft  ‘turning  well’.  —  f.  clt  (VS.1v.19)  ‘thought’;  apa-cit 
(AV.)  a  noxious  insect,  didyut  ‘shining’,  vi-dyut  ‘flashing’.  —  n.  eka-vft  (AV.), 
tri-vft \  as  adv.  aksi-pdt  ‘a  little’  and  anapa-vrt  ‘unremittingly’. 

A.  m.  a-citam  ‘unthinking’,  eka-vftam  (AV.),  ghrta-sciitam  ‘sprinkling 
ghee’,  tri-vftam ,  dus-citam  (AV.)  ‘thinking  evil’,  madhu-scutam  ‘distilling 
sweetness’,  vipas-citam ,  visu-vftam ,  su-vft  am,  huras-citam  ‘plotting  deceit’.  — 
f.  dyutam ,  vftam ;  d-vftam  ‘turning  home’,  ghrta-sciitam ,  vi-cftam  ‘loosening’, 
vi-dyiitam,  vipas-citam ,  sam-ydtam ,  sam-vftam  (AV.)  ‘approach’,  sam-cftam 
‘union’. 

I.  m.  tri-vfta ,  vipas-cita  (VS.  iv.  32),  su-vftd.  —  f.  dyuta ,  vrtd ;  d-citd 
‘attention’,  ghrta-scutdy  tri-vfta ,  pra-cdtd  ‘with  concealment’  (adv.),  vi-dydta.  — 
n.  sam-ydta ,  tri-vfta  (AV.). 

D.  m.  a-cite ,  tri-vfte  (VS.  xv.  9),  pra-vfte  (VS.  xv.  9),  vipas-cite,  vi-vfte 
(VS.  xv.  9),  sa-vrte  (VS.  xv.  9),  su-dyute.  —  f.  vi-dyute. 

Ab.'  m.  tri-vftas  (VS.  xm.  54),  vi-dyutasT.  —  f.  didyutas. 


1  Cp.  above  17,  5. 

2  Derived  from  is-  ‘refreshment’  which 
is  of  very  frequent  occurrence;  cp.  above 
p.  35,  note  r. 

3  This  form  is  regarded  by  Grassmann  in 
one  passage  (vn.  47 x)  as  an  A.  pi. :  cp. 
Lanman  466. 

4  vft-  occurs  once  in  the  dual  as  a  fem.  ad¬ 

jective. 


5  From  yat -  ‘unite’. 

6  From  kri-  ‘cut’;  but  it  may  be  ‘not 
relative-making’  ( kr-t );  see  Whitney’s  note 
on  AV.  iv.  191. 

7  The  Ab.  didyot  (TS.  I.  8.  141)  and  vidyot 
(VS.  XX.  2)  are  probably  irregular  formations 
due  to  parallelism ;  cp.  Lanman  468. 


1 86  I.  Allgemeines  und  Serache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


G.  m.  tri-vftas ,  vipas-citas,  sa-cltas  ‘wise’,  su-dyutas  ‘shining  beautifully’.  — 
f.  vi-dy utas.  —  L.  n.  tri-vfti  (AV.). 

Du.  N.  A.  V.  m.  vipas-citd  (V.),  isu-kftd 1  (1.  1843).  —  f.  vftau\  a-vftd , 
madhu-scuta ,  vi-cftau  (AV.).  —  L.  f.  vi-cftos  (AV.). 

PI.  N.  m.  a-vftas,  rsti-vidyutas  ‘glittering  with  spears’,  eka-vftas  (AV.), 
ghrta-scutas,  dus-citas  (AV.),  vi-dy  utas,  vipas-citas ,  sam-ydtas ,  silrya-svitas 
‘bright  as  the  sun’,  svd-vidyutas  ‘self-lightning’,  hradum-vrtas  ‘bringing  hail’.  — 
V.  rsti-vidyutas ,  vi-dyutas.  —  N.  f.  apa-citas  (AV.),  a-vrtas  (AV.),  upd-vftas 
(VS.  AV.)  ‘return’,  ghrta-scutas ,  ghrta-scyutas  (VS.  xvn.  3),  madhu-scutas , 
madhu-scyutas  (VS.  xvn.  3),  vi-dyutas ,  sam-ydtas.  —  V.  apa-citas  (AV.). 

A.  m.  a-citas ,  a-dyutas  ‘lacking  brightness’,  ghrta-scutas ,  vipas-citas ,  huras- 
citas.  — •  f.  nftas  (AV.),  vftas ;  tri-vftas  (AV.),  daksina-vftas ,  didyutas ,  puru- 
vftas  (AV.)  ‘moving  in  various  ways’,  madhu-scutas ,  vi-dyutas ,  visu-vftas  (AV)., 
sam-ydtas ,  sam-vftas  (AV.). 

I.  n.  tri-vfdbhis  (AV.).  —  G.  m.  vipas-citdm.  —  f.  apa-citam  (AV.),  z/z- 
dyutam  (AV.).  —  L.  f.  prtsu 2. 

307.  Stems  in  determinative  -f.  —  Derivative  nominal  stems  are 
formed  from  nearly  thirty  roots  ending  in  the  short  vowels  z,  zz  and  r  by 
means  of  the  suffix  -A  The  roots  adding  it  are  z-  ‘go’,  kr-  ‘make’,  Arz-  ‘dwell’, 
^zz-  ‘sound’,  rz-  ‘pile’,  ‘note’,  ryzz-  ‘move’,  ji-  ‘conquer’,  dhr-  ‘hold’,  dhvr-  ‘injure’, 
pi-  ‘swell’,  /z'zz-  ‘flow’,  bhr-  ‘bear’,  mi-  ‘fix’,  jyzz-  ‘join’  and  ‘separate’,  rz-  ‘flow’, 
zv'-  ‘cover’,  /rz-  ‘resort’,  /rzz-  ‘hear’,  ^zz-  ‘press’,  jr-  ‘flow’,  ^/zz-  ‘praise’,  spr-  ‘win’, 
^rzz-  ‘flow’,  /zzz-  ‘sacrifice’,  hr-  ‘take’,  hvr-  or  hru-  ‘be  crooked’.  Two  other 
roots,  ^zzz/z-  ‘go’,  and  han-  ‘strike’,  are  modified  so  as  to  end  in  short  a 
(representing  the  sonant  nasal)  before  adding  the  suffix:  -gd-t  and  hd-t. 

These  stems  are  mostly  m.  and  f.  Neuter  cases  are  very  rare,  occurring 
from  five  or  six  stems  only.  The  inflexion  is  exactly  the  same  as  that  of 
the  stems  in  radical  -t. 

Inflexion. 

308.  Sing.  N.  m.  with  -krt:  anukama-kft  ‘acting  according  to  desire’, 
abhisti-kft  ‘giving  help',  aji-hft  ‘instituting  a  contest’,  isdna-kft  ‘acting  as 
a  lord’,  rsi-kft  ‘making  into  a  seer’,  khaja-krt  ‘causing  the  din  of  battle’, 
jyotis-kft  ‘causing  light’,  tanu-kft  ‘preserving  life’,  pathi-kft  ‘path -making”, 
puru-kft  ‘doing  much’,  purva-kft  (VS.  xx.  36)  ‘active  from  of  old’,  bhadra- 
kft  ‘bestowing  blessings’,  uloka-kft  ‘procuring  free  space’,  vayas-kft  ‘creating 
youthful  vigour’,  varivo-kft  ‘bestowing  freedom’,  vijesa-krt  ‘procuring  victory’, 
su-kft  ‘acting  well’,  steya-kft  ‘committing  theft’,  syona-kft  ‘causing  comfort”, 
svista-kft  (VS.  11.  9)  ‘offering  right  sacrifice’;  with  -jit:  apsu-jit  ‘con¬ 
quering  in  the  waters’,  ab-jit  ‘winning  waters’,  abhimati-jit  (VS.  xxvn.  3) 
‘conquering  foes’,  asva-jit  ‘winning  horses’,  rta-jit  (VS.  xvii.  83)  ‘winner  of 
right’,  go-jit  ‘winning  kine’,  dhana-jit  'winning  booty’,  ranya-jit  ‘winning  in 
battle’,  ratha-jit  ‘winning  chariots’,  visva-jit  ‘all-conquering’,  samsrsta-jit  ‘con¬ 
quering  combatants’,  satya-jit  (VS.  xvii.  83)  'winner  of  truth’,  satrd-jit  ‘wholly 
victorious’,  samarya-jit  ‘winning  battles’,  sahasra-jit  ‘conquering  a  thousand’, 
sejia-jit  (VS.  xv.  1 9)  ‘conquering  armies’,  svar-jit  ‘winning  heaven’,  hiranya-jit 
‘winning  gold’;  with  other  roots:  acyuta-ksit  (VS.  v.  13)  ‘dwelling  immovably’; 
acyuta-cyut  ‘shaking  what  is  firm’;  d-dara-srt  (AV.)  ‘not  falling  into  a  crack’; 
a-ksit  ‘dwelling’;  rna-cit  ‘avenging  guilt’,  rta-cit  ‘observing  sacred  order’; 


1  isu-kfteva  here  may,  however,  be  a 
D.  sing,  for  isukfte  va;  see  Lanman  468. 

2  With  double  ending  once  (1.  1294) 

firtsu-su. 


3  This  suffix  -t  partakes  of  the  character 
of  a  root  determinative,  as  roots  in  -i  -u  -r 
are  hardly  ever  used  without  it  as  nominal 
stems. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Consonant  Stems 


187 


kilbisasppt  ‘removing  sin’;  ksatra-bhpt  (VS.  xxvir.  7)  ‘holder  of  sway’;  carsanT- 
dhpt  ‘preserving  men’;  dirgha-srut  ‘heard  afar’,  deva-srut  (VS.  xxxvn.  18) 
‘heard  by  the  gods’;  dhana-spft  ‘winning  booty’;  dhruva-ksit  (VS.  v.  13) 
‘dwelling  firmly’;  pari-hrut  ‘overthrowing’;  puta-bhrt  (VS.  xvm.  21)  a  kind 
of  soma  vessel;  bhdra-bhpt  ‘bearing  a  load’;  mada-cyitt  ‘reeling  with  excite¬ 
ment’;  madhu-siit  ‘emitting  sweetness’;  yaksa-bhpt  ‘supporting  pursuers’  (?), 
vajra-bhpt  ‘wielding  a  thunderbolt’;  vdja-spt  ‘running  for  a  prize’;  sapatna-ksit 
(VS.  1.  29)  ‘destroying  rivals’;  suparna-dt  (VS.  xxvii.  45)  ‘heaped  up  like  the 
bird  Suparna’;  soma-sut  ‘pressing  Soma’;  sva-srt  ‘going  one’s  own  way’;  havana- 
sri'tt  ‘hearing  invocations’.  —  f.  upa-bhrt  (VS.  11.  6)  ‘sacrificial  ladle’;  upa-mit 
‘prop’;  rta-cit;  pari-srut  (VS.xix.  15)  ‘fermented  liquor’;  prasasta-kpt  ‘bestowing 
praise’.  —  N.  A.  n.  visva-jit ;  dirgha-sr'ct ,  nava-gdt  (AV.  TS.)  ‘first-bearing’, 
puntdt 1  (VS.  xxxix.  9)  ‘pericardium’;  as  adverbs:  upa-stut  ‘invoked’,  dyu-gdt 
‘going  to  heaven’,  sa-kpt  (‘one-making’)  ‘once’. 

A.  m.  adhi-ksitam  ‘ruler’,  adhvara-krtam  (VS.  1.24)  ‘performing  sacrifice’, 
arno-vrtam  ‘enclosing  the  waters’,  uktha-bhrtam  ‘offering  verses’,  uda-prutam 
‘swimming  in  water’,  rna-cyutam  ‘inciting  to  (fulfil)  obligations’,  carsani-dhptam , 
tivra-sidam  ‘pressing  pungent  (juice)’,  trsu-cyutam  ‘moving  greedily’,  dlrgha- 
srutam ,  dus-kptam  ‘acting  wickedly’,  dveso-yutam  ‘removing  hostility’,  dhana- 
jitarn  (VS.  xi.  8),  dhana-spptam ,  71a dl- upturn  ‘stream- obstructing’,  pari-sn'itam 
‘flowing  around’,  pratar-j'itam  ‘conquering  early’,  ?nada-cyutam ,  mithn-kptam 
‘fallen  into  trouble’,  vayas-krtatn  (VS.  111. 18),  vaja-jitam  (VS.11. 7)  ‘winning  spoil’, 
sravo-jitam  ‘winning  renown’,  sam-jltam  ‘conqueror’,  satya-dhvrtam  ‘perverting 
truth’,  scitra-jitam  (VS.  xi.  8),  sahas-kptam  (VS.  hi.  18)  ‘bestowing  strength’, 
satna-bhrtam  ‘bringing  chants’,  su-krtam,  svai'-j'itam,  svista-kptam  (VS.  xxi.  47), 
havana-srutam ,  havis-krtam  ‘preparing  the  oblation’.  —  f.  aram-krtam  ‘making 
ready’,  upa-prutam  ‘flowing  near’,  deva-srutam ,  niyutam  ‘team’,  pari-srutam. 

I.  m.  abhi-j'ita  (VS.xv.  7)  ‘victorious’,  upari-pruta,  (VS.  vn.  3)  ‘falling  from 
above’,  car saiu-dhrt a,  brahma-kpta  ‘offering  prayers’,  soma-suta.  —  f.  ni-yuta , 
pari-sriitd  (VS.  xix.  83),  pari-hvrtd2 *  (vm.  47s)  ‘deceiving’. 

D.  m.  arain-kpte ,  dus-kptc ,  dharma-kpte  ‘establishing  order’,  brahma-kpte , 
su-kpte)  ab-jite ,  asva-jite,  urvard-jite  ‘winning  fertile  fields’,  go-jlte ,  dhana-j'ite , 
nr-jite  ‘conquering  men’,  visva-jlte ,  satrd-jite ,  svar-jite ;  giri-ksite  ‘dwelling  in 
mountains’,  parvata-cyiite  ‘shaking  mountains’,  soma-bhpte  (VS.  v.  1)  ‘bringing 
Soma’. 

Ab.  m.  pari-srutas  (VS.  xix.  75)  ‘foaming’,  brahma-kptas ,  sarva-hutas 
‘offered  completely’.  —  f.  abhi-hrutas  ‘injurious’. 

G.  m.  carsam-dhptas ,  vaja-jitas  (VS.  ix.  13),  virya-kptas  (VS.  x.  25)  ‘doing 
mighty  deeds’,  sain-jitas ,  su-kptas,  havis-kptas.  —  f.  is  a-s  tut  as  3,  devastutas 
‘praising  the  gods’,  parisriitas  (AV.). 

L.  m.  mada-cyiiti ,  go-jiti,  vasu-jlti  (AV.)  ‘winning  goods’,  sam-dhana-jiti 4 
(AV.)  ‘winning  booty  together’. 

V.  m.  acyuta-cyut ,  uru-krt  ‘making  wide”,  rta-cit,  khaja-krt ,  puru-krt , 
rana-krt  ‘causing  joy’,  7'aiidana-srut  ‘listening  to  praise’,  vajajit  (VS.  11.  7), 
sahasra-jit ,  hdvis-krt  (VS  1.  15).  —  f.  upa-bhrt  (AV.),  rdstra-bhrt  (AV.) 
‘bearing  sway’. 


1  The  second  part  of  the  word  may  be 

derived  from  Az;z-  ‘stretch’  like  from 

gam-  ‘go’. 

2  With  anomalous  accent;  but  the  form  may 

beL.  of pari-hvrti the  normal  accent  of  which 

would  be  pari-hvrti- ;  seeLANMAN  502  (bottom). 


3  ‘refreshment’,  BR. ;  but  the 
Pada  text  reads  isah-siutas,  and  Grassmann 
regards  isa  =  isah  (before  j/-)  as  G.  of  ff-. 

4  Instead  of  *dhana-sam-piti. 


1 88 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


Du.  N.  A.  V.  m.  go-jitd,  divi-ksita  ‘dwelling  in  the  sky’,  pari-ksitd  ‘dwelling 
around’,  mada-cyuta ,  su-snita  ‘hearing  well’,  havana-srutd ,  V.  pathi-krtd  (AV.); 
a-dus-krtau ,  krsna-prutau  ‘moving  in  darkness’,  sa-kftau  (AY.)  ‘acting  at  once’, 
sa-ksitau  ‘dwelling  together’,  su-kftau  (AV.),  bhadra-kftau  (AY.),  su-srutau 
(AV.).  —  f.  ugra-jltau  (AV.)  ‘fierce-conquering’  (name  of  an  Apsaras).  — 
G.  f.  su-kftos ,  pari-ksitos. 

PL  N.  V.  m.  YAzx  (VS.  1.  18)  ‘heaping  up’,  hrutas  ‘stumbling-blocks’; 
with  -krt:  aram-kftas ,  Tsana-kftas ,  karma-kftas  (VS.  in.  47)  ‘skilful  in  work’, 
dudhra-kftas  ‘boisterous’,  dus-kftas,  dhanyd-kftas 1  ‘preparing  grain’,  brahma- 
kftas ,  yajna-nis-kftas  ‘preparing  the  sacrifice’,  vayas-kftas,  su-kftas ,  havis-kftas ; 
with  -cyut:  dhanva-cyutas  ‘shaking  the  ground’,  dhruva-cyutas  ‘shaking  the 
immovable’,  parvata-cyutas ,  mada-cyi'itas ;  with  -ksit:  apsu-ksitas  ‘dwelling  in 
the  waters’,  upa-ksitas  ‘dwelling  near’,  vraja-kslias  (VS.  x.  4)  ‘resting  in  their 
station’,  sa-ksttas ;  with  other  roots:  adhva-gatas  (AV.)  ‘travellers’,  arthctas 2 3 
(VS.  x.  3)  ‘swift’,  uda-prutas ,  urdhva-citas  (VS.  1.  18)  ‘piling  up’,  krcchre-srltas 
‘undergoing  danger’,  grama-jitas  ‘conquering  troops’,  carsanl-dhrtas ,  jana- 
bhftas  (VS.  x.  4)  ‘supporting  people’,  divi-sritas  (AV.)  ‘going  to  heaven’,  deva- 
srutas  (VS. vi.  30),  dveso-yutas ,  tii-gutas  ‘enemies’,  pari-citas  (VS.  xii.46)  ‘piling 
up  around’,  pitu-bhrtas  ‘bringing  food’,  purva-citas  (VS.  xxvn.  4)  ‘piling  up 
first’,  mano-dhftas  ‘intelligent’,  V.  vaja-jitcis  (VS.  ix.  9),  vi-citas  (VS.  iv.  24) 
‘sifting’,  visva-bhftas  (VS.  x.  4)  ‘all-nourishing’,  satya-srutas  ‘hearing  the  truth’, 
satrd-jltas,  su-kftas  (VS.  xxxm.  16),  su-sriitas ,  soma-sutas,  sva-sftas ,  hava?ia- 
sn'itas.  —  f.  mitas  ‘posts’,  stutas  ‘praises’;  uda-prutas ,  ni-yutas ,  pari-srutas, 
pitu-bhftas ,  sam-hdtas  ‘layers’,  sa-srutas  ‘streaming’.  —  N.  A.  n.  dlrgha-srut  ‘far- 
renowned’  appears  to  be  used  as  a  n.  pi.  in  agreement  with  vratti  (vm.  25I7)L 

A.  m.  hrutas  and  hrutas 4  (AV.);  a- pitas  ‘not  swelling’,  go-jitas,  jyotis- 
kftas,  dus-krtas ,  ni-gutas,  mada-cy litas,  su-kftas.  —  f.  ritas  ‘flowing’;  upa-stutas 
‘invocations’,  dirgha-srutas ,  ni-yutas,  bali-hftas  ‘paying  tribute’,  varuna-dhrutas 
‘deceiving  Varuna’,  vi-sftas  ‘flowing  asunder’,  sa-srutas. 

I.  m.  soma-sudbhis.  —  f.  antariksa-prudbhis  ‘floating  over  the  atmosphere’, 
ni-yudbhis. 

D.  m.  isu-kfdbhyas  (VS.  xvi.  46)  ‘arrow-makers’,  dhanus-kfdbhyas  (VS. 
xvi.  46)  ‘bow-makers’,  pathi-kfdbhyas ,  bandhu-ksidbhyas  ‘dwelling  among 
kinsmen’.  —  Ab.  n.  tanu-kfdbhyas. 

G.  m.  agni-hotra-hutdm  (AV.)  ‘offering  the  oblation  to  Agni’,  isu-bhftdm 
(AV.)  ‘archers’,  mantra-kftam  ‘composers  of  hymns’,  su-kftdm.  —  f.  abhi-hrutdm , 
upa-dtam  (VS.  xn.  97)  a  kind  of  disease,  upa-mitam  (AV.),  ni-yutam,  pari- 
mitam  (AV.)  ‘rafters’,  prati-mitam  (AV.)  ‘props’,  ratha-jitdm  (AV.). 

L.  m.  su-kftsu. 

Derivative  Stems  in  -vat,  -tat,  -it,  -ut  and  secondary  -f. 

gog.  The  following  stems  are  formed  with  the  suffix  (1)  -vat$:  arvd-vat- 
f.  ‘proximity’,  d-vcit-  (AV.)  f.  ‘proximity’,  ud-vdt-  f.  ‘height’,  ni-vdt-  f.  ‘depth’, 
para-vat -  f.  ‘distance’,  pra-vat-  f.  ‘height’,  sam-vdt-  f.  ‘region’;  (2)  -tat6: 
upard-tat-  f.  ‘vicinity’,  devd-tat-  f.  ‘divine  service’,  vrka-tdt-  f.  ‘wolfishness’, 
satyd-tat-  f.  ‘reality’,  sarvd-tat-  f.  ‘totality’;  (3)  -/Y:  tad-it-  f.  ‘contiguous’,  div-it-i 


1  dhanya-kflas  in  the  Pada  text. 

2  That  is,  ‘going  (z-z)  to  the  goal’ 
( arthaf . 

3  See  Lanman  503  (bottom),  and  474  on 
the  N.  A.  pi.  n. 

4  With  irregular  accent. 


5  See  above,  secondary  nominal  derivation, 
233- 

6  Cp.  above  215  a. 

7  In  this  word  the  suffix  -it  probably  con¬ 
sists  of  the  root  z-  ‘go’  with  the  primary 
(determinative)  -t  (307). 


VI.  Declension,  Nouns.  Consonant  Stems.  189 

‘going  to  the  sky’,  yos-it-  f.  ‘young  woman’,  roh-it-  f.  ‘red  mare’,  sar-it-  f.  ‘stream’, 
har-it-  f.  ‘fallow’;  (4)  - ut :  mar-ut-  m.  ‘storm-god’;  (5)  with  secondary  -f: 
the  two  neuters  yakr-t- 1  (AV.)  ‘liver’,  sdkr-t-2  ‘excrement’,  and  perhaps  the 
etymologically  obscure  m.  napat 3  ‘descendant’,  all  three  of  which  are  supple¬ 
mented  in  the  weak  cases  by  the  stems  yakati-,  sakan -  and  ndptr-  respectively. 
The  inflexion  of  this  group  of  -t  stems  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  radical 
-t  stems. 

Inflexion. 

310.  Sing.  N.  m.  tadit,  tdnu-ndpat  ‘son  of  himself’,  nap  at,  prd-napdt 
‘great-grandson’.  —  f.  pardvat ,  pravdt ,  roh'it ,  sarit  (VS.  xxxiv.  11).  — n.  ydkrt 
(VS.  AV.),  sdkrt. 

A.  m.  tdnu-ndpatam ,  napatam.  —  f.  arvavdtam ,  paravdtam,  pravdtam , 
yositam,  rohitam  (AV.),  samvdtam  (AV.). 

I.  m.  divitd.  —  f.  udvdta ,  dev  at  at  a 4,  nivata,  pravdt  a,  satydtdta 4, 
sarvatdtd 4,  har'itd. 

D.  f.  devdtate.  There  is  also  the  transfer  form  avirat-e  (from  a-vira-td- 
‘lack  of  sons’). 

Ab.  f.  arvavatas ,  udvatas 5,  nivdtas*,  paravdtas ,  pravatas,  samvdtas.  — 
G.  f.  pravatas. 

L.  f.  arvavati ,  uparatdti ,  devatati,  par  avail,  vrkatdti. 

V.  m.  tanu-napat ,  napat** . 

Du.  N.  A.  V.  m.  ndpatd.  —  f.  har'itd.  —  G.  f.  harltos. 

PI.  N.  m.  ndpatas ,  marutas ,  haritas.  —  f.  dvatas  (AV.),  udvatas,  tadltas, 
paravdtas  (AV.),  pravatas,  yositas  (AV.),  saritas,  haritas. 

A.  m.  marutas.  —  f.  udvatas,  nivdtas,  paravdtas,  pravatas,  yositas  (AV.), 
rohitas,  samvdtas,  saritas,  haritas. 

I.  m.  marudbhis.  —  f.  pravddbhis.  —  D.  m.  marudbhyas. 

Ab.  m.  marudbhyas.  —  G.  m.  marutam.  —  f.  pravatdm. 

Li.  m.  marutsu.  —  f.  udvatsu,  nivatsu,  pravatsu. 

V.  m.  indra-marutas  ‘O  Indra  and  the  Maruts’,  ?iapdtas,  marutas. 

Participial  Stems  in  -af  and 

311.  Participles  in  -af  are  almost  limited  to  the  present  active  form 
of  stems  made  with  reduplication,  viz.  those  of  the  third  class  (457)  and  of 
intensives  (545).  The  old  reduplicated  participle  (from  gd-  ‘go’)  jdgat-  ‘going’, 
‘living’,  is  used  chiefly  as  a  n.  substantive  meaning  ‘the  animate  world’.  The 
analogy  of  these  participles  is  followed  by  a  few  others  formed  from  un¬ 
reduplicated  stems:  dds-at-  ‘worshipping’,  sds-at-  ‘instructing’ 7 ;  also  ddksat-  and 
dhdksat-,  the  aor.  participle  of  dah-  ‘burn’.  A  few  others,  again,  originally 
participles,  having  come  to  be  used  as  substantives,  have  shifted  the  accent 
to  the  suffix:  vah-dt -8  ‘stream’,  veh-at-9  ( AV.  VS.)  f.  ‘barren  cow’,  vdgh-dt-10 
m.  ‘sacrificed,  srav-dt- 1 1  f.  ‘stream’;  like  the  regular  participle  sdsc-at-  (from 
sac-  ‘accompany’),  which  as  a  substantive  becomes  sasc-dt-  m.  ‘pursuer’.  In 


1  Cp.  Lat.  jecur.  |  6  Perhaps  marut  in  evaya-marui. 

2  Cp.  Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  p.  559.  1  7  Lanman  505,  would  place  da  sat-  ‘in- 

3  The  suffix  may  here  have  been  a  pri-  1  juring’  here,  but  there  is  no  evidence,  as 
mary  -t  added  to  the  root  pd- :  cp.  Leu-  only  a  weak  case,  dasatas  G.  sing.,  occurs. 
Mann’s  etymology  (18881,  Festgruss  an  Bdht-  ^  But  vah-ant-  ‘carrying’. 

lingk  77  f. ;  Brugmann  2,  p.  366.  1  9  The  derivation  of  this  word  is  obscure. 

4  These  forms  might  be  locatives  of  10  In  one  or  two  passages  vaghat-  still 

devatati satyatdii-,  sarvdtdti-.  1  retains  its  participial  sense. 

5  These  forms  might  be  A.  pi.  11  But  srav-ant-  ‘flowing’. 


190  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  Yedic  Grammar. 

this  class  masculines  are  frequent,  but  only  about  half  a  dozen  neuter  forms 
occur,  and  the  feminines  are  limited  to  three  substantives1  and  the  adjective 
a-sascdt  ‘unequalled’ 2.  The  inflexion  is  like  that  of  the  radical  -t  stems,  the 
accent  never  shifting  to  the  endings. 


Inflexion. 


312.  Sing.  N.  m.  r.  reduplicating  class  3 4 * * * :  cikyat,  jahat,  jiihvat,  dddat, 
dddhat ,  bdpsat  ( Ybhas -),  bibhyat ',  bibhrat.  —  2.  intensives:  kdnikradat  and 
kdnikrat ,  kdrikrat  {kr-  ‘do’)  and  ( a-)cdrikrat  (A V.),  ghdnighnat  and  jdughanat 
(Y  han-),  cdniscadat  (  Y  scand-),  car  kr  sat,  cdkasat  (Ykas-),  cekitat  ( Y 
idrbhurat \  jdgrat,  tdvltvat,  ddrdrat,  dedisat,  didyat,  ddvidyutat,  dodhuvat, 
ddvidhvat,  ndnadat ,  ndnnamat,  pamphanat,  bhdribhrat,  marmrjat,  mdrmrsat, 
memyat,  rdrajat,  rerihat \  roruvat,  vdrivrjat,  v&vadat,  vevidat,  vevisat,  so  sue  at, 
sanisyadat  ( Y syand-),  sesidhat.  —  3.  non-reduplicating  verbs:  vaghdt, 
sdsat;  aor.  daks  at  and  dhdksat.  —  N.  A.  n.  1.  jdgat,  ddvidyutat,  pepisat , 
ydyuvat  (AY.).  —  N.  f.  vehdt  (AV.  VS.). 

A.  m.  1.  a-sascatam  (1.  1129),  dadatam ,  bibhratam.  —  2.  kdrikratam  (AV.), 
gdnigmatam,  didyatam,  ndnadat  am,  panipnatam,  roruvatam  (AV.).  —  f.  a-sascatam 
(11.  $23);  vehdt a?n  (AV.). 

I.  m.  dddata,  sdsucata.  —  f.  a-sasedta.  —  n.  jagata  (AV.). 


D.  m.  1.  jujosate,  juhvate,  dddhate,  bibhrate,  s  as  cate.  —  2.  ghdnighnate. — 
3.  vaghdte.  —  n.  1.  j agate  (AV.). 

Ab.  m.  2.  kdnikradatas . 

G.  m.  1.  j; gat  as,  dddatas,  dad  hat  as,  baps  at  as.  —  2.  jdhghnatas,  tdritratas, 
dodhatas,  vevisatas.  —  3.  vaghdtas,  sdsatas,  dhdksatas  (aor.).  —  n.  i.jdgatas.  — 

2.  d-varvrtatas  (AV.),  vdvadatas.  —  L.  n.  jdgati. 

D  u.  N.  A.  V.  m.  a-sasedta,  bdpsata,  bibhrata ;  tdritrata ;  s'asata;  dddhatau, 
bibhratau.  —  f.  a-sasedtd.  —  G.  m.  pipratos. 

PI.  N.  m.  1.  juhvatas,  titratas,  dddatas,  dddhat  as,  plpratas,  baps  at  as , 
bibhrat  as,  si sr  at  as h  —  2.  kdrikratas,  jdgratas,  johuvatas,  ddvidhvatas ,  didhyatas, 
dodhatas,  nonuvatas,  mdrmrjatas,  sosucatas. —  3.  ddsatas,  vaghdtas.  —  f .a-sasedtas, 
vahdtas,  sravdtas. 

A.  m.i .jdksatas  (  Ys^ias~)- —  2.  jdgratas  (AV.),  dodhatas  (AV.),  sdsvasatas, 
sosucatas  (AV.).  —  f.  s  a  sc  at  as-,  sravdtas. 

I.  m.  2.  ndnadadbhis,  pdpruthadbhis,  vdvadadbhis,  sdsvasadbhis.  — 

3.  vaghddbhis.  —  G.  m.  jagatdm,  bibhyatdm  (AV.);  vaghdtdm.  —  f.  sravatdm. 

V.  m.  jagatas,  vdghatas. 

313.  Participles  in  -ant  are  formed  from  all  present  stems  (except 
those  of  the  reduplicating  class  and  of  intensives  and  the  few  others  that 
follow  their  analogy),  from  all  future  stems,  and  from  aorist  stems.  Their 
analogy  is  followed  by  rhdnt-  ‘weak’,  prsant-  ‘spotted’,  brhdnt-  ‘great’,  rusant- 
‘brilliant’,  which  have  lost  their  participial  function;  also  by  dd?it-s  m.  ‘tooth’. 
The  adjective  mahdnt-  ‘great’,  having  lost  its  original  participial  meaning 
deviates  from  the  participial  declension  in  lengthening  the  vowel  of  the  suffix 
in  the  strong  forms.  In  the  inflexion  of  this  group  the  distinction  between 


1  The  f.  of  the  regular  participles  is 
formed  by  the  suffix  -I. 

2  But  a-sascant-i  from  sascat-. 

3  See  below,  Verb,  461. 

4  There  occurs  once  an  anomalous  N.  pi. 

with  -ant  from  a  reduplicated  stem:  vavrdh- 

dii/as.  See  below,  Perfect,  492,  note  on 

vavrdhva  nns-. 


5  This  word  is  probably  an  old  pres, 
j  participle  of  ad-  ‘eat’,  with  prehistoric  loss 
of  the  initial  a  like  s-dnt-  ‘being’  from  as- 
‘be’  (25,  I).  The  RV.  has  one  transfer  form, 
N.  ddnta-s  (starting  from  the  A.  ddnt-am); 
the  AV.  has  others,  ddntds  and  ddntais. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Consonant  Stems, 


191 

strong  and  weak  forms  is  regularly  made,  -ant  appearing  in  the  former 
only  and  being  reduced  to  -at  in  the  latter,  which  shift  the  accent,  if  resting 
on  the  suffix,  to  the  ending.  These  participles  are  declined  in  the  m. 
and  n.  only,  as  they  form  a  special  f.  stem  in  -T\  The  m.  and  n.  forms 
are  the  same,  except  of  course  in  the  N.  A.;  the  former  are  very  frequent, 
the  latter  rare. 

Inflexion. 

314.  The  forms  occurring,  if  made  from  bhdvat-  ‘being’,  would  be  as 
follows : 

Sing.  N.m.  bhavan1  2 3.  —  n.  bhdvat.  —  A.  m.  bhdvantam.  —  I.  m.  n.  bhdvata. 

—  D.  bhdvate.  —  Ab.  m.  n.  bhdvatas.  —  G.  m.  n.  bhdvatas.  —  L.  bhdvati . 

Du.  N.  A.  V.  m.  bhavanta  and  bhdvantau.  —  n.  bhdvati.  —  D.  bhdvad- 
bhyam.  —  G.  m.  n.  bhdvatos. 

PL  N.  m.  bhdvantas.  —  n.  bhdvatiti.  —  A.  m.  bhdvatas.  —  I.  bhdvadbhis. 

—  D.  m.  bhdvadbhyas.  —  Ab.  m.  bhdvadbhyas.  —  G.  m.  n.  bhdvatdm.  — 
L.  m.  n.  bhdvatsu. 

Forms  actually  occurring  are  the  following.  It  is  unnecessary  to  enumerate 
all  the  m.  N.  and  A.  forms,  as  in  the  RV.  alone  228  forms  of  the  N.  sing., 
1 21  of  the  A.  sing.,  and  166  of  the  N.  plN  occur. 

Sing.  N.  m.  Examples  are:  dr  can,  sidan ;  ghnan ,  ydn,  sdn;  pdsyan ; 
icchan ;  krnvan ,  sunvdn ;  bJiahjdn ;  jandn  ;  j a  nay  an ;  yuyutsan ;  karisydn.  Also 
dan,  ‘tooth’4;  mahAn 5.  —  n.  andt,  dsat 6,  isndt,  ejat ,  esat 7,  kiddy dy at,  carat , 
citdyat ,  trpdt ,  dhrsdt ,  pat  at ,  patdyat ,  minat ,  ydt,  raghuydt ,  vdrdhat ,  samsat , 
s'iksat,  s'vdyat ,  sat,  sunvdt ;  adj.  brhdt ,  mahdt ,  r  us  at ;  aor.  sdksat  (\hsah-) ; 
fut.  bhavisydt  (AV.).  As  adv.  with  shift  of  accent:  dravdt  ‘swiftly’  (dra-  ‘run’), 
drahydt  ‘firmly’  (irregular  formation  from  drh-  ‘be  firm’). 

A.  m.  Examples  are:  car  ant  am ;  y  ant  am,  us  ant  am,  s  ant  am ;  yudhyantam ; 
vidhdntam ;  krnvantam ;  prhcdntam ;  grndntam ;  ditsantam ;  ddntam ;  brhdntam, 
mahdntam. 

1.  m.  a-ghnatd ,  dvata,  d-sunvatd,  cdrata,  j  an  at  A ,  tujatct,  pusyatd ,  b  hind  aid, 
vanusyatd ;  data,  syavd-data  (AV.)  ‘dark-toothed’,  brhatd,  mahatd,  nisata.  — 
n.  a-drpyata ,  d-sredhata ,  d-hedata ,  Asatds,  us  at  A,  gavyatd,  tv  ay  at  A ,  dhrsata 
(adv.),  sucatA ,  sravasyatA ,  samary at A,  sumnayatA ;  brhatA ,  mahatA,  nisata. 

D.  m.  1.  from  stems  accented  on  the  suffix:  avasyate,  asvayate, 
isayate,  isudhyate,  isuyate ,  us  ate, \  rjuyate,  rtdyate,  krnvate,  gavyate,  grnate \ 
j urate \  janate,  tvdyate,  devayate,  dvisate,  dhiyayate,  dhunvate,  prnate,  prcchate , 
brahmanyate \  mahayate ,  mdnavasyate '  yajhayate,  yate,  vanvate,  vidhatc,  srnvate, 
sravasyatA,  sakhiyate,  sate,  silicate,  sunvate \  stuvate\  rhate,  brhate,  mahate\ 
fut.  avisyate.  —  n.  sue  ate,  sanayate. 

2.  from  stems  accented  on  the  radical  or  the  penultimate  syllable: 
d-ghnate ,  a-coddte9,  a-minate,  dreate,  drhate,  iyaksate,  edrate,  estate,  tdrate, 


1  On  the  difference  in  the  form  of  this  f. 
stem  see  201,  377,  455,  461,  etc. 

2  On  the  Sandhi  of  such  nominatives  see 
Lanman  506. 

3  Lists  of  the  participle  stems  will  be 
found  below  under  each  of  the  conjugational 
classes,  under  the  secondary  conjugations, 
and  under  the  future. 

4  Occurring  also  in  several  compounds 
a-dan  'toothless’,  etc.;  ub  hay  a- dam  (AV.  V.  192) 
must  be  emended  to  -dann. 

5  maham  in  II.  24”,  iv.  23 r,  IX.  1097  is 


regarded  by  Benfey  as  N.  sing.  m.  (Gottinger 
Nachrichten  1878,  p.  1 90). 

6  For  a-sat  (vil.  10412);  the  Pada  reads 
dsat. 

7  The  Pada  reads  d-isat  (x.  89T4). 

8  Once  (iv.  5H)  with  lengthened  initial  for 
a-sat-d  'not  being’,  also  once  as  at  as  (vil.  1048); 
the  Pp.  has  dsata  and  dsatak.  See  Grass- 
mann,  Worterbuch,  under  a-sat. 

9  Wrong  accentuation  (in  V.  442)  for 
a-codate ;  see  Lanman  508  (top). 


192  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  Vedic  Grammar. 

trsyate ,  ddsate,  pdcate ,  pipisate,  pusyate ,  ydjate ;  yudhyati ,  rdjate ,  risate ,  vadate, 
sdmsate,  sdrdhate ,  s  isas  ate,  h  dry  ate;  a-ddte 1  ‘toothless’. 

Ab.  1.  m.  krnvatds ,  prnatds ,  vanusyatds;  brhatds.  —  n.  brhatds ,  mahatds. 
—  2.  m.  d-bhuhjatas,  a-vadatas,  jighamsatas ,  risatas.  —  n.  d-satas. 

G.  m.  1.  aratlyatds ,  undatds ,  usatds ,  rghayatds ,  rtlyatds ,  krnvatds , 
ksiyatds,  grnatds ,  tujatds ,  turatds,  turanyatds,  tvayatds,  durhanlyatds ,  dvisatds, 
dhrsatds ,  pit uy  at  as,  prnatds ,  brahmanyatds ,  minatds,  mi  sat  as,  yatds,  rudhatds, 
vapusyatds,  vidhatds,  sue  aids,  satds,  sap  ary  aids,  sunvatds,  siuvatas ,  huvatds ; 
brhatds,  mahatds;  fut.  karisyatds . 

2.  d-ghnatas,  a-juryatas,  d-bhuhjatas,  dreatas,  d-sunvatas,  inaksatas , 
edratas,  cetatas ,  jay  atas,  jdratas,  jighamsatas,  jijyasatas,  jivatas ,  tdrvatas, 
trsyatas,  didasatas,  drdvatas,  dhdmatas ,  dhrdjatas,  piyatas ,  bhttsatas,  yudhyatas, 
ririksatas,  rebhatas,  vdyatas,  vardhatas,  venatas ,  sdrdhatas,  sdcatas,  sisasatas, 
sidatas,  hdrsatas;  r  us  atas. 

n.  1.  krpayatds ,  pranatds2,  misatas,  yatds,  satds ;  brhatds,  mahatds.  — 
2.  dsatas  h  edratas,  bhdvatas,  venatas,  sisasatas ;  rusatas. 

L.  m.  1.  sunvati;  mahati.  —  2.  Trdyati,  ubhayd-dati  (AV.).  — 

n.  1.  mahati.  —  2.  d-sati. 

Du.  N.  A.  V.  a)  forms  in  -a.  1.  accented  on  the  suffix:  asnanta , 

irajydnta,  usanta,  gmanta 4 5,  gavydnta,  dasasydnta,  disanta,  duhdnta ,  pdnta , 
pundnta ,  prhcdnta ,  bhujdnta,  mindnta,  misdnta,  ydnta ,  yanta,  vanvdntl,  vasnay- 
dnta,  vajaydnta,  vy-antl,  vrdhanta,  srnvdnta,  sdnta ,  sapary anta,  sumnayanta; 
brhanta,  brhanta  (V.),  mahdnta.  —  2.  accented  on  the  penultimate  or  ante¬ 
penultimate:  a-mardhanta ,  a-yatanta,  drhanta,  isdyanta,  ksdyanta,  car  anta , 
coddyanta,  jandyanta,  jar  anta ,  dr  dv  anta ,  dhamanta ,  par  ay  anta,  pip  anta, 
madanta,  rddanta,  vddanta,  vdpa?ita,  valiant  a. ,  vajdyanta,  venanta,  sddanta, 
sdpanta,  sdhanta,  sddhanta,  hdyanta. 

b)  forms  in  -aw.  1.  asndntau,  tirdntau ,  ydntau,  vrdhdntau ,  sdntau ; 
mahantau.  —  2.  isdyantau ,  kridantau,  ksdyantau ,  mddantau  (AV.),  ydjantau , 
rdjantau. 

N.  A.  n.  yatl;  brhatz.  —  D.  m.  mrdayddbhyam;  mahddbhyam.  — 
G.  m.  jdratos.  —  n.  sam-yatds  (AV.)  ‘going  together’. 

PI.  N.  m.  From  the  very  numerous  forms  occurring  the  following  may 
be  quoted:  madantas;  ghndntas,  ydntas,  sdntas;  pasyantas;  icchdntas;  bhinddntas; 
krnvdntas;  grndntas;  devaydntas ,  vajayantas;  dipsantas 5;  aor.  krdntas 6, 
bhiddntas 1 ;  prsatas  (VS.  xxiv.  11),  mahantas 8.  —  V.  usantas;  mahantas. — 
N.  A.  n.  sdnti9;  brhdnti  (AV.  vm.  93),  mahdnti. 

A.  m.  1.  usatds,  rghayatds,  grnatds,  tarusyatds,  tvayatds,  prnatds, 
prtanyatds,  bhandanayatds,  manayatds ,  yatds,  rudatds,  vanusyatds ,  vajayatas, 
vidhatds,  srnvatds,  sravasyatas,  srudhiyatas,  sakhiyatds ,  satds,  sa satds,  stuvatds ; 
brhatds,  mahatds;  datds. 

2.  d-prnatas,  d-prayucchatas ,  dreatas,  ksayatas,  dhdvatas,  dhrdjatas, 
pdtatas,  rdyatas,  risatas,  ruruksatas  (\Pruh-),  vddatas,  vrddhatas,  sdrdhatas, 
sisrpsatas;  syavd-datas  (AV.). 


1  On  the  accent  see  90  B  c.  The  dative 
of  ad-ant-  ‘eating’,  would  be  ad-at-e. 

2  That  is,  pra-anatas. 

3  For  asatas  according  to  the  Pada  text. 

4  Aor.  participle  of  gam-  ‘go’.  In  one 
passage  (1.  I22xi)  the  Pada  reads  gmanta ; 
the  sense  seems  to  require  the  pi.  grndntas. 
See  Lanman  509. 

5  Desiderative  of  ddbh-  ‘injure’;  cp.  Lan¬ 

man  508  (gen.  masc.). 


6  gmantas  should  perhaps  be  read  for 
gmanta  in  1.  12211. 

7  On  the  anomalous  N.  pi.  perf.  participle, 
vavrdhantas,  see  above  p.  190,  note  4. 

8  ubhaya-datas  in  x.  90™  is  perhaps  a 
metrical  shortening  for  - dantas ;  cp.  Lanman 
509  (bottom).  The  AV.  has  the  transfer  form 
dantas ;  cp.  p.  1 90,  note  5. 

9  The  Pada  text  reads  sdnti ;  see  RPr. 
ix.  25. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Consonant  Stems.  193 

I.  m.  d-nimisadbhis ,  a-prayucchadbhis,  a-sredhadbhis,  us  a  db  his,  citdyad- 
b/iis,  tujdyadbhis,  devayddbhis ,  dhavadbhis,  patdyadbhis ,  rebhadbhis ,  vddadbhis , 
vajayddbhis ,  vrdjadbhis ,  sucddbhis ,  sucdyadbhis ,  subhdyadbhis ,  socadbhis ; 
brhddbhis ,  mahddbhis ,  rusadbhis ;  dadbhis  \  —  n.  sucdyadbhis,  standyadbhis ; 
brhddbhis,  mahddbhis ,  rusadbhis. 

D.  m.  usddbhyas,  ksudhyadbhyas,  grnddbhyas ,  tvayddbhyas,  pdsyadbhyas, 
prayddbhyas,  vddadbhyas,  vdhadbhyas ,  sunvddbhyas ;  brhddbhyas,  mahddbhyas ; 
dadbhyds  (AV.).  —  Ab.  m.  para-yddbhyas. 

G.  m.  1.  adhvarTyatam,  us  at  dm,  rjuyatdm,  grnatdm ,  ghnatdm ,  juratdm, 
devayatdm,  dvisatdm,  yatdm,  yatdm,  vanusyatdm,  vajayatdm ,  satruyatdm , 
spiv  at  dm,  sravasyatdm,  sakhiyatdm,  satdm ,  sasatdm,  sunvatdm,  stuvatdm, 
sthatdm1  2,  brhatdm,  mahatdnr,  datdm  (AV.).  —  2.  d-sunvatam ,  cdratam, 
jayatam,  nrtyatdm ,  pdtatam ,  vivdsatdm,  sdrdhatam.  —  n.  rathirdyatdm 3. 

L.  m.  grndtsu ,  devaydtsu,  patdyatsu ,  mahdtsu.  —  n.  jdryatsu. 

Stems  in  -mant  and  -vant. 

3X5-  As  these  two  suffixes  have  the  same  sense;  that  of  ‘possessing’,  and 
are  inflected  exactly  alike,  the  stems  formed  with  them  are  best  treated 
together  in  declension.  These  stems  are  used  in  the  m.  and  n.  only4,  as 
they  form  a  separate  f.  by  adding  -f  to  the  weak  stem.  They  are  inflected 
like  the  participles  in  -ant  except  that  they  lengthen  the  vowel  of  the 
suffix  in  the  N.  sing.  m.  and  never  shift  the  accent  from  the  suffix  to 
the  ending  in  the  weak  cases.  Strong  and  weak  forms  are  as  strictly 
distinguished  as  in  the  -ant  stems5.  The  regular  vocative  of  these  stems 
ends  in  -mas  and  -1 /as  in  the  RV.,  but  the  AV.  has  neither6  in  any  in¬ 
dependent  passage,  and  the  VS.  has  only  bhagavas  and  patmvas.  The  RV. 
has  also  three  vocatives  in  -van,  and  the  AV.  adds  five  others;  but  no  voc. 
in  -man  occurs. 

Three  stems  in  -vant  and  one  in  -mant  have  case-forms  supplementing 
the  inflexion  of  stems  in  -an  and  forming  transitions  from  the  latter  declension 
to  the  former.  Thus  from  maghavant-  ‘bountiful’  alone  are  formed  the  pi.  I.: 
maghdvadbhis,  D.  maghdvadbhyas ,  L.  maghavatsu ;  also  the  N.  sing,  maghdvan 
beside  the  usual  maghdvd  from  maghdvan-',  from  sahavant-  the  N.  sahdvan 
beside  sahdvd;  from  yuvant-  ‘young’,  the  A.  n.  yuvat  beside  the  N.  m.  yuvd\ 
from  varimant-  the  I.  m.  sing,  varimatd  beside  forms  from  variman-  ‘width’7. 

Inflexion. 

316.  Sing.  N.m.  1.  from  stems  in  -vant  :  aksanvdn  8,  agnivdn,  ahgirasvdn > 
annavan,  a-paviravdn,  amavdn,  drvan,  asirvan,  idavan ,  isdvan,  fghdvdn, 
etdvan,  kakslvdn,  ksapdvan  and  ksdpavan,  ghrmvan,  jdnivan,  tdpasvan , 
tar sy divan,  tdvasvdn,  tdvisivan,  tdvan,  tuvirdvan 9,  tvdvan,  damsanavan,  ddksina- 


1  The  AV.  (xi.  337)  has  the  transfer  form 
dantais. 

2  From  the  aor.  stem  s 'that-  ‘standing’. 

3  With  irregular  accent  on  the  suffix  in¬ 
stead  of  the  ending,  from  rathira-yat-. 

4  In  two  or  three  instances  the  m.  form 
seems  to  be  used  for  the  f.,  as  havismatd 
(1.  1282)  and  rathavate  (1.  12211);  see  Lan- 
man  515  (bottom). 

5  There  seem,  however,  to  be  two  or 

three  instances  of  a  weak  form  used  instead 

of  a  strong:  ksumati  (iv.  2l5),  A.  pi.  n., 

Indo-arische  Philologie.  I.  4. 


krdtumatd  (x.  59T)>  N.  du.  m.,  indrdvatas  (iv. 
274),  N.  pi.;  see  Lanman  516. 

6  In  AV.  xix.  348  the  Mss.  read  bhagavas 
which  is  emended  to  samabhavas  in  the 
printed  text. 

7  On  the  other  hand,  arvant-  ‘steed’,  has 
two  forms  representing  a  transition  to  the 
- an  declension :  N.  d/'va,  A.  arvanam. 

8  On  the  Sandhi  of  these  forms,  see  LAN* 
MAN  517. 

9  Probably  for  *tuvl-rava-vdn. 


13 


194 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


van1,  ddtr avail,  dAnavan,  dAsvan,  durhdnavan ,  devavan,  dev  Avan,  dyumndvan , 
ndmasvan,  niyutvan ,  nilavan ,  payasvan ,  pavitravan ,  pdviravan,  pastydvan, 
puramdZiivan ,  pusanvAin,  prajAvdn ,  prdyasvan ,  pravatvan ,  praZiAvdn,  bZidgavan , 
maghdvan ,  matavdn ,  matsardvan ,  mdnasvan ,  mariitvan,  mdhasvan,  may  Avan , 
mAhinavan,  meZiandvdn ,  ydsasvan,  yatumAvan ,  rabhasvan ,  rdsavan ,  rev  An , 
vAj avail,  vajimvan ,  vivakvAn ,  vivasvan,  vfsanvdn,  vrsnydvan ,  sdcivan ,  sarddvan, 
sasvan,  sipr avail,  siprimvan,  simivdn,  sdkhivan,  sabhdvdn ,  sdrasvdn ,  sdhasvan, 
sahAvdn  and  sdhavan ,  sut Avan ,  sunrtAvan,  stavAn 2,  svadhavan,  svddhitlvan, 
svarvan ,  hdrivan ,  hit  Avan ,  hemyAvan. 

2.  From  stems  in  -mant:  abdimAn ,  dviman ,  asdniman,  human,  udanimAn, 
rbhumAn,  kakudman,  krdtuman ,  garutman ,  gomdn ,  tuvisman ,  tvastrman, 
tvisimdn,  dyumAn,  dhrdjiman,  nadanumAn,  parasumAn ,  pasumAn ,  pitumAn , 
barhismdn,  madhuman ,  vasumdn,  virukmdn ,  vrstimAn,  sdruman ,  socisman, 
susumAn,  havisman,  hirlman. 

N.  A.  n.  1.  apasthavat,  amavat ,  arcivdt ,  asvavat ,  asvavat ,  atmanvdi , 
dvr  tv  at ,  iravat,  fghavat,  etAvat,  ksditavat ,  gopAvat ,  grabhanavat,  ghrtdvat, 
candrdvat,  tAvat,  tokdvat ,  tvAvat,  ddksinavat ,  dyumnavat,  dhanAvat ,  dhvas- 
manvdt,  namasvat,  nilavat,  nrvat ,  padvdt,  pdyasvat ,  pastydvat,  pfsadvat, 
prajAvat ,  barhdndvat ,  yAvat ,  yuvat 3,  rathavat ,  rasavat,  rev  at,  vayunavat, 
vayundvat,  vAjavat,  viprkvat,  vivdsvat,  visavat,  virdvat,  satdvat,  saphdvat , 
sdsvat 4 5,  sahdsravat ,  sdhasvat,  slnavat ,  svarvat,  Zuranyavat. 

2.  abhistimdt,  rbhumdt,  ket uniat ,  kratumat,  ksumat ,  gomat,  jyotismat, 
tvisimat,  dasindt,  dAnumat ,  dyumat,  nidhimdt,  pasumdt,  pitumat,  pustimdt, 
madhumat,  manyumdt ,  yavamat ,  rayimdt,  vdsumat ,  svastimat. 

A.  m.  1.  apidhAnavantam ,  apupdvantam ,  drvantam,  dsvavantam ,  asthan- 
vantam,  dtmanvantam,  hidrasvantam s;  Arjasvantam,  Arndvantam,  etAvantam . 
enasvantam,  djasvantam,  omanvantam ,  omyAvantam,  kaksivantam,  ghrtavantam, 
dAsvantain,  dev  dv  ant  am,  dhanAvantam ,  dhivantam,  nrvantam,  padvdntam , 
pdrasvantam,  prajAvantam,  bhAsvantam ,  marutvantam ,  mahisvantam ,  rdtna- 
vantam,  revdntam,  vapAvantam ,  vayAvantam,  vAjavantam ,  vAravantam,  vivas- 
v  ant  am ,  viravantam,  vfsanvantam,  satdvantam ,  sdsvantam ,  sacanAvantam , 
sarasvantam,  harivantam,  hdstavantam,  Zi ! ranyavantam. 

2.  rbhumdntam,  kdnvamantam,  ketumantam,  ksumdntam,  gdmantam, 
jydtismantam ,  tdvisimantam,  dyumdntam,  nidhimantam,  pitumdntam,  bdndZiu- 
mantam,  bZidnumantam,  mddhumantam,  vdsumantam ,  vAsimantam,  vrstimdntam , 
srustim antam ,  havismantam,  hotrmantam . 

1.  1.  m.  drvata,  dsvdvata,  udanvdta,  rkvata,  kaZisivatd ,  niyutvatd,  nrvdta , 
marutvatd ,  ydsasvata ,  revdtd ,  visvadevyavata,  visuvatd,  subZirdvatd ,  sahasvata.  — 
n.  etAvatd,  candrdvata ,  prajAvatd ,  barhanavata ,  vivasvatd ,  sunrtAvatd ,  Zidrit- 
vatd,  sdsvata. 

2.  m.  gomatd,  jyotismata,  divitmata,  dyumdta ,  bZirstimatd,  varimata 6, 
vasumatd,  viriikmata ,  havismata.  —  n.  divitmata,  virukmata,  Ziavlsmatd ;  as 
adv.  sdsvata 7. 

D.i.m.  drvate,  asvavate,  kaksivate ,  daksinavate  ‘adroit’  and  ‘bestowing  gifts’, 
datvdte,  dAsvate,  niyutvate 8,  pusanvdte,  marutvate,  mAvate,  yuvdvate,  rathavate^, 


1  Representing  two  words:  I.  ‘dexterous’ 
( daksina -  ‘right  hand’);  2.  ‘possessing  sacri- 
fical  gifts’  (daksina-). 

2  To  be  read  stavan  ‘thundering’,  from 

see  Grassmann,  s.  v. 

3  Transfer  form  from  the  -an  stem  yuvan-. 

4  Also  the  Amredita  compound  sasvac- 
chah/at. 

5  With  the  N.  -r  anomalously  retained. 


6  Transfer  form  from  the  stem 

varimdn 

7  See  Lanman  518  (bottom). 

8  Erronously  unaccented  (1.  1 3 5 T). 

9  The  f.  rdthavatyai  should  perhaps  be  read 
for  rathavate  in  I.  i22ir,  as  the  latter  form 
agrees  with  a  f.  substantive,  and  the  former 
is  favoured  by  the  metre;  cp.  Lanman  519. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Consonant  Stems.  195 


Tivdsvate  and  vivasvate ,  sdcivate ,  sdsvate ,  sdhasvate,  sunrtdvate ,  svdrvate , 
hdrivate .  —  n.  padvdte,  revate,  sdsvate. 

2.  m.  gomate ,  cdksusmate ,  tvisimate,  divitmate ,  dyumdte,  bar  his  mate , 
havismate. 

Ab.  1.  m.  tvdvatas ,  vivdsvatas ,  vrsnyavatas. 

G.  1.  m.  drvatas,  dsvavatas,  kaksivatas ,  jdvatas ,  tvdvatas ,  dadhanvatas l, 
ddsvatas ,  dev  dv  at  as,  dhivatas2 3 4,  niyutvatas ,  nrvdtas,  prajdvatas ,  marutvatas, 
mdvatas,  mehdnavatas ,  ydsasvatas,  rev  at  as,  vdyasvatas ,  vdjavatas ,  vivdsvatas 
and  vivasvatas,  vlrdvatas,  sdcivatas,  sdsvatas ,  sdrasvatas,  sdhasvatas,  sutdvatas, 
suravatas,  svadhdvatas,  hrsivatas.  —  n.  etdvatas ,  ydvatas,  vis  uv  at  as,  sdsvatas. 

2.  m.  ksumdtas,  gdmatas,  dyumatas,  havismatas.  —  n.  gdmatas. 

L.  1.  m.  drvati,  ddksinavati  ‘bestowing  gifts’,  nrvdti,  pasty hvati,  ydsas- 
vatil  vdnanvati,  vivasvati  and  vivasvati,  saryandvati.  —  n.  dsvavati,  simivati , 
svan>ati.  —  2.  m.  gomati. 

V.  m.  1.  The  normal  form  in  -vas$  occurs  in  sixteen  examples:  rsivas, 
guavas*,  tavisfvas,  uiyutvas ,  patnJvas  (VS.),  bhagavas  (VS.  TS.),  marutvas, 

rayivas,  vajrivas,  viravas,  saktivas,  sacivas,  sarasvas,  sahasvas ,  svadhavas, 

harivas .  —  Of  the  later  V.  ending  in  -van,  the  RV.  has  three  examples: 

arvan,  satavan 5,  savasavan.  In  the  AV.  the  following  five  additional  forms 

occur:  marutvan0,  vajimvan,  vrsnydvan,  svadhavan,  harivan6.  The  MS.  has 
patmvan 7.  —  2.  There  are  six  examples  of  the  form  in  -mas :  tuvismas,  dyumas, 
bhdnumas,  mantumas ,  sucismas,  havismas.  —  No  vocative  form  in  -man  occurs. 

Du.  N.  A.  V.  m.  1.  with  -d:  dhgirasvanta,  dnasvanta,  drvanta,  indra- 
vantd ,  kasdvantd,  kesavantd ,  dhdrmavanta ,  ndmasvantd ,  niyutvantd,  pavitra- 
vantd ,  marutvantd,  mitrdvdrunavanta ,  vdjavantd ,  visnuvantd,  vyacasvanta , 
sdsvantd 8,  saptlvantd ;  with  -au:  astJuvdntau,  ydvantau  (AV.),  romanvantau, 
sahasvantau  (AV.),  V.  svadhdvantau  (AV.).  —  2.  arcimdntd,  rbhumdntd, 
krdtumantd 9,  vadhdmanta. 

Ab.  1.  m.  asthivadbhyam.  —  G.  1.  m.  vdjimvatos,  simivatos,  sarasvatlvatos. 

Plur.  N.  V.  m.  1.  aksanvdntas,  dnasvantas ,  amavantas,  drvantas,  asvd- 
vantds,  dsirvantas,  iddvantas ,  indravantas ,  mdrdvantas  {TS.w.  7.  141) I0,  firjas- 
vantas,  enasvantas ,  kaksivantas ,  kdrnavantas ,  ghrtdvantas,  casdlavantas, 
ddksinava?itas  ‘bestowing  gifts’,  ddmanvantas,  duvasvantas  (Y S.xvi.  63),  drdvinas- 
vantas ,  dhivantas,  ndmasvantas,  niyutvantas ,  nrvdntas,  pdtmvantas,  padvdntas , 
payasvantas  (VS.xxi.  42),  pavitravantas ,  pdjasvantas,  pustdvantas,  pusanvdntas , 
prajdvantas,  prdyasvantas ,  pravdivantas,  bhdgavantas ,  marutvantas,  mdhasvantas 
(VS.xxi. 42),  yajhdvantas ,  vacandvantas,  vdyasvantas  (VS.m.  18),  vdrmanvantas , 
vlrdvantas,  vrcivantas ,  saktlvantas,  sdsvantas,  simivantas,  sdptivantas,  sutd- 
vantas,  srkdvantas  (TS.  iv.  5.  n2),  svadhavantas  (V.),  sv drvantas,  himavantas, 
hrsiva?itas. 

2.  ahjimdntas,  dyasmantas  (TS.),  isumantas,  rstimdntas,  ksumantas,  jyotis- 
mantas,  tvdstrmantas  (VS.xxvn.  20),  tvisTmantas,  dyumdntas,  mddhumantas , 


1  ‘containing  curds’ ;  cp.  Lanman  513. 

2  Also  the  Amredita  compound  dkivato- 
dhivatas. 

3  Elsewhere  ten  vocatives  in  -vas  and  -mas 
occur:  five  from  perfect  participle  stems  in 
-■ vdms :  khidvas ,  cikitvas,  litirvas ,  didivas , 
mldhvas',  four  from  stems  ending  in  -van-, 
rtavas,  evayavas ,  prataritvas,  matarisvas ;  and 
pumas  from  pumams *.  There  are  also  two 
in  -yas  from  comparative  stems  in  -yams : 
ojiyas  and  jydyas. 

4  In  11.  i5  gnavas  should  probably  be  read 

guavas  as  a  vocative. 


5  The  Pada  text  reads  sata-van ;  cp.  RPr. 
IX.  10. 

6  These  two  forms  occurring  in  passages 
taken  from  the  RV.  are  substituted  for 

marutvas  and  harivas  of  the  RV. 

7  That  is,  patmvam. 

8  The  mysterious  form  sdtapantd  (x.  1065) 
should  perhaps  be  corrected  to  satavanta  — 
saia-vantd  ? 

9  The  weak  form  kratumatd  seems  to  be 
used  for  krdtumantd  in  x.  591. 

The  weak  form  indrdvatas  seems  to  be 
used,  for  indravantas  in  IV.  27  r. 

13* 


196  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

mtdhusmantas ,  ydvamantas ,  rayimdntas,  vadhttmantas ,  vdslmantas ,  sisumantas , 
sthivimdntas ,  harsumdntas ,  havismantas. 

N.  A.  n.  1 ,  ghrtdvanti.  —  2.  pasumanti.  The  Padapatha  reads  -anti 1  in  these 
forms,  and  the  lengthening  of  the  vowel  seems  to  be  metrical2. — The  weak 
form  ksumdti  (used  with  yutha)  seems  to  be  used  for  ksumanti  in  iv.  2 l8. 

A.  m.  1.  arvatas,  indravatas,  rtviydvatas ,  krsandvatas ,  janivatas ,  tdpas- 
vatas,  trsydvatas,  tvdvatas ,  nrvdtas,  pdtmvatas,  parasvatas  (VS.  xxiv.  28)  ‘wild 
asses’,  pastyhvatas ,  posytzvatas,  prajdvatas ,  bhangurdvatas ,  yasasvatas,  yatumd- 
vatas,  rdbhasvatas ,  rayivdtas ,  revdtas ,  vdnanvatas ,  vr  civ  at  as,  saryandvatas ? 
sdsvatas ,  simivatas ,  sutavatas ,  sunrtavatas ,  hiranyavatas ,  hesasvatas.  — 
2.  rtumdtas  (VS.  xix.  61),  gJmatas,  jydtismatas ,  dyumdtas 3,  prdsthnatas , 
mddhumatas ,  vadhbmatas ,  virukmatas ,  sunumatas,  svastimdtas. 

I.  1.  m.  drvadbhis ,  ddksinavadbhis ,  pdtmvadbhis ,  maghdvadbhis 4,  rdbhas- 
vadbhis ,  revddbhis,  vdjavadbhis,  sasvadbhis,  simivadbhis ,  sutdsomavadbhis.  — 
n.  ghrtdvadbhis.  —  2.  m.  rstimadbhis ,  kridum adbhis,  gomadbhis ,  bar/iis- 
madbhis ,  bhanumddbhis ,  vidydnmadbhis,  havismadbhis.  —  n.  m ddhum adbhis. 

D.  1.  m.  duvasvadbhyas  (VS.  ix.  35),  bhdgavadbhyas (AV.),  maghavadbhyas 
mdjavadbhyas  (AV.),  somavadbhyas  (AV.).  —  2.  m.  asimadbhyas  (VS.xvi.21), 
isumadbhyas  (VS.  xvi.  22),  inatrmddbhyas  (AV.),  yltumddbhyas.  —  n.  vibhu- 
madbhyas. 

G.  m.  1.  drvatam ,  ddksinavatam ,  datvdtam  (AV.),  bh  angurd  vat  am .  yatumd- 
vatdm ,  sdsvatam,  simTvatam ,  sutdvatam ,  himdvata?n  { AV.).  —  2.  gomatam{AN.). 

L.  m.  1.  dmavatsu ,  drvatsu ,  maghavatsu 4,  yusmdvatsu.  —  2.  dyumdtsu. 

Stems  in  radical  -f/?. 

317.  There  are  only  three  stems  in  -//r.  kdprth- 5  n.  ‘penis’,  path-b  m. 
path’,  with  its  compound  su-pdth-  ‘fair  path’,  and  abhi-sndth-  adj.  ‘piercing’. 
Among  them  these  three  furnish  examples  of  all  the  cases  in  the  singular, 
but  there  are  no  dual  forms,  and  in  the  plural  only  the  A.  and  G.  occur. 

Sing.  N.  kaprt\  A.  kaprt 1 * ;  I.  pathd 8,  sup  at  ha ;  D.  paths  (VS.);  Ab. 
path  as,  abhi-sndthas ;  G.  pathds 9;  L.  path!.  —  PI.  A.  pat  has 10 ;  G.  pathdm 1 1 . 

Stems  in  radical  -</. 

318.  About  a  hundred  stems  ending  in  d  are  made  in  the  form  of 
compounds  (only  seven  being  simple  stems)  from  the  twenty  roots  ad-  ‘eat’,  /GW- 
‘divide’,  chad-  ‘cover‘  and  ‘please’,  pad-  ‘go’,  mad-  ‘be  exhilarated’,  .sW-  ‘sit’, 

‘move  on’;  chid-  ‘cut  off,  ?iid-  ‘revile’,  bhid-  ‘cleave’,  zvV/-  ‘know’,  vid- 
‘hnd’;  ud-  ‘wet’,  nud-  ‘push’,  mud-  ‘rejoice’,  rud-  Sveep’,  sud-  ‘enjoy’,  .sv7V- 


1  As  also  in  the  only  N.  pi.  n.  of  the  | 
present  part,  in  santi  (314).  The  SV. 
also  has  the  short  a. 

2  Cp.  Lanman  521. 

3  In  VI.  17H  the  Padapatha  reads  dyumdta 
indra  as  dyumatah. ;  Grassmann  explains  it 
as  a  D.  dyumate  agreeing  with  rojA  On 
the  other  hand  dyumanta[h\  in  AV.  XVIII. 

1 V  should  probably  be  emended  to 
dyumatah ;  cp.  Whitney’s  note,  and  Lanman 
5214. 

4  Forms  transferred  from  the  -van  de¬ 
clension. 

5  The  derivation  of  this  word  is  uncertain: 

the  * th  is  radical  if  the  word  is  derived 

from  prath-  ‘extend’  (see  Grassmann,  s.  v.); 


but  it  is  suffixal  if  the  word  is  connected 
with  Lat.  (cp.  Uhlenbeck,  Etymo- 

logisches  Worterbuch,  s.  v.).  With  this 
possible  exception  there  are  no  derivative 
stems  in  -th. 

6  This  stem  supplements  pafithd-  and 
pathi-. 

1  kaprthd-m  occurs  once  as  a  transfer  form. 

8  Once  (1.  1299)  nasalized  before  a  vowel 

pathdm  a-. 

9  Once  (11.  24)  with  the  radical  vowel 
lengthened,  pathds. 

10  Accented  as  a  weak  form. 

The  transfer  form  pathJnam  also  occurs 
in  TS.  iv.  2.  55. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Consonant  Stems.  197 


‘put  .in  order’;  trd-  ‘pierce’,  mrd-  ‘crush’1.  Of  these  roots  only  seven  occur  as 
monosyllabic  substantives:  nid-  ‘contempt’,  bhid-  ‘destroyer’,  vld-  ‘knowledge’, 
ud-  ‘wave’,  mud-  ‘joy’,  mrd-  ‘clay’,  being  f.,  and  pad-  ‘foot’,  m.  There  is  also 
the  monosyllabic  n.  hrd-  ‘heart’2 3 4. 

Strong  and  weak  forms  are  not  distinguished  except  in  pad-)  and 
the  inflexion  is  the  same  in  all  genders  except,  of  course,  the  N.  A.  n. 
du.  and  pi. 

a.  The  following  pecularities  or  irregularities  of  this  declension  are  to  be  noted. 
1.  The  weak  reduplicated  present  stem  dad-  of  dd-  ‘give’,  is  once  treated  as  a  root  in 
the  form  ayur-ddd-am  (AV.)  ‘giving  long  life’.  • —  2.  The  vowel  of  mad-  is  lengthened 
in  sadha-mad-  ‘drinking  companion’,  and  soma-mad *  ‘intoxicated  with  Soma’,  of  both  of 
which,  however,  only  strong  cases  occur.  The  vowel  of  pad-  is  lengthened  not  only 
in  the  strong  cases,  but  occasionally  in  others  also:  dvipat,  N.  sing,  n.,  beside  dvipat, 
D.  dvipa.de?>,  L.  pi.  dvipdtsu,  while  the  N.pl.  m.  is  once  dvipddas  (AV.).  —  3.  The  euphonic 
combination  is  irregular  in  the  I.  pi.  of  pad-  which  is  padbhfs 4  beside  the  Ab.  du.  pad- 
bhya??i.  —  4.  The  stem  hrd-  is  found  in  weak  cases  only5.  Its  place  is  taken  in  the 
N.  A.  sing.  pi.  by  hrd-aya-,  which  is  also  used  in  other  cases  ( hfdaydt ,  hrdaye ,  hfdayesu ), 
though  in  the  RV.  almost  entirely  in  late  passages.  —  5.  There  are  a  few  transitions  to 
the  a-declension  in  the  inflexion  of  these  stems.  Starting  from  the  strong  A.  pad-am 
are  formed  the  N.  sing,  pada-s  and  the  N.pl.  padds ,  both  in  late  passages  of  the  RV.6. 
Similarly,  starting  from  the  A.  sadha-mad-am  are  formed  the  locatives  sadha-ma.de  and 
sadha-madesu.  Beside  nid-ds,  the  ordinary  Ab.  of  nid-,  the  form  nidayds  occurs  once. 


Inflexion. 


319.  The  inflexion  of  these  stems  is  identical  with  that  of  the  radical 
-t  stems.  The  forms  actually  occurring,  if  made  from  pad-  ‘foot’,  and  -vid- 
m.  f.  n.  ‘finding’,  would  be  as  follows: 

Sing.  N.  pat ,  -vit.  —  A.  pcidarn ,  -vidam.  —  n.  -vit.  —  I.  pada ,  -vida.  — 
D.  pade. '  -vide.  —  Ab.  padds ,  -vidas.  —  G.  padds,  -vidas.  —  L.  padi ,  -z ndi.  — 
V.  ( sdrva)-vit . 

Du.  N.  A.  V.  pdda ,  m.  f.  -vida.  —  I.  padbhydm.  —  Ab.  padbhydm.  — 
G.  padds.  —  L.  padds. 

PI.  N.  pddas,  m.  f.  -vidas.  —  A.  padds,  m.  f.  -vidas.  —  I.  padbhis  (AV.), 
-vidbhis.  —  D.  -vidbhyas.  —  G.  paddm ,  -vidam.  —  L.  patsu,  -vitsu. 

a.  The  forms  actually  occurring  are  the  following: 

Sing.  N.  m.  1.  with  lengthened  vowel:  pad-  with  its  compounds  and 
sadha-mad- :  pat  (AV.);  a-pdt ,  eka-pat ,  eka-siti-pat  (VS.  xxix.  58)  ‘having  one 
white  foot’,  cdtus-pat ,  tri-pdt,  dvi-pdt  and  dvi-pat  (AV.),  visvatas-pat,  siti-pdt 
(AV.),  sdrva-pat  (AV.),  sahasra-pat)  sadha-mdt  (iv.  211)  and  the  abnormal 
sadha-mds1  (vn.  187). 

2.  with  unchanged  vowel,  being  compounds  ending  in  various  roots: 
from  ad-  :  agdhdt  (TS.  111.  3,  82),  karambhdt ,  kravydt ,  visvdt,  havydt)  from 
chad-  : prathama-cchat* ;  from  pad-  :  anu-pdt  (VS. xv.  8)  ‘coming  to  pass’;  from 
chid-  :  ukha-cchit)  from  bhid-  :  adri-bhit,  ud-bhit ,  gotra-bhit,  pur-bhit)  from 
vid- :  d-ksetra-vit,  asva-vit,  kratu-vit,  ksetra-vit,  gatu-vit,  go-vit,  dravino-vit , 


1  Compounds  formed  with  -vid  and  -sad  5  Its  high  grade  form  -hard  occurs  in  the 

are  the  commonest.  N.  sing.  m. 

2  The  strong  form  of  this  word,  hard-,  6  Probably  also  the  A.  sing.  m.  pahca- 
appears  in  composition  with  dus-  and  su-.  padarn-,  see  Lanman  47 12. 

Another  word  for  ‘heart’,  srcid-  (Lat.  cord-)  I  7  See  above  55- 

n.  occurs  only  in  the  A.  sing,  with  the  verbs  8 ‘appearing  first’,  ‘typical’  (x. 81 accord- 
kr-  and  dhd-.  ing  to  Sayana  from  chad-  ‘cover’  =  ‘covering 

3  The  lengthening  here  is,  however,  first’, 
metrical. 

4  Owing  to  the  confusing  influence  of  the 

I.  pi.  padbhis  from  pas-  ‘look’. 


198 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


nabho-vit ,  ndtha-v'it  (AY.),  pasu-v'it  (AV.),  purdna-v'it  (AY.),  praja-vit  (AV.), 
rayi-vit ,  vaco-vit,  vayuna-vit,  varivo-vit,  vasu-vit,  visva-vit ,  vira-vit  (AV.), 
sruta-vit,  sarva-vit  (AV.),  svar-vit ,  hiranya-vit;  from  jW-  :  adma-sdt,  antariksa- 
sdt,  upastha-sdt ,  rta-sdt,  turanya-sdt ,  daksina-sdt  (VS.  xxxvm.  10),  durona-sdt, 
duvanya-sdt ,  pragharma-sdt ,  vara-sdt ,  vyoma-sdt ,  su-sam-sdt;  camu-sat ,  dru-sat, 
nr-sat,  vedi-sdt ,  suci-sdt.  Also  su-hdrt 1  (AV.  11.  7  s)  ‘friendly’. 

f.  1.  a-pdt.  —  2.  a-cchdt  (VS.  xv.  5),  pra-cchdt  (VS.  xv.  5)  ‘covering’; 
su-yavasAt  (-ad);  sam-vit;  sam-sat ,  su-a-sdt  (AV.)2. 

N.  A.  n.  1.  -pad-  appears  with  both  unaltered  and  lengthened  vowel: 
dvi-pdt ,  cdtus-pat  and  tri-pAt ,  dvi-pAt ,  cdtus-pat. 

2.  hrt  (TS.  iv.  4.  72);  prakala-vlt  ‘knowing  very  little’;  raghu-sydt  ‘moving 
quickly’  ( ]/ syad-). 

A.  m.  1.  pddam ;  a-pAdam,  tri-pddam 3,  dvi-pddam  (VS.  xm.  47),  V//- 
pctdam  (AV.),  sahdsra-padam;  sadha-mddam;  dur-hdrdam  (AV.).  —  2.  from 
ad-  :  kravyddam ,  visvddam;  from  pad-  :  dvi-pddam  (VS.  xxviii.  32)  a  metre; 
from  chid :  pra-cchidam  (VS.  xxx.  16)  ‘cutting  to  pieces’;  from  bhid- :  ud-bhidam, 
gotra-bh'ida?n ,  pur-bhidam ;  from  zVV-  :  ahar-vidam ,  kratu-vidam,  ksetra-vidam , 
gatu-vidam ,  go-vidam ,  varivo-vidam ,  vasu-vidam ,  visva-v'idam ,  saci-vidam,  svar- 
vidam,  hotra-vidam ;  from  :  garta-sddam,  su-sam-sddam ;  apszc-sddam,  dru- 
s d dam,  dhur-sddam ,  barhi-sddam  4,  vanar-sadam ;  from  -syad- :  raghu-syddam, 
havaiia-syadam.  —  f.  2.  nidam 5,  mrdam  (VS.  xi.  55;  TS.  iv.  1.  52);  ayur-dddam 
(AV.)6,  upa-sadam ,  go-vidam  (AV.),  ni-vidam ,  pari-pddam  ‘snare’,  pari-sddam 
(AV.),  pitr-sddam ,  barhi-sddam 4,  vaco-vidam ,  visva-v'idam ,  sam-vidam,  sam- 
sddam,  sa-mddam  ‘battle’  (‘raging  together’). 

I.  m.  padA  7 ;  dpa-dus-pada,  cdtus-padd ,  dvi-pdda;  ksetra-vida ,  varivo-vida , 
svar-vida ,  su-sdda  (AV.).  —  f.  udA ,  mud  A,  vidA;  upa-vida,  ni-vida ,  ni-sada , 
pra-miida  (VS.  xxxix.  9),  pra-vida,  sam-sada,  svar-vida.  —  n.  hrdA;  cdtus- 
padd  (AV.),  dus-pdda ,  dvi-pdda.  With  adverbial  shift  of  accent:  sarva-hrdA. 

D.  m.  a-pdde ,  kuhacid-vide ,  kravydde ,  cdtus-pade ,  tad-vide  (AV.),  vedi- 
sdde ,  sadana-sdde,  sarva-vide  (AV.),  svar-vide.  —  f.  nide,  mude;  pitr-sdde , 
pra-made  (VS.  xxx.  8),  pra-mude  (VS.  xxx.  10),  sam-pdde  (VS.  xv.  8).  — 
n.  hrde )  cdtus-pade ,  dzd-pdde8. 

Ab.  m.  padds  (AV.) ;  dvi-pddas. —  f.  niddts 9 ;  uttana-padas ,  sam-vidas 
(AV.).  —  n.  hrdas ;  sdt-padas  (AV.). 

G.  m.  eka-padas  (AV.),  dur-hardas  (AV.),  nr-sddas,  yavadas  (-adas), 
raghu-syddas  (AV.),  svar-vidas.  —  f.  pra-mi'idas ,  sam-sddas  (AV.).  —  n.  hrdas; 
cdtus-padas ,  dvi-pddas. 

L.  m.  padi;  svar-vidi.  —  f.  ni-sadi ,  sam-sddi.  —  n.  hrdi I0. 

V.  m.  visva-vit ,  sarva-vit  (AV.). 

Du.  N.  A.  V.  m.  1.  pAda;  pAdau.  —  2.  V.  ahar-vida ,  kavi-cchdda  ‘delight- 


1  This  seems  to  be  the  preferable  reading 
(suhart  tend);  the  Pada  has  su-hah.  Other¬ 
wise  the  N.  appears  as  su-har  in  MS.  IV.  2^ 
(p.  26,  1.  19)  in  suhar  nah;  see  Lanman’s 
note  in  Whitney’s  AV.  Translation  on  xix. 
452,  and  Grammar  150  b. 

2  Perhaps  also  wAaV  in  AV.  XX.  1326-  7, 
where  the  edition  has  vanisad. 

3  pahca-pdda-m  (1.  16412)  is  probably  a 
transfer  to  the  a-declension;  see  Lanman 
4712- 

4  For  barhis-scidam;  see  above  62. 

5  In  the  Amredita  compound  nidam- 

11  id  am. 


6  From  a  secondary  root  dad •  formed 
from  the  present  stem  of  <Az-  ‘give’. 

7  BR.  take  .mYi  in  AV.  IV.  47  as  I.  of 
jAA  ‘position’,  but  owing  to  the  accent  it 
must  be  taken  as  an  adv.  ‘always’,  see 
Whitney’s  note  on  the  passage. 

8  Beside  dvi-pade  occurring  eleven  times, 
dvi-pade  occurs  once  (i.  1213),  when  the 
lengthening  is  metrical. 

9  The  transfer  form  nidayas  occurs  once. 

i°  On  the  possibility  of  hrdi  representing 

an  A.  sing.  n.  in  two  or  three  passages,  see 
Lanman  4734. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Consonant  Stems. 


199 


ing  in  sages’,  kratu-vlda,  vasu-vlda ,  visva-vlda,  svar-vlda 1 ;  atma-sddau.  — 
f.  ud-bhlda ,  barhi-sdda 2 ;  sra?ita-sddau  (AV.). 

I.  m.  padbhydm  (AV.).  —  Ab.  m.  padbhydm.  —  G.  m.  padJs  (AV.)3.  — 
L.  m.  pados.  —  f.  prd-pados  (AV.). 

PL  N.  V.  m.  1.  a-pddas ,  cdtus-padas ,  dvi-pddas  ,  siti-pddas 5;  sadha- 
mddas,  soma-mddas ;  su-hdrdas  (AV.).  —  2.  firjadas ,  puru-s&das ,  madhv-ddas , 
yavasddas ,  somddas,  havir-ddas ;  a-trdas 6,  V.  pra-trdas ;  deva-nldas ;  ud-bhidas ; 
abhimoda-mudas  (AV.),  svadu-sam-mudas  (AV.);  anna-vidas  (AV.),  ahar-vldas, 
V.  gatu-vidas  (AV.),  ni-v'idas  (AV.),  m-vidas  (AV.),  mtha-vldas ,  brahma-vldas 
(AV.),  yajur-vldas  (AV.),  vaco-vidas ,  varivo-vldas ,  vasu-vidas ,  visva-vldas 
(AV.),  svar-vldas ,  hotra-vldas ;  adma-sadas ,  antariksa-sddas  (AV.),  apsu-sddas 
(TS.  1.  4.  io1),  upa-sddas  (AV.),  pascat-sddas  (VS.  ix.  36),  purah-sadas ,  sarma- 
sddas ,  sabha-sddas  (AV.),  svadu-sam-sddas ;  camu-sadas ,  divi-sadas  (AV.), 
dhur-sddas,  bar/ii-sddas,  V.  barhi-sadas,  vanar-sadas ,  vedi-sddas  (VS.  11.  29); 
raghu-syddas.  —  f.  1.  dur-Jidrdas  (AV.);  nidas ,  mddas;  agha-rudas  (AV.), 
amddas  (-ddas),  upa-sddas  (AV.),  nis-pddas ,  pra-mudas ,  visva-su-vidas , 
sddas ,  su  hut  ddas  (-ddas),  svar-vldas. 

A.  m.7  pad  as ;  dur-hdrdas  (AV.),  su-hdrdas  (AV.);  apsu-sddas  (AV.), 
kravyddas ,  cdtus-padas  (AV.),  tv  a -til das,  deva-nldas,  dvi-pddas  (AV.),  pari- 
sddas,  pasty a-sddas,  bahu-ksddas ,  sattra-sddas  (AV.).  —  f.  nidds,  bhldas ; 
ni-vldas,  pra-mudas ,  vasu-vidas,  vi-nudas ,  sa-madas ,  sa-syddas,  havya-sddas. 

I.  m.  padbhls  (AV.  TS.  VS.),  padbhls  in  RV.  and  VS.8;  gharma-sddbhis , 
satd-padbhis.  —  n.  hrdbhls. 

D.  m.  ajitariksa-sddbhyas  (AV.),  daksina-sddbhyas  (VS.  ix.  35), 
sddbhyas  (AV.  TS.),  pascat-sadbhyas  (VS.  ix.  35),  prthivi-sddbhyas  (AV.). 

G.  m.  su-hdrdam  (AV.);  adma-sddam ,  cdtuspadam  (VS.  TS.  AV.),  dvi- 
pddam ,  barhi-sddam  (VS.  xxiv.  18),  svd-padam  (AV.),  su-sddam  (AV.).  — 
f.  upa-sddam  (VS.  xix.  14)  a  kind  of  ceremony,  pari-pddam ,  sranta-sddam  (AV.), 
sa-madam. 

Li.  m.  patsu.  —  f.  sa-mdtsu.  —  n.  hrtsu. 

Stems  in  derivative  -</. 

320.  There  are  some  six  stems  formed  with  suffixal  -d,  seemingly  all 
feminines9,  which  with  one  exception  (sardd-)  are  of  rare  occurrence.  They 
are  drsdd-  and  dhrsdd-  (RV1.)  ‘nether  millstone’,  bhasad-  ‘hind  quarters’,  with 
its  compound  su-bhasdd-  ‘having  beautiful  buttocks’,  vandd -10  (RV1.)  ‘longing’, 
sardd-  ‘autumn’;  kaki'td -11  ‘summit’,  with  its  compound  tri-kakud-  (AV.)  ‘three- 
peaked’,  kakud-  ‘palate’.  The  inflexion  is  like  that  of  radical  -/  stems.  The 
forms  occurring  are  the  following: 

Sing.  N.  f.  kakut,  kakut ,  dhrsdt ,  bhasdt,  sardt.  —  m.  tri-kakut  (VS.  AV.). 


1  In  AV.  xviil.  2X4  occurs  the  ungramma¬ 
tical  form  pathi-sadl  an  imitation  of  pathi- 
raksT  of  RV.  X.  1411. 

2  The  form  rapsuda, ,  occurring  once,  is  of 
uncertain  meaning  and  origin. 

3  This  form  is  used  with  an  ablative 
sense  in  AV.  I.  182. 

4  AV.  X.  26  has  dvi-pddas. 

5  The  transfer  form  pddds  occurs  once  in 
the  RV.  (I.  1639). 

6  Used  as  ablative  infinitive. 

7  There  are  no  N.  A.  V.  forms  in  the 
n.  pi.  Cp.  Lanman  474. 

8  Four  times  in  RV.  and  once  in  VS. 


(xxill.  13)  owing  to  confusion  with  padbhis, 
I.  pi.  of  ‘look’. 

9  Except  the  adj.  tri-kakud-  (AV.),  siti- 
kakud-  (TS.)  ‘white-humped’  and  possibly 

vandd-. 

10  This  stem  occurs  only  once  (il.  45)  in 
the  form  vanddas,  N.  pi.  m.  ‘Verlangen’  (from 
van-  ‘desire’)  according  to  BR. ;  G.  sing.  m. 
of  van-dd-  ‘wood-consuming’  according  to 
Grassmann. 

n  The  origin  of  this  -</  is  obscure.  On 
the  relation  of  this  word  to  kakubh -  see 
Lanman  47 14. 


200 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


A.  f.  kaki'idam ,  drsddam,  bhasddazn  (AV.),  sarddazn. —  m.  iri-kakudam  (AV.). 
I.  f.  drsdda,  saradd  (TS.  iv.  4.  123).  —  D.  f.  sarade.  —  Ab.  f.  kaki'idas. 
L,.  f.  kakiidi  (AV.),  sarddi.  —  PL  N.  f.  vanddas,  sarddas.  —  A.  f.  sarddas. 
—  I.  f.  sarddbhis.  —  G.  f.  saradam  (AV.).  —  L.  f.  saratsu  (AV.). 


Stems  in  radical  -dh. 

321.  Stems  ending  in  -dh  are  all  radical,  simple  or  compound.  There 
are  some  fifty  derived,  with  only  two  or  three  exceptions,  from  the  following 
sixteen  roots:  badh-  ‘oppress’,  sddh-  ‘succeed’;  idh-  ‘kindle’,  vidh-  ‘pierce’ 
(=  zyadh-),  sidh-  ‘succeed’,  sridh-  ‘blunder’  (?);  ksudh -  ‘be  hungry’,  budh- 
‘waken’,  yudh-  ‘fight’,  ?-udh-  ‘grow’  and  ‘obstruct’;  rdh-  ‘thrive’,  mrdh-  ‘neglect’, 
vrdh-  ‘grow’,  sprdh-  ‘contend’. 

In  this  declension  there  occurs  no  stem  distinguishing  strong  and  weak 
cases.  Masculines  and  feminines  are  inflected  exactly  alike.  No  distinctively 
neuter  forms  (N.  A.  du.  pi.)  occur,  and  only  four  case-forms  (G.  L.  sing.)  are 
found  as  neuters.  There  are  two  monosyllabic  m.  nouns:  vrdh -  ‘strengthening’ 
and  (perhaps)  bddh- 1 ;  besides  seven  f.  substantives:  nadh- 2 *  ‘bond’;  sridh-  ‘foe’; 
ksudh-  ‘hunger’,  yudh-  ‘fight’;  mrdh-  ‘conflict’,  vrdh-  ‘prosperity’,  sprdh-  ‘battle’. 
Neuter  cases  occur  in  the  sing.  (I.  G.)  of  compounds  of  - vidh ,  -yudh ,  and  -vrdh. 

a.  Three  or  four  stems  are  of  doubtful  origin:  agnidh-  is  probably  lobe  explained 
as  agni-dh-  ‘priest  who  prepares  ( dhd -  ‘put’)  the  fire’,  rather  than  as  a  shortened  form  of 
agnidh-  ‘firedcindler’  (from  idh-  ‘kindle’)  which  does  not  occur  in  the  RV. J;  isidh- 
‘offering’  (RVr.)  is  perhaps  a  shortened  form  of  nis-sidh-  ‘offering’4;  prksudh -  (RV1.)  is 
obscure  in  meaning  and  origin;  surudh -  f.  ‘invigorating  draught’  is  perhaps  derived  from 
srdh-  ‘be  defiant’  with  Svarabhakti 5. 

Inflexion. 

322.  Sing.  N.  m.  agnit,  anu-rut  (VS.)  and  anu-rut  ‘loving’;  usar-bhut 
‘waking  ( budh -)  at  morn’,  yaviyut 6  ‘eager  to  fight’,  svd-vlt  (AV.  VS.)  ‘porcupine’ 
(‘dog-piercer’,  Yvidh-),  sam-it  ‘flaming’.  —  f.  ksut  (AV.);  pra-vrt  ‘growth’, 
vT-rut  ‘plant’  (AV.),  sam-it1  ‘fuel’. 

A.  m.  vfdham ,  and  its  compounds:  annd-vrdham  ‘prospering  by  food’, 
ahutl-vrdham  ‘delighting  in  sacrifices’,  gira-vfdhavi  ‘delighting  in  praise’,  tugryd- 
vrdham  ‘favouring  the  Tugryas’,  namo-vfdham  ‘honoured  by  adoration’,  payo- 
vfdham  'full  of  sap’,  parvata-vrdha?n  ‘delighting  in  pressing  stones’,  madhu- 
vrdhain  ‘abounding  in  sweetness’,  yajha-vfdham  (AV.)  ‘abounding  in  sacrifice’, 
vayo-vrdham  ‘increasing  strength’,  sadyo-vfdham  ‘rejoicing  every  day’,  saho- 
vrdham  ‘increasing  strength’,  su-vrdham  ‘joyous’;  ag7iidha?/i,  anu-rudham  (VS. 
xxx.  9),  a-sridham  ‘not  failing’,  usar-budham,  gosu-yudham*  ‘fighting  for  kine’, 
marma-vidham  (AV.)  ‘piercing  the  vitals’,  yajha-sadham  ‘performing  sacrifice’, 
hrdaya-vidham  (AV.)  ‘wounding  the  heart’.  —  f.  ksudham ,  yudham ,  sridham ; 
a-sridham ,  usar-budhani ,  nis-sidham ,  vJrudham ,  sam-rudham  (AV.)  ‘check’  (in 
gambling) 9,  sa7n-idham. 

I.  m.  su-vrdha.  —  f.  ksudhti  (AV.),  yudhti ,  vrdh  A ;  sam-idhd ,  su-budha 
(AV.)  ‘good  awakening’,  su-vfdha  (AV.),  su-sam-idha  ‘good  fuel’.  —  n.  payo- 
vrdha ,  yaviyudha ,  sakam-vrdha  ‘growing  together’. 


1  In  bcidhas  A.  pi.  in  VI.  II*  (Grassmann) ; 
BR.  do  not  acknowledge  a  m.  use  of  bhdh-, 
and  in  VIII.  45 IO,  IX.  1096  they  would  join 
the  word  with  the  preceding  pciri. 

2  In  nadbhyas  (x.  606)  if  derived  from 

nadh -  =  nah-  ‘bind’  (BR.  s.  v.  ncih -);  but  it 

is  more  probably  =  *nabd-bhyas  from  napt-, 

weak  stem  of  napat- ,  as  also  indicated  by 

the  accent. 


3  See  above  p.  18,  note  6. 

4  Cp.  is-kfti-  for  nis-krii-. 

5  Cp.  above  21. 

6  From  the  intensive  stem  oi yudh-  ‘fight’. 

7  In  the  Amredita  samit-samit. 

8  With  the  L.  pi.  gosu  instead  of  the 
stem  go-. 

9  Cp.  Whitney’s  note  on  AV.  vn.  505. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Consonant  Stems.  201 


D.  m.  usar-biidhe,  rta-vfdhe  ‘fostering  truth’,  puru-nissidhe  ‘repelling  many 
(foes)’,  mahi-vfdhe  ‘greatly  rejoicing’,  vi-?nfdhe  (VS.  vm.  44)  ‘dispeller  of  foes’, 
sam-fdhe  (A V.)  ‘welfare’,  sa-vfdhe  (VS.  xvi.  30)  ‘growing’.  —  f.  ksudhe '  yudhi 
(AV.)1,  vrdhe '  sam-idhe. 

Ab.  f.  ksudhds,  yudhds,  sridhds. 

G.  m.  gosu-yudhas ,  vi-mrdhas 2  ‘foe’,  sumati-vfdhas  (VS.  xxn.  12) 
‘delighting  in  prayer’.  —  f.  ksudhds.  —  n.  hrdaya-vidhas. 

L>.  f.  mrdhi ,  yudhi ,  sprdh'r,  pra-budhi  ‘awaking’. 

Du.  N.  A.  V.  m.  a-sridha ,  rta-vfdha ,  V.  rta-vrdha ,  namo-vfdha ,  puro- 
yudha  ‘fighting  in  front’;  rtd-vfdhau.  —  f.  rdu-vfdha  ‘increasing  sweetness’, 
ghrta-vfdha  ‘rejoicing  in  fatness’,  payo-vfdha, ,  vayo-vfdha ,  sakam-vfdha ; 
sam-idhau  (AV.). 

Pl.  N.V.m.  rta-vfdhas ,  V.  rta-vrdhas ,  tugrya-vfdhas ,  payo-vfdhas ,  parvata- 
vfdhas ,  vayo-vfdhas ,  suge-vfdhas  ‘rejoicing  in  good  progress’,  su-vfdhas ;  a-sridhas , 
ayur-yudhas  (VS.  xvi.  60)  ‘struggling  for  life’,  usar-budhas ,  gosu-yudhas ,  jhu- 
bddhas  ‘bending  the  knees’,  pra-yudhas  ‘assailing’,  vrsa-yudhas  ‘combating 
men’,  surudhas ,  soma-pari-btidhas  ‘despising  Soma’.  —  f.  ksiidhas  (AV.), 
mfdhas ,  spfdhas ,  sridhas  (VS.  xxvn.  6)  ‘foes’;  amitra-yudhas  ‘fighting  with 
enemies’,  a-sridhas,  isidhas ,  rta-vrdhas,  nis-sidhas ,  pari-bddhas  ‘oppressors’, 
pari-sprdhas  ‘rivals’,  vT-rudhas,  V.  vT-rudhas ,  surudhas ,  sam-idhas. 

A.  m.  bdd/ias ;  rta-vrdhas,  tamo-vrdhas  ‘rejoicing  in  darkness’,  rayi-vrdhas 
‘enjoying  wealth’,  usar-budhas ,  surudhas.  —  f.  mfdhas ,  yudhas,  spfdhas , 
sridhas 3 ;  vT-rudhas,  surudhas,  sam-idhas,  sam-fdhas ,  sa-vfdhas  ‘increasing 
together’ 4. 

I.  f.  sam-idbhis,  vT-rudbhis  (AV.).  —  D.  f.  nad-bhyas 5 *.  —  Ab.  f.  ul- 
rudbhyas  (AV.). 

G.  m.  vrdham ;  rta-vfdham,  pra-budham  ‘watchful’.  —  f.  yudhand  (AV.), 
sprdhfim ;  vis-sidham,  vT-rudham,  vT-rudham 7  (AV.). 

L.  f.  yutsii. ,  vT-rutsu. 

Stems  in  radical  -n. 

323.  The  radical  stems  ending  in  -/z  are  formed  from  half  a  dozen  roots: 
from  tan-  ‘stretch’,  ‘rejoice’,  van-  ‘be  pleasant’,  are  formed  monosyllabic 

substantives  meaning  ‘succession’,  ‘joy’,  ‘wood’,  respectively;  from  j-zwz- ‘sound’ 
is  formed  the  adj.  svan-8  ‘sounding’  and  the  compound  tuvi-svdn-  ‘roaring 
aloud’;  from  jwz-  ‘gain’,  the  compound  go-sdn-  ‘winning  cows’.  From  these 
six  nouns  very  few  case-forms  occur.  But  from  han-  ‘strike’  no  fewer  than 
35  compounds  are  made  in  the  RV.,  and  all  the  singular  cases  as  well  as 
several  of  the  du.  and  pl.  cases  are  formed.  All  the  stems  formed  from  these 
six  roots9  are  m.  except  Afzz-,  which  is  f. IO,  and  only  a  single  n.  case-form 
occurs  from  a  compound  of  han-  ( dasyu-ghnd ).  The  distinction  between  strong 
and  weak  forms  is  made  in  -/za;z-  only.  Here  in  the  weak  cases  a  as 


1  The  infinitive  yudhaye  is  a  transition 
to  the  /-declension,  there  being  no  stem 
yudhi-. 

2  With  irregular  accent ;  cp.LANMANr477(top). 

3  Fifteen  times  accented  sridhas,  once 
(IX.  718)  sridhds. 

4  In  viii.  454°,  IX.  1056  pari-badhas  should 
perhaps  be  read  instead  of  pari  badhas. 

5  If  from  according  to  BR.  (cp.  aAw- 

nahas  (A.  p.  f.) ;  according  to  Weber,  IS. 

13,  109,  from  nap-.  It  is  probably  from 

napl-  =  ndpat.  See  above  321,  note  on  nadh-. 


6  In  the  V.  yudharn  pate. 

1  In  the  V.  vlrudhdm  pate. 

8  The  accent  of  the  monosyllabic  stems 
is  irregular  in  remaining  on  the  radical 
syllable  except  tana  (beside  Af/za)  and  vanam\ 
cp.  Lanman  4794  and  above  94,  1  a. 

9  Other  roots  in  used  as  nominal  stems 
have  gone  over  to  the  a-  or  a-declension; 
thus  fan-  becomes  -fa-  or  fd-. 

-han-  forms  a  separate  fem.  stem  in  -1 
from  its  weak  form :  -sthn-t-. 

o 


202 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


representing  the  sonant  nasal  appears  for  an  before  consonants,  while  before 
vowels  the  root,  by  syncopation  of  its  vowel,  assumes  the  form  of  -ghn-. 
The  N.  sing.  11.  of  - han  is  -ha-m,  a  transition  to  the  a -declension 1  (for  -ha, 
which  does  not  occur). 

Inflexion. 


324.  All  forms  are  represented  in  this  declension  except  Ab.  sing.,  the  weak 
cases  of  the  du.,  and  the  D.  Ab.  pi.  The  forms  made  from  - han -  are:  Sing.  N. 
-ha2,  A.  -hdnam,  I.  -ghnd,  D.  -ghne,  G.  -ghnas,  L.  -ghni,  V.  -han.  —  Du.  N.  A. 
-hand,  -hdnau  (VS.TS.),  V.  -hand. —  PL  N.  -hdnas,  A.  - ghnas ,  I.  -hdbhis.  The  G. 
would  be  -ghndm  and  the  L.  -hdsu  according  to  the  analogy  of  other  stems  in 
this  declension.  The  forms  of  radical  «-stems  which  occur  are  the  following: 

Sing.  N.  m.  aghasamsa-hd  ‘slaying  the  wicked’,  adrsta-hd  ‘slaying 
unseen  (vermin)’,  abhimati-hd  ‘destroying  adversaries’,  amitra-hd  ‘killing 
enemies’,  amwa-hd  ‘destroying  pains’,  arusa-hd  ‘striking  the  dark  (cloud)’, 
a-vira-hd  ‘not  slaying  men’,  asasti-hd  ‘averting  curses’,  asura-hd  ‘demon-slaying’, 
ahi-hd  ‘killing  the  serpent’,  krslvhd  ‘subduing  nations’,  go-hd  ‘killing  cattle’, 
dasyu-hd  ‘destroying  the  Dasyus’,  durnama-hd  (AV.)  ‘destroying  the  ill-named’, 
nr-hd  ‘killing  men’,  puro-hd  ‘destroying  strongholds’3,  prsni-hd  (AV.)  ‘slaying 
the  speckled  (snake)’,  mano-hd  (AV.)  ‘mind-destroying’,  musti-hd  ‘striking 
with  the  fist’,  yatu-hd  (AV.)  ‘destroying  witchcraft’,  rakso-hd  ‘destroying  demons’, 
vasar-hd  ‘destroying  at  dawn’,  vrtra-hd  ‘Vrtra-slaying’,  s'arya-hd  ‘killing  with 
arrows’,  satra-hd  ‘destroying  entirely’,  sapatna-hd  ‘slaying  rivals’,  sapta-hd 
‘slaying  seven’.  —  n.  Only  two  transition  forms  occur:  vrtra-ha-m  and 
satra-hd -m* . 

A.  m.  d-pra-hanam 5  ‘not  hurting’,  abhimati-hdnam ,  ahi-hanam ,  tamo- 
hanam  ‘dispelling  darkness’,  dasyu-hdnam ,  rakso-hdnam 5,  valaga-hdnam 
‘destroying  secret  spells’  (VS.  v.  23),  mano-hanam  (AV.),  vira-hanam 5  (VS. 
xxx.  5)  ‘homicide’,  vrtra-hdnam 5,  satra-hanam 5,  sapatna-hanam  (AV.). 

I.  m.  vrtra-ghnd 6.  —  n.  dasyu-ghnd.  —  f.  tand  (once)  and  tana 7 


(19  times). 

D.  m.  rare1 ;  abhimdti-ghne  (VS.  vi.  32),  a  sura -ghnd6,  ahi-ghne ,  nr-ghne 6, 
makha-ghne  (TS.  hi.  2.  4.  u  2),  ‘slayer  of  Makha’,  vrtra-ghnd 6.  —  f.  tdne 7. 

G.  m.  go-sanas  (in  the  V.  gosano  nap  at) ;  asura-ghnds6,  vrtra-ghnds 6. 

L.  m.  svdni 8  (ix.  669),  tuvi-svdni ;  bhruna-ghni  (AV.)  ‘killer  of  an  embryo’. 
Without  an  ending:  rdn^. 

V.  m.  amitra-han ,  ahi-han ,  vrtra-han. 

Du.  N.  A.  V.  tamo-hand ,  rakso-hana 5,  vrtra-hd nd ,  V.  vrtra-hand 5.  With 
-au  :  rakso-hdnau  (VS.  v.  25),  valaga-hdnau  (VS.  v.  25;  TS.  1.  3.  22). 

PI.  N.  V.  m.  V.  tuvi-svanas ;  a-bhog-ghdnas10  ‘striking  the  niggardly 
one’,  pwiar-hdnass  ‘destroying  in  return’,  yajna-hdnas  (TS.)  ‘destroying 
sacrifice’,  satru-hanas 5  ‘slaying  enemies’. 

A.  m.  sata-ghnas  (AV.)  ‘gain-destroying’.  With  strong  form:  rakso-hanas 5 
and  valaga-hanas  (VS.  v.  25;  TS.  1.  3.  22). 

I.  m.  vrtra-hdbhis.  —  G.  m.  vandm.  —  L.  m.  ramsu1 ,  vd/nsu 7. 


1  The  forms  made  from  -ghn a-,  viz.  -ghnas, 
-ghndm,  -ghndya,  -gnasya,  - ghne ,  are  probably 
to  be  explained  as  transition  forms  starting 
from  the  weak  stem  -ghn-. 

2  Formed  like  the  N.  of  derivative 
stems  (327). 

3  That  is,  puras,  A.  pi.  of  pur-,  the  case 
termination  being  retained. 

4  The  normal  forms  would  be  ^ vrtra-hd 
and  * satra-hd . 


5  See  above  47,  A  b  2  (p.  39). 

6  See  above  p.  38,  note  4. 

7  Against  the  rule  of  accentuation  in 
monosyllabic  stems  (94). 

8  This  form  may,  however,  be  the  3.  sing, 
passive  aor.  See  below  501,  note  on  sadi. 

9  With  loss  of  the  loc.  ending  as  in  the 
-an  declension  (325). 

10  -ghanas  for  -hdnas,  see  above  80,  81. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Consonant  Stems.  203 


Derivative  stems  in  -an,  -man,  -van. 

325.  This  declension  embraces  a  large  number  of  words,  the  stems 
in  - van  being  by  far  the  commonest,  those  in  -an  the  least  frequent.  It  is 
almost  limited  to  masculines  and  neuters;  but  some  forms  of  adjective  stems 
serve  as  feminines,  and  there  is  one  specifically  f.  stem,  yjs-an-  'woman’1. 

The  distinction  of  strong  and  weak  forms  is  regularly  made.  In  the 
strong  cases  the  a  of  the  suffix  is  usually  lengthened,  e.  g.  ddhvzn-am ;  but 
in  half  a  dozen  -an  and  -man  stems  it  remains  unchanged;  e.  g.  arya-mdn-am. 
In  the  weak  cases  the  a  is  often  syncopated  before  vowel  endings,  though 
never  when  - man  and  -van  are  preceded  by  a  consonant2,  e.  g.  I.  sing,  grd- 
vn-a 3  from  grd-van -,  ‘pressing  stone’4,  while  before  consonant  endings  the 
final  n  disappears5,  e.  g.  rdja-bhis.  In  the  RV.  the  syncopation  never  takes 
place  in  the  N.  A.  du.  n.,  nor  with  one  exception  ( sata-ddvn-i )  in  the  L.  sing. 

As  in  all  other  stems  ending  in  -n,  the  nasal  is  dropped  in  the  N.  sing. ; 
e.  g.  m.  dd/iva,  n.  karma .  But  there  are  two  peculiarities  of  inflexion  which, 
being  common  to  these  three  groups,  do  not  appear  elsewhere  in  the  consonant 
declension.  Both  the  L.  sing,  and  the  N.  A.  pi.  n.  are  formed  in  two  ways.  The 
ending  of  the  L.  sing,  is  in  the  RV.  dropped  more  often  than  not,  e.  g. 
murdhdn-i  and  murdhdn,  the  choice  often  depending  on  the  metre6.  The 
N.  A.  pi.  n.  is  formed  with  -ani  from  18  stems  and  with  -a  from  19  stems7 
in  the  RV. ;  seven  of  the  latter  appear  with  -a  in  the  Samhita  text,  but  with  -a 
like  the  rest  in  the  Pada  text.  The  evidence  of  the  Avesta  indicates  that  there 
were  in  the  Indo-Iranian  period  two  forms,  naman  and  ndmdni,  the  former 
losing  its  -n  as  usual  when  final  after  a  long  vowel.  On  this  ground  the  -a 
form  of  the  Samhita,  though  the  less  frequent,  would  appear  to  be  the  older8. 

There  are  here  many  supplementary  stems  and  numerous  transitions  to 
the  ^-declension. 

1.  Stems  in  -an. 

326.  These  stems,  which  are  both  m.  and  n.,  are  not  numerous.  They 
include  some  which  at  first  sight  have  the  appearance  of  belonging  to  one 
of  the  other  two  groups:  yu-v-an-9  ‘youth’,  sv-dn-  ‘dog’,  rji-sv-an10  N.  of  a 
man,  matari-sv-an- 10  N.  of  a  demi-god,  vi-bhv-an- 11  ‘far-reaching’;  pari-j '/n-an-12 
‘going  round’.  The  n.  slrs-dn-  is  an  extended  stem  from  siras-  ‘head’  = 
sir{a)s-dn~. 

a.  Besides  the  N.  pi.  yosan-as  ‘women’,  six  or  seven  forms  of  this  declension  appear 
to  be  feminine  as  agreeing  with  f.  substantives:  vfsa  ‘raining’  ( kasa ,  vak),  vrsanam 
( tvacam ),  vrsana  ( dyavd-prthivi ),  pdri-jmanas  ‘going  round’  (yidyuias ),  rapsad-udhabhis  ‘having 
distended  udders’  ( dhenubhispZ ,  vaja-karmab/iis  (SV.  TS.)  and  vaja-bharmabhis  (viil.  1 9 3°) 
‘bringing  rewards’  ( utibhis ). 


1  The  stems  in  - van  regularly  form  their 
f.  in  -van,  e.  g.  pi-van,  pl-varT’,  those  in  -an 
and  -man  by  adding  -1  to  the  syncopated 
stem  at  the  end  of  compounds;  e.  g.  sdma- 
rdjh-i-,  pahca-ndmn-l-  (AV.). 

2  This  exception  does  not  apply  when  -art  is 
preceded  by  two  consonants,  e.  g.  sakth-na . 

3  But  also  G.  sing,  vrsan-as  (AV.).  The  synco¬ 
pation  nearly  always  takes  place  in  -an  stems 
and  in  nearly  half  of  the  -man  and  -van 
stems. 

4  When  the  accent  is  on  the  suffix  it  is 
thrown  on  the  ending  in  these  syncopated 
forms,  e.  g.  mahnd  from  mah-an-. 

5  That  is,  a  here  represents  an  original 

sonant  nasal,  see  p.  17,  note  2. 


6  48  locatives  (occurring  127  times)  have 
the  i,  45  (occurring  203  times)  drop  it.  See 
Lanman  535. 

7  But  those  in  -ani  occur  nearly  twice  as 
often. 

8  Cp.  Brugmann,  KG.  483  and  Lanman 
53S. 

9  Cp.  the  comparative  yav-iyan  and  the 
Avestan  yvan. 

10  -svan  in  both  these  compounds  is  probably 
derived  from  su-  ‘grow’. 

* 1  From  bhii-  ‘be’. 

12  From  gam-  ‘go’. 

*3  The  f.  of  -an  stems  at  the  end  ol 
compounds  is  formed  with  -i  in  acchidra- 
ud/in-T-  ‘having  a  faultless  udder’,  sam-rajh-i - 


204  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

b.  In  the  strong  forms  the  stems  rbhn-ksan -  ‘chief  of  the  Rbhus’,  ptisan-,  and  the 
f.  ydsan-,  retain  the  short  a,  while  uksan-  ‘ox’  and  vfsan-  ‘bull’  fluctuate  between  a  and  a. 
The  words  svan-  and  yuvan-  form  their  weak  stems  before  vowels  with  Samprasarana, 
sun-,  yun-\  the  latter  is  once  used  in  the  N.  du.  m.  form  yund  instead  of  yuvdna.  In 
the  weak  cases  syncopation  always  takes  place1  except  in  the  forms  uksan  as  and  vfsanas. 

c.  A  number  of  -an  stems  have  supplementary  forms  from  other  stems :  aksan- 
from  aksi- ;  asthdn-  from  a  si  hi- \  dhan-  from  a  has-  and  ah  ary  dsdn-  from  dsyd-,  as-,  and  as  a  - ; 
uddn-  from  ud -  and  nda-kd-',  udhan-  from  udhas-  and  Ftdhar- ;  dadhan-  from  dadhi-;  dosdn- 
from  dos- ;  yakdn-  from  yakrt-',  yosan-  from  ydsana -  and  yosd-;  sdkan-  from  sakrty  sakthan- 
from  sakthi-.  As  no  stem  in  -an  has  been  found  in  the  N.  A.  sing,  n.,  such  forms  appear 
to  have  been  avoided  and  to  have  been  purposely  replaced  by  forms  from  supplementary 
stems.  These  forms  are  the  N.  A.  n.  aksi,  asthi  (AV.),  dhar,  asyam,  tidakdm,  lidhar, yakrt 
(AV.),  sdkri,  sakthi',  also  yuvat  instead  of  *yuva,  as  well  as  sir  as  and  slrsa-m  (AV.)  in¬ 
stead  of  *  sirs  a  2. 

d.  There  are  here  several  transitions  to  the  a-declension.  The  A.  sing,  pusan-am 
is  the  starting  point  for  the  N.  piisan-a-s  and  the  G.  ptisan  a-sy  a- J.  The  N.  A.  pi.  n.  is 
the  starting  point  in  other  instances:  the  two  pi.  forms  sirs  a  and  slrsani  give  rise  to  the 
L.  sing,  sirse  (AV.)  beside  slrsani,  as  well  as  to  the  du.  N.  A.  sirse  and  the  N.  A.  sing. 
slrsd-m  (AV.);  similarly  the  two  plurals  aha  and  dhdni  led  to  the  G.  pi.  dhdndm  beside 
dhndrn ;  and  yusani,  the  pi.  of  ytisdn-,  which  has  the  appearance  of  a  pi.  of  a  stem 
yusd-,  led  to  the  formation  of  an  I.  sing,  yttsena  (TS.)  beside  the  regular  yusna  (VS.). 
Again,  the  weak  forms  dsn- as ,  ahn-ds  etc.,  gave  rise  to  the  transition  stems  asna-  and 
dhna-,  from  which  are  formed  the  I.  pi.  dsnais  and  the  L.  sing,  purvahne. 

Transition  ^-sterns  often  take  the  place  of  -an  stems  at  the  end  of  compounds. 
Thus  -aksd-  appears  in  several  compounds  for  -aksdn-,  and  -vrsd-  (AV.)  for  -vfsan-",  an- 
asthan -  once  forms  the  N.  sing.  m.  an-astha-s  (viu.  134);  beside  the  N.  sing.  m.  brhad-uksa 
appears  the  D.  brhad-uksdya  (VS.);  beside  raj  ana  m  is  found  the  A.  m.  adhi-rdja-m 
(X.  1289)  ‘over-lord’;  and  beside  saptdbhis  ‘seven’,  the  compound  tri-saptais^ . 

Inflexion. 

327.  The  normal  forms,  if  made  from  rcijan-  ‘king’  in  the  m.,  and  from 
dhan-  ‘day’  in  the  n.,  would  be  as  follows: 

1.  m.  Sing.  N.  rdja.  A.  rdjanatn .  I.  rdjha .  D.  rdjhe.  Ab.  rdjnas. 
G.  rdjnas.  L.  rdjani  and  rdjan.  Y.  rdjan. 

Du.  N.  A.  rdjdnd  and  rdjanau.  I.  rajabhydm.  D.  rdjabhyam.  G.  rdjhos. 

PI.  N.  V.  rdjanas.  A.  rdjnas.  I.  rdjabhis.  D.  rdjabhyas.  Ab.  rdjabhyas 
(AV.).  G.  raj  ham.  L.  rdjasu. 

2.  n.  Sing.  N.  A. — 5.  I.  dhna.  D.  dhne.  Ab.  G.  dhnas.  L.  dhani  and 
dhan.  —  Du.  N.  A.  dhanT.  G.  dhnos  (AV.).  • —  PI.  N.  A.  dhdni.  I.  ahabhis. 
D.  Ab.  dhabhyas.  G.  dhnam.  L.  dhasu. 

The  forms  actually  occurring  are  the  following: 

Sing.  N.  m.  an-asthd  ‘boneless’,  dyah-sTrsa  ‘iron-headed’,  a-sirsd  ‘head¬ 
less’,  uksd  ‘bull’,  rjl-svd  N.  of  a  man,  tdksa  ‘carpenter’,  tdpur-murdha  ‘burning¬ 
headed’,  try-udhd 6  ‘three-uddered’,  dvi-bdrha-jma 7  ‘having  a  double  course’, 
pdri-jma  ‘surrounding’,  pusd  ‘Pusan’,  plihd  (VS.)  ‘spleen’,  brhad-uksa  ‘having 
great  oxen’,  majjdi  (VS.  AV.)  ‘marrow’,  mdtari-svd  ‘Matarisvan’,  murdhd  ‘head’, 
yuva  ‘youth’,  rdja  ‘king’,  vi-bhvd  ‘far-reaching’,  vi-rdja  (TS.  v.  7.  4*)  ‘sovereign’, 
vfsa  ‘bull’,  svd  ‘dog’,  sahasra-sirsa  ‘thousand-headed’. 


‘queen’,  sdma-rdjn-I-  ‘having  Soma  as  king’, 
hatb-vrsn-T-  ‘whose  lord  has  been  slain’,  riirn- 
sirsn-I-  ‘deer-headed’,  sapia-strsn-i-  ‘seven¬ 
headed’,  eka-miirdhn-i -  (AV.)  ‘having  the 
head  turned  in  one  direction’,  sindhu-rajh-t- 
(AV.)  ‘having  Sindhu  as  queen’. 

1  The  restoration  of  the  a  seems  to  be 
metrically  required  in  a  few  instances:  see 
Lanman  525. 

2  The  N.  sing.  n.  of  the  adj.  vfsan-  is 
avoided  in  several  ways:  see  Lanman  530 
(bottom). 


3  With  shifted  accent. 

4  On  the  other  hand  there  are  two  trans¬ 
itions  from  the  ^-declension  to  the  ^-de¬ 
clension  in  ni-kdmabhis  beside  ni-kamais  and 
nakta-bhis  for  naktam ,  but  these  forms  are 
due  to  somewhat  artificial  conditions;  see 
below,  I.  pi.  p.  206,  notes  3  and  4. 

5  Only  supplementary  forms  occur:  see 
Lanman  530  (bottom). 

6  The  metre  seems  to  require  try-iidhh 
(in,  56^. 

7  Here  bdrha-  =  barhas-. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Consonant  Stems. 


205 


A.  m.  uksanam ,  tdksanam  (VS.  xxx.  6),  tri-murdhdnam  ‘three-headed’, 
tri-slrsdnam  ‘three-headed’,  panthanam  (VS.  AV.)  ‘path’,  parijmdnam , 
prthu-gmdnam 1  ‘broad-pathed’,  pllhdnam  (AV.),  majjdnam ,  matari-svanam , 
murdhdnam ,  yuvdnam,  rdjdnam 2,  vrsanam ,  svdnam ,  sapta-slrsanam  ‘seven¬ 
headed’.  ■ —  With  short  a:  uksanam ,  rbhu-ksdnam 3  ‘chief  of  the  Rbhus’, 
pus  an  am,  vrsanam  4. 

I.  m.  1.  rji-svand ,  matari-svand ,  vi-bhvand.  —  2.  With  syncope:  amd5, 
pusnd ,  pllhnd  (VS.),  majjhd  (AV.),  murdhnd  (VS.  xxv.  2),  rdjhd ,  vrsna.  — 
3.  With  Samprasarana:  suna 6 7  (AV.).  —  n.  ou/z.-i  (VS.  xxv.  9)  ‘blood’, 
dhnd  ‘day’,  <z.r/zi  ‘mouth’,  udnd  ‘water’,  dadhnd  ‘curds’,  mahnd  ‘greatness’, 
yaknd  (VS.  xxxix.  8)  ‘liver’,  yusnd  (VS.  xxv.  9)  ‘broth’,  vi-sirsnd  (Kh.  1.  id) 
'headless’,  saknd  (VS.)  ‘excrement’,  sirsnd  ‘head’,  sakthnd  (VS.)  ‘thigh’. 

D.  m.  1.  rjl-svane ,  pari-jmane ,  matari-svane,  vi-bhvane ,  vrsane  (TS.  in. 
2.  52)7.  —  2.  prime,  prati-d'ivne  ‘adversary  at  play’,  murdhne  (VS.  xxn.  32), 
rdjne,  vrsne 8.  —  3.  ydne.  —  n.  1.  dhkrv-ane  ‘hurting’.  —  2.  dime,  asne,  sirsne. 

Ab.  m.  2.  pllhnds  (AV.),  murdhnds ,  vrsnas9.  —  n.  2.  aksnds  ‘eye’, 
dhnas,  asnas I0 *,  udnds Ir,  ddhnas,  yaknds  ‘liver’,  vrsnas  ‘shedding  rain’,  sirsnds. 

G.  m.  1.  durgrbhi-svanas  ‘continually  swelling’,  pari-jmanas ,  mltari- 
svanas  (VS.  1.2),  vrsanas12  (AV.).  —  2.  dhias 13 ,  uksnds ,  pusnds ,  yusnds 
(or  n.),  rdjhas ,  vrsnas.  —  3.  ydnas,  sunas.  —  n.  aksnds  (VS.  iv.  32;  TS.), 
asnas (AV.)  ‘blood’,  ast/inds  (AV.)  ‘bone’,  dhnas,  udnds,  dadhnds,  vrsnas, 
saknds  (AV.),  sirsnds  I5. 

L.  m.  1.  rji-svani,  matarl-svani ,  murdhdni ,  rdjani.  —  'i.jmdn  ‘way’,  pdri- 
jman ,  matari-svan  (AV.),  murdhdn.  —  n.  1.  dhani,  asdni ,  uddni,  udhani 
‘udder’,  ksamani  ‘earth’,  rajdni ,  slrsani ;  ahni  (AV.).  —  2.  dhan,  as  an,  udan, 
ddhan ,  ksdman16,  gambhan  (VS.  xm.  30)  ‘depth’,  sirs  an  V 

V.  m.  1.  uru-jman  (AV.)  ‘extension’,  pari-jman,  prthu-jman  (AV.),  pusan, 
murdhan  (VS.xvm.  55),  yuvan ,  raj an,  vrsan,  sata-murdhan  (VS.Xvii.  71 ;  TS.) 
‘hundred-headed’,  satya-rdjan  (VS.  xx.  4)  ‘true  king’.  —  2.  mdtari-svas l8. 

Du.  N.  A.  V.  m.  1.  pdri-jmdnd ,  V.  mitra-rajand  ‘ye  kings  Mitra  (and 
Varuna)’,  yuvana,  V.  yuvand,  rdjdnd,  svdnd.  With  short  vowel:  Indra-pusdna , 
pus  ana,  vrsand,  V.  vrsana ,  soma-pus  ana.  With  weak  stem:  jy/izz.l  (ix.  685) 
for  yuvand  (probably  through  yuvand).  —  2.  With  an/:  rdjanau ,  vrsdnau  (AV.), 
s'vdnau;  V.  vrsan au,  somd-pusanau. 

N.  A.  n.  dhani,  cdksani  (AV.)  ‘eyes’,  dosani  (AV.)  ‘fore-arms’ I9. 

I.  m.  vrsabhydm.  —  D.  m.  soma-pusabhydm.  —  G.  m.  pdri-jmanos,  indrd- 
pusnos.  —  n.  dhnos  (AV.).  —  L.  n.  aksnds  (Kh.  1.  11s). 


1  -gman-  =  -jman-  ‘path’. 

2  There  is  also  the  transfer  form 
rdjd-m  (x.  1289). 

3  Perhaps  from  =  &«'-  ‘possess’. 

4  In  the  RY.  vrsanam  occurs  53  times, 
vrsanam  only  twice. 

5  This  form  (occurring  thrice)  may  possibly 
be  shortened  for  asmand  (which  occurs 
twice)  from  cisman -  ‘stone’. 

6  For  *su-an-a;  hence  no  shift  of  accent 
as  in  monosyllabic  stems. 

7  Also  usdn-e(yi.  201*)  according  to  Benfey, 
Orient  und  Occident  2,  242. 

8  There  is  also  the  transition  form  brhdd- 
uksaya  (VS.  VIII.  8). 

9  Benfey,  Gott.  Abh.  19,  261,  regards 

vibhvdnd  (x.  765)  as  =  Ab.  vibhvdnas. 

*0  Also  the  supplementary  forms  asydt,  as  as. 


11  Also  the  supplementary  form  udakat. 

12  For  vfsa-nama  (ix.  9754)  Grassmann 
would  read  vfsano  nd;  cp.  Wackernagel  21, 
68  a,  note  (p.  160). 

O  This  form  (occurring  once)  may  be 
shortened  for  asmanas  (occurring  four  times). 

J4  With  supplementary  stem  asr-j-. 

T5  The  G.pnsandsya,  occurring  once,  seems 
to  be  a  transfer  form  starting  from  the  A. 
pus  an  am  (326  d). 

16  There  are  also  the  transition  forms 
slrse,  purvdhnc-.  see  LanmAn  536. 

*7  The  compound  nemann-is-  ‘following 
guidance’  probably  contains  a  loc. 

18  Following  the  analogy  of  some  stems  in 
•van. 

19  Also  the  transition  form  slrse. 


2 06  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

PI.  N.  V.  m.  uksanas  (VS.  xxiv.  13),  tigma-murdhanas  ‘sharp-edged’, 
pdnthdnas  (AV.),  murdhdnas,  yuvanas,  rdjanas,  svdnas.  —  With  short 
vowel :  uksanas ,  rbZiu-ksdnas ,  vfsanas . 

N.  A.  n.  1.  aksdni,  asthdni  (TS.  iv.  7.  i1 2)1,  a/idni ,  sTrsdni,  sakthdni .  — 
2.  aha,  slrsa 2. 

A.  m.  1.  mdtari-svanas ,  uksanas,  vfsanas.  —  2.  uksnas, jana-rdjhas  ‘king 
of  men’,  majjhds  (AV.),  murd kinds,  yama-rdjhas  ‘subject  to  Yarna’,  raffias, 
vfsnas.  —  3.  y  fin  as,  sunas. 

I.  m.  uksabhis 3,  yuvabhis,  rdjabhis ,  vfsabhis,  svdb/iis  (Kh.  v.  157)4.  — 
n.  aksdbhis,  ast/idbhis,  dhab/iis,  asdbhis,  uddbhis,  ddhabhis,  mahdbhis ,  vfsabhis, 
sdkabhis  (TS.  v.  7.  231),  su-kfta-karmabhis  (Kh.  111.  12 3)  ‘doing  good  deeds'5. 

D.  m.  tdksabhyas  (VS.),  majjdbhyas  (TS.  VS.  xxxix.  10),  yuvabhyas, 
rdjabhyas,  svabhyas  (AV.  VS.).  —  n.  asthdbhyas  (VS.  xxxix.  10;  TS.  v.  2.  122), 
d/iab/iyas.  —  Ab.  m.  majjdbJiyas  (AV.).  —  n.  dhabhyas. 

G.  m.  vfsnam,  rfijhdm  (VS.  AV.),  sunam  (AV.).  —  n.  dhnam 6. 

L.  m.  majjasu  (AV.),  yamd-rajasu  (AV.),  rdjasu.  —  n.  dhasu,  slrsdsu. 

2.  Stems  in  -man. 

328.  These  stems  are  about  equally  divided  between  the  masculine  and 
the  neuter  gender,  the  former  being  agent  nouns,  the  latter  verbal  abstracts. 
These  stems  seem  to  have  been  used  normally  for  the  f.  as  well  as  the  m.; 
for  though  no  simple  stem  in  -man  occurs  as  a  f.,  about  a  dozen  of  them 
are  used  as  f.  at  the  end  of  compounds,  while  no  certain  example  appears 
in  the  RV.  of  a  f.  being  formed  by  adding  -T  to  -man1.  A  peculiarity  of 
the  inflexion  of  the  stems  in  -man,  as  compared  with  those  in  -an  and  -van, 
is  that  in  the  syncopated  forms  of  the  I.  sing,  several  words  drop  the  m, 
while  two  drop  the  n  of  the  suffix;  e.  g.  m  a  hind 8  for  mahimnd,  and  rasmd 
for  rasmnd. 

a.  The  f.  forms  which  occur  at  the  end  of  compounds  are:  Sing.  N.  pnni-sarma  (VS. 
X.  9)  ‘giving  wide  shelter’  ( ddili-) ,  sa-laksmd  (x.  to2)  ‘similar’;  A.  dy  id  ad-yam  an  am  (v.  So1) 
‘having  a  shining  course’  ( usasam );  su-tarmdnam  (VJIL  425)  ‘easily  conveying  across’ 
( navam ),  sn-tramdnam  (x.  6310)  ‘protecting  well’  ( prthivim ),  su-sdrmdnam  (X.  6310)  ‘granting 
secure  refuge’  ( aditim ) ;  V.  arista-bharman  (vm.  184)  ‘yielding  security’  ( ddite),  prthu-ydman 
(VI.  64b  ‘having  a  broad  path’  [du hilar) ;  Du.  N.  su-janmanfi  (i.  1601)  ‘producing  fair  things’ 
( dhisane );  PI.  A.  suci-janmanas  (vi.  393)  ‘of  radiant  birth’  ( usasas );  I.  ziaj a-bharmabhis 
(VIII.  193°)  ‘winning  rewards’  ( fdibhis ),  su-karmabhis  (IX.  704)  ‘skilful’  (fingers);  G.  sukra- 
saamandm  (vi.  475)  ‘having  a  bright  dwelling-place’  psasam)  io.  From  ndman-  ‘name’  the 
AV.  forms  with  -T  the  f.  stem  - ndmni -  at  the  end  of  five  compounds:  dur-namm-  ‘ill- 
named’,  pdhca-ndmnl-  ‘having  five  names’,  maha-ndmni •  ‘great-named’,  visva-tidmni-  ‘having 
all  names’,  sahasra -namn T-  ‘thousand-named’.  The  f.  dur-adman-i-  (VS.  II.  20)  ‘noxious  food’ 
is  perhaps  similarly  formed 


1  In  the  corresponding  passage  of  VS. 
(XVIII.  3)  asthini. 

2  Both  these  might  be  formed  from  the 
transition  a-stems  aha-,  sTrsd-.  This  is  per¬ 
haps  the  reason  why  these  are  the  only  two 
plurals  of  this  declension  which  retain  the 
a.  in  the  Pada  text;  aha  appears  in  I.  92b 

3  The  form  ni-kdmabhis  ‘eager’  for  ni- 
kdmais  is  due  to  the  parallelism  of  evayavabhis 
in  X.  92b 

4  There  is  also  a  transition  form  asnais 
‘stones’,  beside  the  stem  asan-. 

5  The  unique  form  naktabhis  (as  if  from  a 
stem  naktdn-)  is  doubtless  used  for  metrical 
reasons  instead  of  naktam  in  vii.  ioq18. 

6  There  is  also  the  transition  form 

dhanarn. 


7  The  AV.  has  five  stems  thus  formed  at 
the  end  of  compounds. 

8  Cp.  Bloomfield,  BB.  23,  105  ff.,  AJPh. 
16,  409 — 434;  Bartholomae  IF.  8,  An- 
2, eiger  17. 

9  With  the  ending  of  the  neuter;  see 
Lanman  433  (top). 

10  Possibly  also  su-sumd  (11.  32^)  ‘bearing 
well’;  but  it  is  derived  from  * su-ma -  according 
to  BR.  and  Grassmann. 

11  The  f.  brdhmT-  (IX.  335)  formed  from 
brahman-  is  quite  exceptional,  being  due  to 
a  play  on  words  (see  Lanman  528).  The 
form  Imdnyd  =  Inland  in  sense,  occurring 
twice  in  the  RV.,  may  be  an  I.  sing.  f.  of 
lman-i-:  cp.  Grassmann  and  BR. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Consonant  Stems. 


207 


b.  In  the  strong  forms  ary  am  an-  ‘Aryaman’,  tmdn-  ‘self’,  and  jeman -  ‘victorious’ 
retain  the  short  vowel  of  the  suffix.  In  the  weak  forms,  even  when  the  suffix  is  preceded 
by  a  vowel,  about  a  dozen  forms  do  not  syncopate  the  a 1 :  I.  omand,  pravad-ydmand, 
bhumand,  bhumand,  syumand ,  hemand\  D.  tramane ,  damane\  Ab.  G.  bhumanas',  G.  mahi- 
mdnas ,  dtimanas ,  yamanas ,  vybmanas.  The  forms  which,  besides  syncopating,  drop  the 
m  or  the  n  of  the  suffix  are:  prathina,  prena,  bhfina,  mahina,  varina ;  drdghma ,  rasmcL. 

c.  Beside  the  -man  stems  there  are  several  transfer  stems  in  -ma,  which  are, 
however,  of  rare  or  late  occurrence:  darma-  ‘destroyer’  beside  darman-',  dharma-  (AV .  etc.) 
‘law’  beside  dharman-\  ema-  (VS.)  ‘course’  beside  eman- ;  homa-  (VS.  AV.)  ‘offering’ 
beside  homan-  (RV.);  ajma -  ‘course’  beside  ajman-;  yama-  ‘course’  beside  yaman- ;  priyd- 
dhama-  (I.  1401)  ‘fond  of  home’  beside  priyd-dhdman-  (AV.);  and  occasional  forms  of 
-karma-  at  the  end  of  compounds  beside  the  regular  - karman -:  vTrd-karma-m  (x.  615)  ‘doing 
manly  deeds’;  visva-karmena  (x.  1644)  ‘all-creating’  beside  visva-karmanh ,  etc. 


Inflexion. 


329.  The  normal  forms  actually  occurring  would;  if  made  from  asman- 
‘stone’  in  the  m.  and  from  karman-  ‘act’  in  the  n.,  be  as  follows: 

Sing.  m.  N.  as?nd.  A.  asmdnam2.  I.  asmana 3.  D.  as  mane 4.  Ab.  asm  anas 5. 


G. 

L. 

G. 


asmanas 5. 


and  ds'man.  V. 


as  man. 


asmana  6. 


asma?ios.  — 
dsma?ia?n. 


asmanas.  A.  asmanas. 


—  Du.  N.  A.  V. 

I.  dsmab/iis.  D.  dsmabhyas. 


L.  asmani 
PI.  N.  V. 

L.  asmasu  (AV.). 

Sing.  n.  N.  A.  karma1.  I.  karmana 8.  D.  kdrmane 8.  Ab.  kdrmanas 8. 
G.  kdrmanas s.  L.  kdrmani  and  karman. —  Du.  N.  A.  karmam.  G.  kdrmanos. 
—  PI.  N.  A.  kdrmani ,  karma,  karma.  I.  kdrmabhis.  D.  kdrmabkyas. 
Ab.  kdrmabkyas.  G.  kdrmanam 8.  L.  kdrmasu. 

Forms  which  actually  occur  are  the  following: 

Sing.  N.  m.  a-karmd  ‘wicked’,  a-brahma  ‘lacking  devotion’,  aryamd 
‘Aryaman’,  dsma  ‘stone’,  a-sre7nd  ‘faultless’,  atmd  ‘breath’,  asu-hema  ‘speeding 
swiftly’,  istd-yama  ‘going  according  to  desire’,  usrd-yama  ‘moving  towards 
brightness’,  rta-dhama  (VS.  iv.  32)  ‘abiding  in  truth’,  krta-brahma  ‘having 
performed  devotion’,  jarimd  ‘old  age‘,  jatii-bharma  ‘ever  nourishing’,  jemd 
(VS.  xviii.  4)  ‘superiority’,  trpala-prab karma  ‘offering  what  is  refreshing’,  dannk 
‘demolisher’,  dama  ‘giver’,  dur-ndma  ‘ill-named’,  dur-mdnma  ‘evil-minded’, 
dyutdd-yama  ‘having  a  shining  path’,  dragkimd  (VS.  xviii.  4)  ‘length’,  dvi- 
jdnma  ‘having  a  double  birth’,  dharmk  ‘arranger’,  dhvasmd  ‘darkening’,  pdka- 
stkama  N.  of  a  man,  papmd  (VS.  vi.  35)  ‘misfortune’,  prthu-pragdma  ‘wide- 
striding’,  pratkund  (VS.  xviii.  4)  ‘width’,  brakmd  ‘devout  man’,  bhujmd 9 
‘abounding  in  valleys’,  bhumd  (TS.  vii.  3,  131)  ‘plenty’,  bkdri-janma  ‘having 
many  births’,  mahimd  ‘greatness’,  yajna-manma  ‘ready  for  sacrifice’,  ragku- 
ydma  ‘going  quickly’,  resmd  (AV.)  ‘tempest’,  vadmd  ‘speaker’,  varimd  ‘width’, 
varsund  (VS.  xviii.  4)  ‘height’,  visva-karma  ‘all-creator’,  visva-samd  (VS.  xviii.  39) 
‘having  the  form  of  all  Samans’,  vrsa-prab karma  ‘to  whom  the  strong  (Soma) 
is  offered’,  satdtma  ‘possessing  a  hundred  lives’,  satyd-dkarjna  ‘whose  laws 
are  true’,  satyd-manmci  ‘whose  thoughts  are  true’,  sapta-nama  ‘seven-named’, 
sahasra-yama  ‘having  a  thousand  courses’,  sadhu-karma  ‘acting  well’,  su-karmd 
‘working  skilfully’,  su-janima  ‘producing  fair  things’,  su-trdma  ‘guarding  well’, 
sn-dyutma  ‘shining  bright’,  su-brdkwia  ‘accompanied  by  good  prayers’,  su- 
mantu-ndma  ‘bearing  a  well-known  name’,  su-mdnmd  ‘benevolent’,  su-vdhma 


1  The  vowel  has  also  to  be  restored  in 
several  other  forms  (see  Lanman  524  f.). 

2  With  short  vowel  aryamanam ,  tmatiam. 

3  Without  syncope  after  vowel  bhumand , 
etc. ;  with  syncope  mahimna ,  mahina ,  drdghma , 
etc. 

4  Also  with  syncope,  mahimne ,  etc. 


5  Also  with  syncope,  mahimnbs,  etc. 

G  Also  with  short  vowel  aryamdnd,jbmand. 

7  Sometimes  karma  in  the  Samhita  text. 

8  Also  with  syncope,  namnd,  etc. 

9  bhujma  (I.  655)  should  probably  be  read 
bhujma'y  see  BR.,  Grassmann,  Lanman  530 
(top). 


2o8 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


‘driving  well’,  su-sdrma  (VS.  vm.  8)  ‘good  protector’,  su-sthdma  ‘having  a 
firm  support’,  svadu-ksddma  ‘having  sweet  food’ 1. 

N.  A.  n.  djma  ‘track’,  ddma  ‘food’,  dm  a  ‘course’,  karma  ‘deed’,  kdrsma 
‘goal’,  ksddma  ‘carving  knife’,  cdnna  ‘skin’,  jdnima  ‘birth’,  jdnma  ‘birth’, 
tdkrna  ‘young  blade  of  corn’,  ddma  ‘cord’,  dhdrma  ‘ordinance’,  dhdma  ‘abode’, 
ndma  ‘name’,  pdtma  ‘flight’,  brahma  ‘prayer’,  b/idsma  (TS.  VS.  xii.  35)  ‘ashes’, 
bhdma  ‘earth’,  mdnma  ‘thought’,  mdrma  ‘vital  part’,  ydma  ‘course’,  loma 
(TS.  VS.  xix.  92)  ‘hair’,  vdrtma  ‘path’  (Kh.  v.  21),  vdrma  ‘mail’,  vdsma 
‘garment’,  verna  (VS.  xix.  83)  ‘loom’,  vesma  ‘house’,  vybma  ‘sky’,  sdkma  ‘power’, 
sdrtna  ‘refuge’,  sddma  ‘seat’,  sdma  ‘chant’,  sdma  ‘wealth’,  sthdma  ‘station’, 
syUma  ‘strong’,  svddma  ‘sweetness’,  hbma  ‘oblation’.  —  With  final  vowel 
lengthened  in  the  Samhita  text:  karma,  jdnima ,  dhdma  (AV.),  bhdma , 
vybma ,  su-starlma 2  (TS.  v.  1.  112)  ‘forming  an  excellent  couch’,  svddma 3. 

A.  m.  dsmanam ,  a-sremdnam,  atmdnam,  usmdnam  (AV.)  ‘heat’,  ojmdtiam 
‘power’,  omdnam  ‘favour’,  kldmanam  (VS.  xix.  85)  ‘right  lung’,  jarimanam,  tuvi- 
brahmanam  ‘praying  much’,  darmdnam,  damdnam  ‘gift’,  dur-mdnmanam ,  dyutdd- 
yamanam ,  dvi-j dnmanam ,  dharmdnam, pdka-sthamanam,  paprndnam  (VS.xii.  99; 
TS.  1.  4.  41 l),  puru-tmdnam  ‘existing  variously’,  puru-namanam  (AV.)  ‘having 
many  names’,  brahmdnam ,  bhumdnam ,  mahimdnam ,  resmdnam  (VS.xxv.  2), 
varimdnam ,  varsmdnam  ‘height’,  visva-kar marram ,  vi-sarmdnam  ‘dispersion’, 
satdtmanam ,  satyd-dharmanam,  sadmdna?n  ‘sitter’,  sahd-samanam  ‘accompanied 
by  songs’,  su-tdrmanam  (TS.  1.  2.  22)  ‘crossing  well’,  su-dyutmanam ,  su-brdh- 
manam ,  su-sarmanam,  somdnam  ‘preparer  of  Soma’,  stamdnam  (AV.  v.  135) 
‘track’  (?),  svadmdnam  ‘sweetness’,  harimdnam  ‘jaundice’.  —  With  short  a : 
aryamdnam,  tmdnam  ‘breath’. 

I.  m.  dsmana,  atmdna  (VS.  xxxii.  11),  usmdna  (VS.  xxv.  9),  tmdna , 
papmdna  (VS.  xix.  11),  bhasmana  ‘chewing’,  majmana  ‘greatness’,  varsmdna , 
visvd-karmana .  — ■  1.  omdna ,  pravdd-ya?nana  ‘having  a  precipitous  course’, 
bhumdna  ‘abundance’,  satd-yamana  (AV.  SV.)  ‘having  a  hundred  paths’.  — 
2.  aryamnd  (AV.),  pamnd  (AY.)  ‘scab’,  bhumnd  (VS.m.  5),  mahimnd,  varinmd 4 
(YrS.  AV.),  sata-yamna.  —  3.  prat  hind 5,  prend 6 7  ‘love’,  bhund  7,  m  a  hind 8, 
varind  (TS.)9;  draghmd ,  rasmdi 10.  —  n.  kdrmana ,  jdnmana,  dharmana 
‘ordinance’,  pat  mafia ,  brdhmana ,  bhasmana  (VS.  vi.  21)  ‘ashes’,  mdnmana , 
v armaria,  vidmdna  ‘wisdom’,  vi- dharmana  ‘extension’,  sakmana,  s armaria, 
sdkmana  ‘might’,  svdjanmana  ‘self-begotten’,  hanmand  ‘stroke’.  —  1.  bhdmana 
‘earth’,  sydmana ,  demand  ‘zeal’.  —  2.  ddmna  (AV.)  ‘tie’,  dhdmna ,  ndmna , 
lomna  (AYY)  ‘hair’,  sdrnna,  sutrdmna  (VS.  xx.  35)  ‘protecting  well’. 

D.  m.  1.  atmdne  (VS.  vn.  28),  takmdne  (AV.)  a  kind  of  disease,  tmdne, 
papmdne  (AY.  VS.),  brahmdne ,  bhdri-karmane  ‘doing  much’,  visvd-karmane 
(TS.  VS.  vm.  45).  —  2.  aryamne,  jarimne,  bhumnd  (VS.  xxx.  13)  ‘plenty’, 
mahimnd-,  dn-usra-yamne  ‘not  going  out  during  daylight’,  usrd-yamne , 
su-trdmne  (VS.  x.  31),  su-sdmne  N.  of  a  man  (‘having  beautiful  songs’j, 
suhdvitu-namne  ‘whose  name  is  to  be  invoked  successfully’.  —  n. 


1  su- dhdrma  (VS.  xxxvni.  14)  ‘well  support¬ 
ing’  seems  to  be  meant  for  a  V.  (wrong 
accent),  but  perhaps  su-dharma  should  be 
read. 

2  sustdrlma  in  the  Pada  text. 

3  See  Lanman  53  iu 

4  Once  also  the  transfer  form  varimdtd, 
according  to  the  declension  in  -inant. 

5  For  prathimna  from  prathiman-. 

6  For  premna  from  pr email-. 

7  For  bhumnd  beside  bhumana. 


8  mahina  occurs  35  times,  mahimnd  only 
3  times. 

9  Beside  varimna  (AV.).  The  TS.  twice  has 
varind,  which  in  the  corresponding  passages  of 
the  VS.  is  replaced  by  varimna ;  cp.  Lanman 

50  o 

10  In  these  two  forms  the  being  preceded 
by  a  consonant  remains,  the  zz  being  dropped: 
=  draghmnd  ‘breadth’,  and  rasrnna  ‘rein’. 
Probably  also  Yazzd  for  ddmna  ‘gift’,  and 
possibly  ==  asmand. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Consonant  Stems. 


209 


mane, ,  janmane,  dhdrmane ,  brahmane,  bharmane  ‘support’,  vidmane ,  vi-dharmane , 
sarmane.  —  1.  trAmane  ‘protection’,  dAmatie.  —  2.  dhAmne ,  sAmne  ‘acquisition’. 

Ab.  m.  dsmanas ,  atmanas,  dsmanas  (VS.vi.  18),  satya-dharmanas  (AV.).  — 
2.  klomnas  (AV.),  jarimnas  (AV.),  varimnds  (AV.).  —  n.  cdrmanas,  jdnmanas, 
dhdrmanas ,  manmanas ,  v dsmanas  ‘nest’,  sddmanas.  —  1.  bhiimanas.  —  2.  dAmnas , 
dhAmnas  (VS.  vi.  22) I,  lomnas. 

G.  m.  a-marmanas  ‘having  no  vital  spot’,  brahmdnas ,  vi-patmanas  ‘speeding 
away’,  vipra-manmanas  ‘having  an  inspired  mind’,  suci-janmanas  ‘of  radiant  birth’, 
su-sdrmanas,  visva-karmanas  (VS.  xxxi.  17).  —  1.  mahimanas .  —  2.  aryamnas , 
jarimnas  (AV.),  mahimnas ,  sthird-dhamnas  (AV.)  ‘belonging  to  a  strong  race’. 
—  n.  kdrmanas ,  jdnmanas ,  dhdrmanas ,  brdhmanas ,  manmanas ,  vdrmanas.  — 
1.  dAmanas ,  bhfimanas ,  yAmanas ,  vyomanas.  —  2.  dhAmnas ,  sAmnas. 

Li.  m.  1.  dsmani ,  atmdni ,  tmdni ,  brahmdni,  mahmani  (AV.)  ‘greatness’,  jz/- 
sdmani.  —  2.  asman,  tmdn ,  atm  an  (VS.  AV.).  —  n.  1.  djmani  (AV.),  h  Armani, 
cdnnani  (AV.),  jdnmani ,  dAmani ,  dlrgha-prasadmani  ‘affording  an  extensive 
abode’,  dhdrimani  ‘established  usage’,  dhdrmani ,  dhAmani ,  parunani  ‘abund¬ 
ance’,  prd-bharmani  ‘presenting’,  prd-yamani  ‘setting  out’,  brdhmani ,  mdnmani , 
mdrmani ,  yAmani ,  laksmani  (TS.  vn.  4.  192)  ‘mark’,  vakmani  ‘invocation’,  zv- 
dharmani ,  vesmani  (AV.),  vyomani ,  sdrmani ,  sdrlmani  ‘current  of  air’,  sdvima?ii 
‘impulsion’,  su-samani ,  stdrimani  ‘strewing’,  havimanP  invocation’,  hbmani  ‘offer- 
and  ‘invocation’. — With  syncope:  lomni  (AV.),  vi-jAmni  (AV.)  ‘knuckle’ (?), 


mg 


sthAmni  (AV.).  —  2.  djman ,  a-ydman  ‘no  expedition’,  cman  (VS.TS.),  odman 
(TS.  VS.)  ‘flooding’,  k  dr  man,  kArsman ,  carman ,  j Amman ,  janman ,  ddrlman 
‘destruction’,  dhdrman ,  dhAman ,  pat  man,  brahman,  bhdsman  (VS.  TS.)  ‘con¬ 
suming’,  bhArmaji  ‘table’,  mdnman ,  mar  man ,  yAman,  vdriman ,  varlman  ‘width, 
varsman,  vi-jAman  ‘related  to  each  other’,  vi-dharma?i ,  vybman ,  s Arman,  sdsman 
‘song  of  praise’,  sdkman  ‘attendance’,  sddman,  sAman,  sv Adman,  havunan. 

V.  m.  aryaman ,  asman  (TS.iv.  6. 1 r),  Aisu-heman  (TS.i. 7 .i2),takman  (AV f), 
tri-naman  (TS.  AV.)  ‘three-named’,  pdpman  (AV.),  puru-ndman ,  puru-hanman 
N.  of  a  seer,  brahman ,  vi-dharman ,  visva-karman ,  visva-saman  N.  of  a  seer, 
vrsa-karman  ‘doing  manly  deeds’,  satya-karman  ‘whose  actions  are  true’, 
sahasra-dhaman  (AV.)  ‘having  thousandfold  splendour’,  su-daman  ‘giving  good 
gifts’,  su-ydman  (AV.),  sva-dharman  ‘abiding  in  one’s  own  customs’. 

Du.  N.  A.  V.  m.  brahmAnd ,  satya-dharmana,  sa-ndmdnd  ‘of  the  same 
kind’,  su-sarmana ;  ary  am  And,  jemand  ‘victorious’,  sAmatmand  (Kh.  in.  22  s; 
cp.  TB.  11.  8.  91)  ‘endowed  with  chants’,  su-kdrmand  (VS.  xx.  75). 

N.  A.  n.  sdrmani,  jdnmani,  sddmani. —  1.  dhAmani,  samani  (VS.  x.  14). 
—  2.  nAmni  (AV.).  —  G.  n.  sddmanos.  —  L.  m.  dsmanos. 


PL  N.  V.  a-damAnas  ‘unbound’  and  ‘not 


giving 


gifts’,  a-dhvasmanas 


‘undarkened’,  anu-vartmdnas  (VS.  xvii.  86)  ‘followers’,  a-brahmdnas,  a-rasmAnas 
‘having  no  reins’,  bha-brahmdnas  ‘conveying  sacred  knowledge’,  jariwAnas , 
brahmAnas  (VS.  xxvii.  2),  bhrAij ajj anmdnas  ‘having  a  brilliant  birthplace’, 
mahimAnas ,  siicij anmdnas,  satya-dharmanas ,  sa-laksmanas  (TS.i.  3.  io1)  ‘having 
the  same  marks’,  su-kdrmdnas,  su-jdnimdnas,  su-rAmdnas  (VS.  xxi.  42)  ‘very 
delightful’,  su-sdrmdnas ,  sthA-rasmdnas  ‘having  firm  reins’,  svadmdnas.  —  With 
short  a:  aryamdnas ,  mahdtmdnas  (Kh.  in.  122)  ‘high-minded’. 

N.  A.  n.  1.  rk-sdmAni  (VS.xvm.  43),  karmdni,  cdrmani,  jdnimdni,  jdnmani, 
dAmani  (AV.),  dhdrmani ,  dhAmani,  nAmdni ,  paksmani  (VS.  xix.  89)  ‘eyelashes’, 
brahmdni,  mdnmani,  mdrmani ,  rbmdni  ‘hair’,  lomani  (AV.),  vdrtmdni ,  v Armani 
(AV.),  sdrmani,  sddmani,  sAmdni.  —  2.  karma2,  janima,  jdnma ,  dhdrma, 


1  BR.  and  Eggeling  suggest  that  this  is 
a  corruption  for  damnas  ‘bond’. 

2  This  and  the  following  forms  have 
Indo-ansche  Philologie.  I.  4. 


short  final  <3  in 
Samhita  text. 


the  Pada  as  well  as  the 


14 


210  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

dhdma ,  nrfma ,  brahma ,  bhiima,  mdnma ,  roma l,  sdrma ,  sddma.  —  3.  jdnima  2 3, 
d harm  a ,  ndma ,  brahma ,  bhiima ,  roma,  sddma*. 

A.  m.  dsmanas ,  takmdnas  (AV.),  brahmanas.  —  2.  dur-ndmnas  (A V.). 

I.  m.  d-khidra-yamabhis  ‘unwearied  in  course’,  a-dhvasmdbhis ,  dsmabhis, 
dsma-hanmabhis  ‘strokes  of  the  thunderbolt’,  asu-hemabhis ,  d??iabhis ,  klbmabhis 
(VS.  xxv.  8),  braJundbhis,  may dra-romabhis  ‘peacock-haired’,  vilu-patmabhis 
‘flying  strongly’,  su-karmabhis ,  su-manmabhis ,  su-sarmabhis.  —  n.  djmabhis , 
emabhis ,  kdrmabhis ,  tdkmabhis  (YS. xix.  81),  trdmabhis ,  dhdrmabhis ,  dhdmabhis , 
ndmabhis ,  pdtmabhis ,  brahmabhis,  bharJmabhis  ‘nourishment’,  manmabhis , 
ydmabhis ,  varlmabhis ,  vdja-karmabhis 4  (SV.  TS.  111.  2.  111)  ‘active  in  war’, 
vdja-bharmabhis  (vm.  1930)  ‘bringing  reward’,  vi-gamabhis  ‘strides’,  sakmabhis , 
sdmabhis ,  h dvimabhis. 

D.  m.  brahmdbhyas.  —  n.  dhamabhyas.  —  Ab.  n.  lomabhyas. 

G.  m.  brahmanam.  —  2.  dur-ndmnam  (AV.).  —  n.  dhdrmana?n ,  brahmanam , 
manmanam ,  marmanam  (Kh.i.  55). —  2.  dhi-namnam 5  ‘animals  named  snake’, 
sdmnam  (AV.). 

L.  m.  dsmasu  (AV.).  —  n.  karmasu,  jdnmasu ,  dhdmasu ,  vdrmasu , 
sddmasu. 


3.  Stems  in  -1^/7. 

330.  The  -van  stems  are  by  far  the  most  numerous  of  the  three  groups. 
They  are  chiefly  verbal  adjectives  and  are  almost  exclusively  declined  in  the 
masculine.  Hardly  a  dozen  of  them  make  neuter  forms,  and  only  five  or 
six  forms  are  used  as  feminines. 

a.  The  few  feminine  forms  are  cases  of  adjectives  agreeing  with  f.  substantives. 
They  are :  sing.  N. sa-yitgvd  (x.  1304 *)  ‘companion’  (, gayatn ),  a?i-arva  (ll.  40^)  ‘irresistible  {adit is) ; 
A.  an-arvanam  (x.  9 z x4)  ‘irresistible’  ( dditifu );  du.  N.  sam-sthavand  (Vlll.  374)  ‘standing 
together’  {rodasl);  pi.  I.  indhan-vabhis 6  (II.  34T  ‘flaming’  {d he  nub  his) ;  G.  sahasra-davndm 
(l.  17$)  ‘giving  a  thousand  gifts’  (. mmatlnam ).  The  f.  of  these  stems  is  otherwise  formed 
with  -J,  which  is  however  never  added  to  -van,  but  regularly  to  a  collateral  suffix  -vara'. 
Twenty-five  such  stems  in  are  found  in  the  RV.  and  several  additional  ones  in  the 

later  Samhitas.  It  is  perhaps  most  convenient  to  enumerate  them  here:  agretvarT-%  (AV.) 
‘going  in  front’,  abhi-kftvari-  ‘bewitching’  (AV.),  abhi-bhuvari-  ‘superior’,  abhitvarJ-9  (TS. 
VS.)  ‘attacking’,  uttana-sivari-  (AV.)  ‘lying  extended’,  rtavarT-  ‘regular’,  eva-yavari -  ‘going 
quickly’,  krtvari-  (AV.)  ‘bewitcher’,  talpa-stvari-  ‘lying  on  a  couch’,  ms-sidhvari-  ‘bestowing’, 
pivari-  ‘fat’,  purva-javari-  ‘born  before’,  pra-suvari-  ‘furnished  with  flowers’,  bahu-suvari - 
‘bearing  many  children’,  bhiiri-davari-  ‘munificent’,  mdtari-bhvari- 10  ‘being  with  her  mother’, 
mdtari-svari- 1 1  (AV.)  ‘mother-growing’,  yujvari-  ‘worshipping’,  vakvari-  ‘rolling’,  vahya-stvarl • 
(AV.)  ‘reclining  on  a  couch’,  vi-bhavari-  ‘brilliant’,  vi-mfgvari-  (AV.)  ‘cleansing’,  sdkvarT- 
(‘powerful’)  a  kind  of  metre,  sarvari- 1 2  ‘(star-spangled)  night’,  srustivari-  ‘obedient’,  sveta- 
yavarl-  ‘white-flowing’,  sarn-sisvarl-  x3  ‘having  a  calf  in  common’,  sa-jitvari '•  ‘victorious’, 
sa-yava7-i-  ‘accompanying’,  sumnavarT-  ‘gracious’,  sunrtdvari-1^  ‘glorious’,  srtvari-  ‘stream¬ 
ing’,  svadhavari-  ‘constant’. 


1  Perhaps  singular. 

2  The  Pada  text  has  always  a  in  this  and 
the  following  forms. 

3  This  lengthening  is  found  in  neither 
-van  stems  nor  stems,  except  and 
sh'sa ,  which  may  be  formed  from  transfer 
stems  and  in  which  the  Pada  as  well  as  the 
Samhita  text  has  the  long  vowel. 

4  vaj a-karmabhiis  is  a  v.  1.  of  vdja-bharmabhis, 
and  both  adjectives  as  agreeing  with  iitibhis 
have  the  value  of  feminines. 

5  The  G.  chando-ndmcndtn  (VS.  IV.  24) 
‘named  metre’  seems  to  be  a  transfer  to 
the  c-declension. 

6  Formed  from  indhana •  ‘fuel’,  with  loss 

of  the  final  vowel. 


7  The  f.  alharvi-,  formed  from  dtharvan- 
‘fire-priest’,  is  quite  exceptional. 

8  That  is,  agra-i-t-vari-. 

9  That  is,  abhi-i-t-varT-. 

10  From  what  only  seems  to  be  a  -va?i 
stem  which  is  really  —  -bhu-an-. 

11  This  seems  to  be  a  corruption  in  AV. 
V.  29  of  mdtaribhvari-  in  the  corresponding 
passage  of  the  RV. 

12  The  f.  of  sarvara-  ‘variegated’  occurring 
in  api-sarvara-  n.  ‘early  morning’;  a  stem 
sdr-van-  does  not  occur. 

13  The  f.  of  what  only  seems  to  be  a  stem 
in  -van  but  is  really  =  sisu-an-. 

14  Also  sunrtavati-. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Consonant  Stems.  2  i  i 


b.  In  the  strong  cases  there  is  one  instance  in  which  the  a  remains  short:  an - 
arvanam  1  (X.  92M),  and  two  others  in  which  the  weakest  stem  is  used:  A.  sing,  maghbnam 
(VS.  XXVIII.  9)  instead  of  maghdvdnamy  N.  pi.  maghonas  (vi.  4412)  instead  of  maghavanas1  2 3. 
In  the  weak  cases  when  the  suffix  is  preceded  by  a  vowel,  the  a  is  always  syncopated 
in  the  Samhita  text  except  in  the  forms  ddvane ,  vasuvdne  (VS.),  and  rtavani,  but  it  may 
have  to  be  restored  in  one  or  two  instances  A 

c.  The  three  words  fk-van-  ‘singing’,  magha-van -  ‘bountiful’,  saha-van-  ‘powerful’ 
make  a  few  forms  from  supplementary  stems  in  - vant:  I.  sing,  fkvata ;  pi.  I.  magha- 
vadbhis,  D.  maghavadbhyas,  L.  maghdvalsir,  N.  sing,  sahavdn  and  sahavdn.  Beside  dadhi- 
kravan-,  N.  of  a  mythical  horse,  also  occurs  the  stem  dadhi-kra- . 

d.  Eight  or  nine  words  in  -van  show  transitions  to  the  cr-declension  by  extending 
the  stem  with  -a  or,  more  commonly,  by  dropping  the  n.  Thus  satvand-m  and  satvanais 
occur  beside  the  numerous  regular  forms  from  sdtvan-  ‘brave’.  The  N.  sing.  m.  anarvan-a-s 
(v.  5 111,  VIII.  3 112)  may  have  started  from  the  A.  anarvan-am  (X.  92I4),  while  the  n. 
anarvd-m  (i.  1642)  may  have  been  due  to  the  f.  (aditir)  anarva  which  appears  like  the  f. 
of  the  a-  declension.  Other  transitional  forms  are  rkva-s  beside  fkvan- ;  fbhva-m 
‘dexterous’  beside  rbhvan-\  takva-s  ‘swift’  beside  takvan-\  vakvas,  N.  pi.,  ‘rolling’  beside 
vakvan-;  vibhava-m  ‘brilliant’  beside  vibhavan- ;  sikva-s  (AV.)  ‘skilful’  beside  sikvan-. 


Inflexion. 

331.  The  normal  forms  occurring,  if  made  from  gr divan-  ‘pressing  stone’ 
in  the  m.  and  from  dhdnvan-  ‘bow’  in  the  n.,  would  be: 

Sing.  m.  N.  grdvd.  A.  grdvdnam.  I.  grdvna.  D.  grdvne.  Ab.  grdvnas. 
G.  grdvnas.  L.  grdvani  and  grdvan.  V.  grdvan.  —  Du.  N.  A.  V.  grdvana 
and  grdvanau.  I.  grdvabhydm  (AV.).  G.  grdvnos.  —  PI.  N.  V.  grdvdnas. 
A.  grdvnas.  I.  grdvabhis.  D.  grdvabhyas.  G.  grdvnam.  L.  grdvasu. 

Sing.  n.  N.  A.  dhdnva  and  dhanva.  I.  dhativand.  D.  dhdnvane.  Ab.  G. 
dhdnvanas.  L.  dhdnvani  and  dhanvan.  —  PI.  N.  A.  dhdnvani ,  dhdnva , 
dhdnva  (AV.).  I.  dhdnvabhis.  D.  dhdnvabhyas  (VS.).  Ab.  dhdnvabhyas  (AV.). 
G.  dhdnvanam  (AV.).  L.  dhdnvasu. 

Forms  actually  occurring  are  the  following: 

Sing.  N.  m.  agra-ydvd  ‘going  in  front’,  dtharva  ‘fire-priest’,  adma-sadva 
‘companion  at  a  meal’,  ddhva  ‘road’,  an-arvdi 4  ‘irresistible’,  abhi-yngvd  (VS. 
xvii.  86)  ‘attacking’,  abhisasti-pdva  ‘protecting  from  curses’,  abhi-satva  ‘sur¬ 
rounded  by  heroes’,  abhyardha-ydjva  ‘receiving  sacrifices  apart’,  amatlvd 
‘suffering  want’,  arativd  ‘hostile’,  a-rdvd  ‘not  giving’,  ‘hostile’,  drva  ‘steed’, 
av  at  at  a- dhanva  (VS.  in.  61)  ‘whose  bow  is  unbent’,  asic-pdtva  ‘flying  swiftly’, 
ugra-dhanvd  ‘having  a  mighty  bow’,  rkva  ‘praising’,  fghdva  ‘impetuous’,  rna- 
ydva  ‘pursuing  guilt’,  rndvd  ‘guilty’,  rtdvd  ‘pious’,  rbhvd  ‘dexterous’,  krsnd- 
dhvd  ‘having  a  black  track'  ( adhvd ),  kratu-prdvd  ‘granting  power’,  ksiprd- 
dhanvd  ‘having  an  elastic  bow’,  grdvd  ‘pressing  stone’,  takvd  ‘bird  of  prey’, 
dadhi-krdva  N.  of  a  divine  horse,  deva-ydvd  ‘going  to  the  gods’,  dru-sddva 
‘sitting  on  the  wood’,  nr-sadva  ‘sitting  among  men',  pdtharvd  N.  of  a  man, 
pdtva  ‘flying’,  puru-kftvd  ‘doing  much’,  purva-gdtvd  ‘leader’,  purva-ydvd  ‘leader’, 
pra-tdkvd  (VS.  v.  32)  ‘steep’,  pra-rlkvd  ‘extending  beyond’,  prana-ddva 5  (AV.) 
‘breath-giving’,  prdtar-itvd  ‘coming  in  the  morning’,  badha-sftvd  ‘striding 
mightily’,  brhdd-grava  (VS.  1.  1  5)  ‘like  a  great  stone’,  bhuri-dava  ‘giving  much’, 
maghdvab  ‘bountiful’,  mddva  ‘exhilarating’,  mraksa-kftva  ‘rubbing  to  pieces’, 
ydjvd  ‘sacrificer’,  ydvd  ‘aggressor’,  yukta-grdvd  ‘having  yoked  the  pressing 
stones’,  yudhva  ‘warlike’,  raghu-pdtvd  ‘flying  swiftly’,  rdrava  ‘giving  abun¬ 
dantly’,  rdvd  (VS.  vi.  30)  ‘giving’,  vdkvd  ‘rolling’,  vasu-ddvd  ‘giving  goods’, 


1  This  seems  to  be  a  metrical  shortening; 
according  to  Grassmann  it  is  an  A.  of  a 
transfer  stem  an-arvana-. 

2  The  form  kfivanas  in  AV.  XIX.  35s  as 
N.  ph  m.  is  a  conjecture;  cp.  p.213,  note2. 

3  See  Lanman  524  (bottom). 


4  an-arvan-a-s  is  a  transition  to  the  a- 
declension. 

5  Emendation  for  prdna-davdn  in  AV. 
tv.  35s- 

6  Also  once  maghd-van,  transition  form 
from  a  stem  in  -vant. 


14* 


2  I  2 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


vaja-ddva  ‘granting  wealth’,  vi-jdvd  ‘bodily’,  ‘own’,  vi-bhdva  ‘brilliant’,  vi- 
bhrtvd  ‘bearing  hither  and  thither’,  vrsa-parvd  ‘strong-jointed’,  vyoma  (VS. 

iv.  23)  ‘heaven’1,  subham-ydva  ‘flying  swiftly’,  subhvd  ‘bright’,  syend-patva 
‘borne  by  eagles’,  srutarva  N.  of  a  man,  srustivti  ‘obedient’,  satind-satva 
‘truly  brave’,  satyd-madva  ‘really  exhilarated’,  satva  ‘brave’,  samadva  ‘eager 
for  battle’,  sahdvd2  ‘mighty’,  sutva  ‘Soma-pressing’,  su-dhdnva  ‘wielding  a 
good  bow’,  srtva  ‘speeding’,  soma-pdva  ‘drinking  Soma’,  soma-sutva  ‘pressing 
Soma’,  stubhva  ‘praising’,  hitvd  ‘speedy’. 

N.  A.  n.  dkdnva 3  ‘bow’  and  ‘desert’,  parva  (AV.)  ‘joint’,  vi-vasva  ‘bright 
flame’,  sndva  (AV.)  ‘sinew’. 

A.  m.  adhvanam ,  an-arvdnam ,  d-yajvanam  ‘not  sacrificing’,  arvanam , 
rj'isvdnam  N.  of  a  man,  rndvdnam ,  rtdvlnam,  grdvanam ,  dadhi-krdvanam ,  dhitd- 
vdtiam  ‘bountiful’,  pivd.nci7n  ‘fat’,  puru-nissidhvdnam  ‘bestowing  many  gifts’,  puro- 
ydvdnam  ‘going  in  front’,  pratar-ydvdnam  ‘coming  in  the  morning’,  maghdvanam , 
musTvdnam  ‘thief’,  sata-ydvdnam  (Kh.i.  3 2) ‘having  a  hundred  ways’,  srustTvdnam , 
sa-jitvdnam  ‘victorious’,  sdtvdnam ,  sa-ydvanam  ‘accompanying’,  sah&vdnam , 
srkvanam  ‘corner  of  the  mouth’,  hdrdvanam  (VS.  xxxvm.  12)  ‘strengthening  hearts’. 

I.  m.  1.  dtharvana ,  abhi-yugvana ,  cikitvand  ‘wise’,  sata-parvana  ‘having  a 
hundred  joints’,  sikvana  (TS.  11. 5. 1 22)  ‘skilful’.  —  2.  grdvna.  —  n.  1.  dhdnvana , 
pdrvana.  —  2.  sndvnd  (AV.). 

D.  m.  1.  ddhvane ,  a-pascad-daghvane  ‘not  staying  behind’,  krtvane  ‘active’, 
jasvane  ‘needy’,  druhvane  ‘hostile’,  prstha-ydjvane  ‘sacrificing  on  the  ridge’, 
madvane ,  ydjvane ,  vasuvdne  (VS.  xxi.  48)  ‘winning  of  wealth’,  sdkvane  (VS. 

v.  5)  ‘skilful’,  sata-dhanvane  (VS.  xvi.  29)  ‘having  a  hundred  bows’,  srutdrvane , 
sdtvane,  su-krtvane  ‘pious’,  su-d/idnvane  (VS.  xvi.  36),  sthira-dhanvane  ‘having  a 
strong  bow’. —  2.  d-ravne ,  rtdvne ,  osistha-ddvne  (TS.i.  6.  1  2  j)  ‘giving  immedia¬ 
tely’,  vrsa-praydvne  ‘going  with  stallions’,  suta-pdvne  ‘Soma-drinker’,  su-ddvne 
‘giving  abundantly’,  soma-pdvne ,  sva-dhdvne  ‘independent’.  —  n.  1.  turvdne 
‘victory’,  dxvane  ‘giving’,  dhanvane  (VS.  xvi.  14). 

Ab.  m.  1.  adhvanas  (VS.xxvi.  1;  TS.),  pdka-sutvanas  ‘offering  Soma  with 
sincerity’.  —  2.  d-ravnas ,  puru-rdvnas  (VS.  111.48)  ‘loud-roaring’. — n.  1.  dhanvanas 
(AV.),  pdrvanas. 

G.  m.  1.  atharvanas ,  adhvanas ,  d-yajvanas,  a-strta-yajvanas  ‘sacrificing 
indefatigably’,  yajvanas ,  vy-ddhvanas  ‘striding  through’.  —  2.  a-rdvnas ,  dadhi- 
hrdvnas ,  bhuri-ddvnas,  yukta-gravnas ,  suta-pdvnas ,  soma-pdvnas ;  maghmas 4.  — 
n.  1.  dhanvanas  ‘bow’. 

L.  m.  1.  dtharvani ,  ddhvani ,  rtdvani ,  srutdrvani ,  su-krtvani.  —  2.  Az/<7- 
ddvni 5.  —  3.  Without  ending:  ddhvan.  —  n.  1.  tugvani  ‘ford’,  parvani.  — 
3.  an-arvan ,  a-parvan ,  dhdnva?i ,  pdrvan  (AV.). 

V.  m.  1.  atharvan  (AV .),  asva-davan  ‘giving  horses’,  davan  (AA.v.  2.2^), 
maghavan,  vasu-davan ,  visvato-ddvan  (SV.  1. 5.  2. 1  ‘giving  everywhere’,  visva- 
davan  (AV.)  ‘giving  everything’,  satya-satvan  ‘truly  strong’,  satra-ddvan  ‘giving 
everything’,  sahasdvan  ‘strong’,  suta-pavan ,  soma-pdvan ,  sva-davan  ‘having  good 
taste’,  sva-dhdvan,  sva-ydvan  ‘going  one’s  own  way’.  —  2.  With  -yas:  rtdvas , 
eva-yavas  ‘going  quickly’,  pratar-itvas ,  vibhavas 6. 


1  As  a  masculine. 

2  Also  sahavan  and  sahavan  from  a  stem 
in  - vant . 

3  Once  with  final  vowel  lengthened  in  the 
Samhita  text,  dkdnva. 

4  Sometimes  to  be  read  as  magha-vanas ; 
see  Lanman  534. 

5  The  only  example  of  syncopation  in  the 

L.  of  this  declension  in  the  RV.  (v.  2 7 5),  where 


however  the  a  must  be  metrically  restored ; 
there  are  no  examples  in  the  or  -man 
stems,  but  the  AV.  has  one  in  the  former 
and  three  in  the  latter. 

6  khid-vcis  (vi.  224)  is  perhaps  best  taken 
as  V.  of  a  stem  khid-vcims-\  BR.  and  Lanman 
explain  it  as  from  khid-van-.  The  V.  mdtarisvas 
is  formed  as  if  from  mdtaris-van-  instead  of 
matari-sv-an- ;  cp.  p.  210,  notes  10  and  13. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Consonant  Stems 


213 


Du.  N.  A.  V.  m.  agradvana  ‘eating  (advcin -)  first’,  a-druhvana  ‘not  hostile’, 
rtdvana,  grdvana ,  pratar-ydvana,  magZiavdnd ,  ratha-ydvana  ‘driving  in  a  car’, 
subhra-yavand  ‘driving  stately’,  srustivdna,  sa-jitvana. —  With  -au:  rtdvanau, 
grdvanau  (AV.).  —  I.  m.  grdvabZiyam  (AV.).  —  G.  m.  maghdnos. 

PI.  N.  V.  m.  aksna-ydvanas  ‘going  across’,  dtharvanas ,  a?i-arvdnas, 
d-yajvanas ,  upa-hasvdnas  ‘mocking’,  urd/ivd-gravanas  ‘lifting  the  pressing  stone’, 
rkvdnas ,  rtdvanas, grdvanas, ghrta-pdvanas ( VS. vi.  19)  ‘drinking  ghee’,  druZivanas , 
ni-krtvdnas  ‘deceitful’,  pari-sadvanas  ‘besetting’,  pivanas  (TS.  111.  2.  81 2 3 4 5),  prd- 
sthavdnas  ‘swift’,  pratar-ydvdnas ,  maghavanas ,  raghu-pdtvdnas ,  vanivdJias 1 
‘demanding’,  vasd-pdvdnas  (VS.  vi.  19)  ‘drinkers  of  fat’,  sub ham-ydiv anas, 
srustTvdnas ,  sdtvanas,  su-dhanvanas,  su-sukvdnas  ‘shining  brightly’.  —  Weak 
form  for  strong:  maghdnas  (vi.  4412)2. 

N.  A.  n.  1.  dhdnvani ,  parvani ,  sndvani  (AV.).  —  2.  dhdnva,  parval\ 
with  long  final  vowel  only  pdrvd  (AV.  xn.  542). 

A.  m.  1.  adhvanas ,  d-yajvanas ,  druhvanas  (AV.).  —  2.  a-rdvnas ,  eva- 
ydvnas ,  grdvnas ,  pratar-ydvnas)  maghdnas. 

I.  m.  ddhvabhis ,  d-prayutvabhis  ‘attentive’,  fkvabhis ,  eva-ydvabhis ,  grdivabhis , 
pratar-ydvabhis* ,  yajvab/iis,  ranvabhis  ‘agreeable’,  sikvabhis,  satvabZiis ,  sanitvabZiis 
‘bestowers’,  sa-ydvabhis ,  su-pra-ydvabhis  ‘speeding  well’,  sva-yugvabhis  ‘allies’.  — - 
n.  pdtvabhis,  pdrvabZiis ,  vivasvabhis ,  soma-parvabhis  ‘times  of  Soma  offerings’. 

D.  m.  dtharvabZiyas,  grdvabhyas ,  gZiarma-pdvabhyas  (VS.xxxviii.i  5)  ‘drink¬ 
ing  hot  (milk)’ 5.  —  n.  sndvabhyas  (VS.  xxxix.  10).  —  Ab.  n.  sndvabZiyas  (AV.). 

G.  m.  1.  ddZivanam  (VS.  v.  33),  an-arvanam ,  d-yajvandm ,  satvanam.  — 
2.  grdvnam ,  rardvndm ,  vaja-ddvnam 6,  soma-pdvndm\  maghdnam.  —  n.  1. 
dhanvanam  (AV.). 

L.  m.  ddhvasu ,  kftvasu ,  gravasu  (Kh.  1. 1 2 3) 7,  yajvasu 8 *.  —  n.  dZidnvasu, 
parvasu. 


Stems  in  -in,  -min,  -vin. 


332.  The  suffixes  -fiv,  -wz>?,  -zvVz,  which  have  the  sense  of  ‘possessing’, 
are  used  to  form  secondary  adjectives.  The  stems  in  are  very  common, 
those  in  - vin  are  fairly  frequent,  numbering  nearly  twenty,  but  there  is  only 
one  in  -min\  rg-min-  ‘praising’.  They  are  declined  in  the  m.  and  n.  only 9; 
but  the  neuter  forms  are  very  rare,  amounting  to  fewer  than  a  dozen  altogether. 
The  inflexion  presents  hardly  any  irregularities.  The  vowel  of  the  suffix 
remains  accented  throughout10,  and  is  not  liable  either  to  syncope  or  to 
lengthening  in  the  G.  pi.  It  is  lengthened  in  the  N.  sing.  m.  only11.  As  in 
all  derivative  stems  ending  in  -n,  the  nasal  disappears  in  the  N.  sing.  m.  n. 
and  before  terminations  beginning  with  consonants. 

a.  There  are  a  few  transition  forms  to  the  ^-declension  starting  from  the 
A.  sing.  m.  in  -in-am  understood  as  - ina-m .  Such  are  paramesthdna-m  (AV.  xix.  91)  ‘most 
exalted’,  N.  sing.  n. ;  the  V.  mahin-a  and  the  G.  mahma-sya  from  mah-in-  ‘mighty’,  and 


1  From  the  intensive  of 

2  The  form  kftvano  in  AV.  xix.  355  is  a 
conjecture  for  the  krsnavo  of  the  Mss. 

3  In  Pada  as  well  as  Samhita. 

4  Also  the  supplementary  form  maghavad- 
bhis. 

5  Also  the  supplementary  form  maghavad- 
bhyas. 

6  The  form  sahasra-davndm  is  read  as  a 
f.  in  I.  175. 

7  Accented  gravasu  in  the  edition. 

8  There  is  also  the  transfer  form  magha- 

vatsu. 


9  They  form  a  special  f.  stem  by  adding 
e.  g.  from  asv-m-  ‘possessing  horses’ 

asvin-T-. 

10  Except  sakin-,  sarin-,  and  the 

compounds  karu-latin-,  maha-vaturin-,  ittdra- 
tnedin-,  from  each  of  which  a  single  form 
occurs;  also  the  compounds  formed  with 
the  negative  a-;  e.  g.  a-ndmin-. 

11  It  would  doubtless  be  lengthened  in  the 
N.  A.  n.  pi.  also  if  that  form  occurred. 


2i4  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


the  n.  pi.  vanina-ni  (x.  669;1  from  van-in-  m.  ‘forest-tree’.  The  isolated  form  mandi-m 
(I.  92)  is  a  transition  to  the  /-declension,  starting  probably  from  the  I.  sing,  mandin-a 
‘exhilarating’  understood  as  mandi-nd. 


Inflexion. 

333.  All  the  case-forms  are  represented  in  the  m.,  but  in  the  n.  the 
three  singular  case-forms,  N.  A.,  I,  and  G.  only.  As  only  eight  or  nine  n. 
forms  occur,  they  may  most  conveniently  be  enumerated  separately: 

Sing.  n.  N.  a-nami  ‘unbending’,  ubhaya-hasti  ‘filling  both  hands’,  tsari 
(AY.)  ‘hidden’,  patatri  ‘winged’,  vaj'i  ‘vigorous’  (Kh.  iv.  62 3),  sakalyesi  (AV.) 
‘seeking  shavings’2.  I.  kirina  ‘praising’,  su-gandhlna 3  ‘fragrant’.  G.  pra- 
Jioslnas  ‘offering  oblations’4. 

The  m.  forms  actually  occurring,  if  made  from  hast-ln-  ‘having  hands’, 
would  be  as  follows: 

Sing.  N.  hast!..  A.  hastlnam.  I.  hastlna.  D.  hastine.  Ab.  hasthias. 
G.  hast'inas.  L.  hastini.  V.  hdstin.  —  Du.  N.  A.  hastlna  and  hastlnau. 
I.  D.  hastibhydm.  G.  L.  hastlnos.  —  PI.  N.  hast'inas.  A.  hasthias.  I.  hast'ibhis. 
D.  hastibhyas  (VS.  AV.).  G.  hastlnam.  L.  hastlsu. 

a.  The  forms  actually  occurring  are : 

Sing.  N.  1.  Stems  in  -in:  ahkt  ‘possessing  a  hook’,  ati-vyadhi  (VS. 
xxii.  22)  ‘wounding’,  abhya-varti  ‘coming  near’,  arthz  ‘active’,  asvi  ‘possessed 
of  horses’,  In 5  ‘powerful’,  uj-jesi  (VS.  xvn.  85)  N.  of  one  of  the  Maruts,  udri 
‘abounding  in  water’,  rjlpz  ‘moving  upwards’,  rjlsi  ‘receiving  the  residue  of 
Soma’,  ekaki  (VS.  TS.)  ‘solitary’,  kapardi  ‘wearing  braided  hair’,  karu-latib 
‘having  decayed  teeth’,  hand  ‘desirous’,  kuldyt  (TS.  iv.  1.96)  ‘forming  a  nest’, 
kevaladi  ‘eating  by  oneself  alone’,  kesi  ‘having  long  hair’,  krTdi  (VS.  xvii.  85) 
‘sporting’, grha-medhi (VS.xvii.  85)  ‘performing  the  domestic  sacrifices’,  candrt (VS. 
xx.  37)  ‘golden’,  tsari  ‘hidden’,  dyumni ‘majestic’,  nis-sapi  ‘lustful’,  pakthi ‘cooking 
the  oblation’,  patatri  (TS.  1.  7.  72)  ‘winged’, parame-sthi (VS. vm.  54)  ‘most  exalted’, 
pari-panthi  ‘waylayer’,  prsty-amayi  ‘suffering  from  a  pain  in  the  side’,  pra-ghasi 
(VS.xvii.  85)  ‘voracious’,  pra-bhahgi  ‘destroying’,  pra-vepani  ‘causing  to  tremble’, 
bdhu-sardhi  ‘relying  on  his  arms’,  brahma-cari  ‘practising  devotion’,  brahma- 
varcasi  (VS.  xxii.  22)  ‘eminent  in  sacred  knowledge’,  bhadra-vadi  ‘uttering 
auspicious  cries’,  manisi  ‘thoughtful’,  manthi  (VS.  vn.  18)  ‘stirred  Soma  juice’, 
mandi  ‘exhilarating’,  marayi  ‘destructive’  (?),  mahd-hasti  ‘having  large  hands’, 
mdyi  ‘crafty’,  medi  ‘ally’,  rathi  ‘possessing  a  car’,  rambhi  ‘carrying  a  crutch’, 
ruktni  ‘adorned  with  gold’,  vajri  ‘armed  with  a  bolt’,  varmi  ‘mailed’,  vast 
‘having  power’,  vdji  ‘vigorous’,  vi-rapsi  ‘copious’,  sata-svi  ‘having  a  hundred 
possessions’,  sdki 7  ‘strong’,  sipri  ‘full-cheeked’,  susmi ‘roaring’,  //^/‘sounding’, 
svaghni  ‘gambler’,  sodasi  (VS.  TS.)  ‘having  sixteen  parts’,  sari 5  ‘hastening’, 
sahasri  ‘thousandfold’,  saci  ‘companion’,  somi  ‘offering  Soma’,  svabdi 
‘bellowing’,  hasti  ‘having  hands’.  —  2.  stem  in  -min:  rgmi  ‘praising’.  — 
3.  stems  in  -vin :  d-dvayavT  ‘free  from  duplicity’,  a-yudhm8  ‘not  fighting’, 
astrdvi  ‘obeying  the  goad’,  tarasvi  (VS.  xix.  88)  ‘bold’. 

A.  1.  atrlnam  ‘devoured,  adhi-kalplnam  (VS.  xxx.  iS)  ‘gamble-manager’, 


1  Instead  of  vanin-as ,  probably  due  to  the 
metre. 

2  The  Pada  text  reads  sakalya-es'r,  but  the 
Paippalada  recension  has  the  better  reading 
sdkalyesu  ‘among  the  shavings’:  see  Whitney’s 
note  on  AV.  I.  252. 

3  But  this  form  might  be  from  su-gandhi-. 

4  The  isolated  form  krudhmi  (VII.  56s) 

agreeing  with  mananjsi  is  a  N.  pi.  n.  of  a  stem 

krudh-mi-,  rather  than  of  krudh-mm-  ‘angry’. 


5  With  abnormal  accent. 

6  Accented  like  a  Bahuvrlhi. 

7  Thus  accented  VS.  XVII.  85,  but  sdki 
RV.  I.  5 18:  the  latter  is  probably  an  error 
as  the  suffix  is  accented  in  the  three  other 
forms  sakinam,  sdkine,  sdkinas. 

8  BoHTLiNGK(pw.) regards  this  as  a  gerund: 
d-yud-dhvT  ‘without  fighting’. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Consonant  Stems. 


2 1 5 


abhi-prasninam  (VS.  xxx.  io)  ‘inquisitive’,  abhi-matlnam  ‘insidious’,  arkinam 
‘praising’,  ava-kraksinam  ‘rushing  down’,  d-vajinam  ‘a  bad  horse’,  asvinam , 
adarinam  ‘breaking  open’,  dyinam  (TS.  n.  4.  71)  ‘hurrying  up’,  isminam 
‘speeding’,  uktha-samsinam  ‘uttering  verses’,  ukthinam  ‘praising’,  udrinam , 
rjlsinam r,  kapardinam ,  karambhmam  ‘possessing  gruel’,  kalpinam  (VS.  xxx.  18) 
‘designing’,  kalmalikinam  ‘flaming’,  kaminam ,  karinam  ‘singing’,  kuldyinam , 
kucid-arthinam  ‘striving  to  get  anywhere’,  catlnam  ‘lurking’,  jana-vadinam 
(VS.  xxx.  17)  ‘prattler’,  tri-sthinam  (VS.  xxx.  14)  ‘having  a  threefold  footing’, 
dyumninam ,  dhaninam  ‘wealthy’,  niyayinam 2  ‘passing  over’,  paksinam 
‘winged’ ,  patatrinam  (VS.xix.  10),  pari-panthinam ,  pitha-sarplnam  (VS.  xxx.  21) 
‘cripple’,  putrinam  ‘possessing  sons’,  purTsinam  ‘possessing  land’,  pra-vadinam 
(VS.  xxx.  13)  ‘speaking  pleasantly’,  prasninam  (VS.  xxx.  10)  ‘questioner’, 
bahu-vadlnam  (VS.  xxx.  19)  ‘talkative’,  mamsinam ,  manthinam ,  mandmam 3, 
manyu-sdvinam  ‘pressing  Soma  with  zeal’,  mayinam ,  medinam  (TS.  iv.  7.  104), 
rathinam,  vamsa-nartinam  (VS.  xxx.  21)  ‘pole-dancer’,  vajrinam ,  vaninam 
‘bountiful’,  vaninam  ‘forest  tree’,  vaydkinam  ‘ramifying’,  varcinam  N.  of 
a  demon,  vdjinam,  vi-rapsina?n ,  vi-stuninam  (VS.  xxm.  29)  ‘wetting’,  /#/#- 
gvlnam  ‘hundredfold’,  satinajii  ‘hundredfold’,  sdkinam ,  susminam ,  srhginatn 
‘horned’,  svaninam  (VS.  xxx.  7)  ‘keeping  dogs’,  sahasra-posinam  ‘thriving  a 
thousandfold’,  sahasrinam.  —  3.  d-dvayavinam ,  ubhayavinam  ‘partaking  of 
both’,  tarasvinam ,  namasvinam  ‘reverential’,  mdydvinam  ‘employing  deceit’, 
medhavinam  (VS.  xxxn.  14)  ‘possessed  of  wisdom’,  raksasvinam  ‘demoniacal’. 

I.  1.  arcina  ‘shining’,  asvina ,  kimtdina  ‘evil  spirit’,  kirina  ‘praising‘4,  balind 
(TS.  ill.  3.  82)  ‘strong’,  mandlna ,  mahd-vaturina 5  ‘very  wide’,  vatQrina  ‘wide’, 
vdj'ind.  —  3.  raksasvina. 

D.  1.  abhyd-vartme ,  a-mitrine  ‘hostile’,  ava-bhedlne  (VS.xvi.  34)  ‘splitting’, 
a-tatayine  (VS.  xvi.  18)  ‘having  one’s  bow  drawn’,  a-yndhine  (VS.  xvi.  36) 
‘warrior’,  upa-vitine  (VS.  xvi.  17)  ‘wearing  the  sacred  cord’,  usmsine  (VS.xvi.  22) 
‘wearing  a  turban’,  kapardine,  kavacine  (VS.  xvi.  35)  ‘mailed’,  kdrine ,  kimidine, 
tantrdyine  (VS.  xxxvm.  12)  ‘drawing  out  rays’,  ni-vyddhine  (VS.  xvi.  20) 
‘piercing’,  ni-sahgine  (VS.xvi.  20)  ‘sword-bearer’,  pra-saksine  ‘victorious’,  bilmine 
(VS.  xvi.  35)  ‘having  a  helmet’,  b  ham  me  ‘angry’,  mamsine ,  mantrme  (VS. 
xvi.  19)  ‘wise’,  mandine ,  mahine  ‘mighty’,  rathine ,  vajrlne ,  varuthine  (VS. 
xvi.  35)  ‘wearing  an 
vi-rapsine ,  vy-asnuv-me " 

‘piercer’,  sakine,  siprine ,  susmme ,  sodasine  (VS.  vm.  33), 
xvi.  36)  ‘having  good  weapons’.  —  3.  raksasvine. 

Ab.  1.  abhi-prabhaiiglnas  ‘breaking  completely’,  patatrinas ,  manthinas  (TS. 
VS.  xiii.  57),  sominas. 

G.  1.  arthinas ,  rjismas ,  kapardlnas  (TS.  VS.  xvi.  10),  dhaninas ,  patatrinas 
(TS.  iv.  7.  131),  parninas  ‘winged’,  pragardhitias  ‘pressing  onwards’,  bhuri- 
posinas  ‘much-nourishing’,  manthinas  (VS.  vn.  18),  mandinas ,  may  mas ,  ratninas 
‘possessing  gifts’,  rasinas  ‘juicy’,  retinas 7  ‘abounding  in  seed’,  vajrinas ,  vaninas 
‘bountiful’,  vaninas  ‘forest  tree’,  varcinas ,  vaginas,  vi-rapsinas ,  vilu-harsinas 


varmine  (VS.),  vi-namsine  (VS.  ix.  20)  ‘vanishing’, 
6  (VS.  xii.  32)  a  genius  of  food,  vyadhine  (VS.  xvi.  18) 

sv-ayudhine  (VS. 


1  rj'Tsdm  in  I.  32^  is  possibly  a  metrically 
shortened  form  for rjlsinam:  cp.  Lanman  543 c 

2  As  this  compound  occurs  only  once 
beside  the  simple  adj.  yayi-,  which  occurs 
several  times,  the  former  is  perhaps  a  trans¬ 
fer  from  the  z-declension. 

3  mand'i-m  (1.  92)  is  probably  a  transition 

form;  but  BR.  regard  it  as  a  contraction  in 

pronunciation  of  mandinam. 


4  Grassmann  in  1.  iooQ  proposes  to  read 

kTrine. 

5  Accented  like  BahuvrThi;  but  cp. 
P-  I545- 

6  Formed  from  the  present  stem  of  pW- : 

vi-as-nuv-in-. 

7  From  for  retas-  ‘seed’. 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


216 


‘refractory’,  vrandinas  ‘becoming  soft’,  satinas ,  susminas ,  srhginas ,  sahasrinas , 
sominas.  —  3.  d-dvayavinas ,  dvayavinas  ‘double-dealing’,  namasvinas. 

L.  1.  dvipini  (AV.)  ‘leopard’,  parame-sthini  (AV.),  brahma-carini  (AV.), 
may  ini ,  vajini ,  so?nini. 

V.  1.  dna-bhayin  ‘fearless’,  abhya-vartin  (VS.xii.  7),  amatrin  ‘having  a  large 
drinking  vessel’,  rjipin ,  rjisin ,  tuvi-kttrmin  ‘working  powerfully’,  pra-pathin 
‘roaming  on  distant  paths’,  yaksin  ‘living’,  vajrin ,  vdjin ,  virapsin ,  savasin 
‘mighty’,  siprin ,  sitsmin ,  sahasin  ‘mighty’.  —  3.  ubhaydvin. 

Du.  N.  A.  V.  1.  asvina ,  V.  asvma  and  asvina ,  kumarina  ‘having  children’, 
kesind ,  V.  pajra-hosina  ‘having  rich  oblations’,  parnind ,  putrind ,  purisina ,  pra- 
saksina ,  manthina ,  V.  mayina ,  vajrina ,  vajind ,  V.  vdjind ,  vi-ghanina  ‘slaying’, 
susmina ,  sarathind  (VS.  xxix.  7;  TS.)  ‘driving  in  the  same  car’,  sdma-cdrind  (Kh. 
hi.  2  25)  ‘faring  with  chants’.  —  3.  mdyavind .  —  Forms  with  -aw1:  asvinau, 
V.  asvinau  and  asvinau,  patatrinau  (VS.  xvm.  52),  vajinau . 

I.  asvibhydm,  indra-medibhyam  (AV.)  ‘whose  ally  is  Indra’.  —  D.  a/zV 
bhyam.  —  G.  asvinos.  —  L.  asvinos. 

PI.  N.  V.  1.  ahkusinas  ‘having  a  hook’,  air  in  as,  arkinas ,  arcinas , 
arthinas ,  avarokinas  (VS.  xxiv.  6)  ‘brilliant’,  isminas ,  ukthinas ,  upa-niantrinas 
‘persuading’,  rjlsinas ,  kapardmas ,  kabandhinas  ‘bearing  casks’,  kdminas , 
kdrinas ,  klrinas,  krsaninas  ‘adorned  with  pearls’,  kesinas,  khddinas  ‘adorned 
with  rings’,  ganinas  (TS.  1.  4.  1 1 ‘having  attendants’,  gdthinas  ‘singers’, 
gdyatrinas  ‘singers  of  hymns’,  gharminas  ‘preparing  the  Gharma  ottering’, 
dasagvinas  ‘tenfold’,  drapsinas  ‘falling  in  drops’,  dhuminas  ‘smoking’,  ni-kdrinas 
(TS.  VS.  xxvii.  4)  ‘injurers’,  ni-iodinas  ‘piercing’,  ni-rdminas  ‘lurking’,  ni-sanginas, 
paksinas ,  patatrinas ,  pari-panthinas,  pari-parinas  (VS.  iv.  34)  ‘adversaries’, 
parninas ,  pdsinas  ‘laying  snares’,  purisina s,  pra-kridinas  ‘sporting’,  pra-sak- 
sinas,  balinas,  mamsinas ,  mandinas,  mahinas,  may  mas,  medinas,  rathmas , 
vaninas  ‘bountiful’,  vaninas  ‘forest  trees’,  varminas,  vdjinas,  vi-rapsinas ,  Z7- 
rokinas  ‘brilliant’,  visdninas  ‘holding  horns’  (a  people),  vrata-carinas  ‘performing 
vows’,  satagvinas,  sat  mas,  sdkmas,  susmmas,  sahasrinas,  sominas,  svdninas 
‘resounding’,  hastinas,  hiraninas  ‘golden’.  —  2.  rgminas.  —  3.  tarasvinas, 
dvayavinas,  dhrsadvinas  ‘bold’,  namasvinas ,  mdydvinas. 

A.  1.  atrinas,  a-rajinas  ‘lacking  splendour’,  arthinas,  asvinas,  uktha-samsinas, 
kdminas,  kdrinas,  grathinas  ‘false’,  dyumninas ,  paksinas,  pra-ghdsmas  (VS. 
hi.  44),  bhdminas ,  mandinas,  mdyinas,  mitrinas  ‘befriended’,  rathmas,  vaninas 
‘bountiful’,  vaninas  ‘forest  trees’,  vdjinas,  vrandinas,  sahasrinas,  sominas, 
hastinas  (VS.  xxiv.  29),  hiraninas.  —  3.  raksasvinas. 

I.  1.  asvibhis,  kesibhis,  ni-sangibhis,  patatribhis,  manisibhis ,  mandibhis, 
rukmibhis,  vdjibhis,  susmibhis,  hastibhis.  —  2.  rgmibhis. 

D.  1.  rta-vadibhyas  (VS.  v.  7)  ‘speaking  the  truth’,  kndibhyas  (VS.  xxiv.  16), 
grha-medhibhyas  (VS.  xxiv.  16),  dhanvayibhyas  (VS.  xvi.  22)  ‘carrying  a  bow’, 
rathibhyas  (VS.  xvi.  26),  sikhibhyas  (AV.)  ‘peaked’,  svanibhyas  (VS.  xvi.  27), 
srkdyibhyas  (VS.xvi.  2  1)  ‘having  a  spear’,  svadhdyibhyas  (VS.  xix.  36)  ‘owning 
the  Svadha’. 

G.  1.  kdrindm,  mdyindm,  vasindm  (AV.),  vdj’mdm,  srhgindm.  —  3.  stukd- 
vinarn  ‘shaggy’.  —  L.  1.  khadisu,  dvarisu  ‘obstructing’,  hastisu  (AV.). 

4.  Labial  Stems, 
a.  Stems  in  (radical)  -/?. 

334.  These  stems  are  inflected  alike  in  the  masculine  and  feminine, 
there  being  no  neuters.  All  the  monosyllables  are  feminine  substantives. 


1  According  to  Lanman  544  the  -a  forms  occur  369  times,  the  -cw  forms  32  times. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Consonant  Stems. 


217 


They  are:  dp-  ‘water’,  krp-  ‘beauty’,  ksdp-  ‘night’,  ksip-  ‘hnger’,  rip-  ‘deceit’, 
rap-  ‘earth’,  vip -1  ‘rod’.  Feminine  are  also  the  compounds  a-tap-  ‘heating’, 
pati-rip-  ‘deceiving  a  husband’,  vi-stap-  ‘summit’,  rta-sap-  ‘performing  worship’. 
All  other  compound  stems  are  masculine.  They  are:  agni-tap -  ‘enjoying  the 
warmth  of  fire’,  abhl-lapa-ldp-2 3 4  ( AV.)  ‘excessively  whimpering’,  asu-trp-  3  ‘delighting 
in  lives’,  keta-sdp-  ‘obeying  the  will  (of  another)’,  pari-rap-  ‘crying  around’, 
pasu-trp-'5  ‘delighting  in  herds’,  pra-sup -4  ‘slumbering’,  rity-dp-  ‘having  streaming 
(riti-)  water’. 

a.  The  distinction  of  strong  and  weak  forms  appears  in  dp -  and  its  compound 

rJ(y-dp-,  as  well  as  in  the  two  compounds  of  sap-  ‘serve’,  rta-sap-  and  kela-sap-.  The 

strong  form  dpas  is  used  a  few  times  in  the  A.  pi.,  but  the  long  vowel  in  pari-rapas  as 

A.  pi.  is  due  to  the  metre;  on  the  other  hand,  the  weak  form  ap-as  appears  twice  in  the 
AV.  as  N.  pi. 

b.  The  A.  pi.  apds  is  nearly  always  accented  on  the  ending  as  a  weak  case; 
ksapas  similarly  appears  two  or  three  times,  and  vipas  once. 

c.  No  N.  sing.  m.  or  f.  occurs,  but  a  n.  transition  form  once  appears  in  this  case: 

vistapa-m  (ix.  11310 *),  a  form  which  doubtless  started  from  the  A.  sing.  f.  vistap-avi.  The 

n.  pi.  of  the  same  transition  stem  occurs  once  as  vistapd  (vnr.  805).  Two  other  transition 
forms  are  ksapabhis  and  ksipabhis. 


Inflexion. 

335.  The  forms  actually  occurring  are  the  following: 

Sing.  A.  m.  pasu-trpam.  —  f.  vi-stdpam.  —  I.  m.  vipd  ‘priest’.  —  f.  apd , 
krpd ,  ksapd,  vipd.  —  Ab.  f.  apas\  a-tdpas ,  vi-stdpas.  —  G.  m.  vipas5.  —  f.  apds, 
ksapas ,  ripas ,  rupds.  —  L.  f.  vi-stdpi. 

Du.  N.  m.  rity-hpa ;  asu-trpaifi. 

PI.  N.  m.  rta-sdpas ,  keta-sdpas ,  V.  rlti-apas;  vipas ;  agni-tdpas ,  abhi-lapa - 
/dpas  (AV.),  asu-tipas ,  pra-supas.  —  f.  dpas,  V.  apas ,  rta-sdpas ;  ksipas , 
vipas ,  ripas ;  pati-ripas.  The  A.  form  apds  occurs  twice  in  the  AV.  for  the  N. 7 8. 

A.  m.  asu-trpas,  pari-rdpas5.  —  f.  apds  and  dpas9,  ksapas  and  ksapas10, 
vipas  and  vipas  lz,  ripas. 

I.  f.  adbkis12.  —  D.  f.  adbhyds 12  (VS.  vi.  9).  —  Ab.  f.  adbhyds 1 2.  —  G.  m. 
vipd?Ji.  —  f.  apdm  I3,  ksapdm ,  vipdirn.  —  L.  f.  apsu 14 . 

b.  Stems  in  (radical)  -bh. 

336.  Both  masculines  and  feminines  occur  in  this  declension,  but  there 
are  no  neuters.  The  stems  comprise  five  monosyllables  formed  from  roots, 
together  with  compounds  of  three  of  the  latter  ( grabh -,  subh -,  stubk-),  and 
kakubh-.  The  stems  are:  ksubh-  f.  ‘push’,  grbh-  f.  ‘seizing’,  ndbh-  f.  ‘destroyer’, 
di'ibh -  f.  ‘splendour’,  stubh-  adj.  ‘praising’,  f.  ‘praise’;  jiva-grbh-  m.  ‘capturing 
alive’,  ‘bailiff’,  sute-grbh-  ‘taking  hold  of  the  Soma’,  syuma-grbh-  ‘seizing  the 


1  vip-  as  an  adjective  is  used  as  a  m. 
also. 

2  An  irregular  intensive  formation. 

3  Cp.  Kluge,  KZ.  25,  31  if. 

4  From  svap-  ‘sleep’. 

5  With  irregular  accent. 

6  Cp.  Lanman  482  (middle). 

7  There  is  also  the  transition  form  in  the 
n.  vi-stapa. 

8  Metrical  for  pari-rapas ,  which  is  the 
reading  of  the  Pada  text  in  II.  233'  x4 ;  see 
RPr.  ix.  26. 

9  apds  is  the  regular  form  occurring  152 

times  in  the  RV.  and  26  times  in  the  AV. 

The  strong  form  apas  is  used  half  a  dozen 


times  in  books  I  and  X  of  the  RV.,  and  16 
times  in  the  AV. ;  it  also  occurs  in  Kh.  ill.  9. 

m  ksapas  6  or  8  times  in  RV.,  ksapas  2  or 
3  times. 

11  vipas  thrice,  vipas  once  in  RV. 

12  By  dissimilation  for  *ab-bhis,  *ab-bhyds\ 
cp.  Johansson,  IF.  4,  134—146.  See  Lan¬ 
man  483.  There  are  also  the  two  transfer 
forms  ksapabhis  and  ksipabhis ,  each  occurring 
once. 

*3  On  the  metrical  value  of  apdm  see  Lan¬ 
man  484  (top). 

BR.  regard  apdsu  in  vm.  414  as  =  apsu 
with  inserted  -a-.  See  Lanman  484. 


2 1 8  I.  Allgemeines  und  Serache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


reins’;  rathe-subh-  ‘flying  along  in  a  car’;  arm-stub h -  f.  ‘after-praise’,  a  metre, 
yta-stubh-  ‘praising  duly’,  tri-stub  h-  ‘triple  praise’,  a  metre,  pari-stubh-  ‘exulting 
on  every  side’,  sam-stubh-  (VS.)  ‘shout  of  joy’,  a  metre,  gharma-stubh- 
‘shouting  in  the  heat’,  chandah-stiibh-  ‘praising  in  hymns’,  vrsa-stubh-  ‘calling 
aloud’,  su-stubh-  ‘uttering  a  shrill  cry’;  kakubh-  f.  ‘peak’,  tri-kakubh-  ‘three- 
pointed’. 

a.  The  distinction  of  strong  and  weak  forms  does  not  appear  except  in 
the  N.  and  A.  pi.  of  nabh-.  The  inflexion  of  these  stems  is  incompletely 
represented,  there  being  no  dual  forms,  and  no  plural  forms  the  endings  of 
which  begin  with  a  consonant. 

Inflexion. 

337.  The  forms  occurring  are: 

Sing.  N.  m.  stup ;  tri-kakup.  —  f.  anu-sti'ip  (VS.  AV.),  anu-stuk  (TS.  v. 
2.  111),  tri-stup ;  kakup  (VS.  AV.). 

A.  m.  rathe-subham ,  sute-grbham.  —  f.  gfbham ,  subham ;  rta-stubham , 
anu-stiibham ,  tri-stub  ham ;  kakubham. 

I.  m.  stub  ha, ;  su-stubha. —  f.  ksubha,  grbhd ,  subhd ;  anu-stubha,  tri-stub  ha 
(VS.  XVII.  34;  TS.  II.  2'.  48);  kakubiici  (VS.  xxvm.  44). 

D.  m.  gharma-stubhe ,  syuma-grbhe.  —  f.  subhe  (AV.  VS.  xxx.  7);  anu- 
stubhe  (VS.  xxiv.  12),  tri-stub  he  ( VS.  xxiv.  1 2) ;  kakubhe  (VS.  xxiv.  13). 

Ab.  m.  jiva-grbhas.  —  f.  grbhds  (VS.  xxi.  43);  anu-stubhas  (VS.  xm.  54), 
tri-stubhas  ( A V. ) . 

G.  m.  su-stubhas.  —  f.  sub  has T  (in  sub  has  pdti ,  du.  N.  A.  and  subhas 
pati ,  V.). 

L.  f.  tri-stubhi  (VS.  xxxvm.  18);  kakubhi  (TS.  in.  3.  92 3;  VS.  xv.  4). 

PL  N.  m.  chandah-stubhas ,  vrsa-stubhas ,  pari-stubhas ,  su-stubhas.  — 
f.  ndbhas 2,  subhas ,  stub  has. 

A.  f.  ndbhas ,  stubhas ;  tri-stubhas ,  pari-stubhas ;  kahubhas. 

G.  f.  kakubham. 


c.  Stems  in  -m. 

338.  There  are  only  about  half  a  dozen  stems  in  -7;/  which  among  them 
muster  a  few  more  than  a  dozen  forms.  All  are  monosyllables  except  a 
compound  of  nam-  ‘bend’.  Neuters  are  /«/;/-  ‘happiness’  and  perhaps  <A?77Z- 
‘house’.  A  possible  m.  is  him-  ‘cold’;  and  there  are  four  feminines:  . ksam -, 
gam-,  and  jam-,  all  meaning  ‘earth’,  and  sam-nam-  (AV.)  ‘favour’.  Strong 
and  weak  forms  are  distinguished  in  ksam-,  which  lengthens  the  vowel  in  the 
strong  cases,  and  syncopates  it  in  one  of  the  two  weak  cases  occurring; 
gam-  and  jam-  are  found  in  weak  cases  only,  where  they  syncopate  the  vowel. 
The  forms  occurring  are  the  following: 

Sing.  N.  A.  n.  —  I.  f.  ksamd,  jmd;  m.  him-d b  —  Ab.  f.  ksmas, 
gmds,  jmds.  —  G.  f.  gmds,  jmds 4 *;  n.  ddns.  —  L.  f.  ksdmi 6.  —  Du.  N.  f. 
ksdma ,  dydva-ksdma  ‘heaven  and  earth’.  —  Pl.  N.  f.  ksdmas;  sam-ndmas  (AV.). 
—  G.  n.  damam. 


1  The  form  dabhas  in  v.  19^  is  regarded 
by  BR.  and  Grassmann  as  N.  •  sing.  m. 
‘destroyer’.  Lanman  485  thinks  it  may  be 
a  G.  sing.  f.  with  wrong  accent. 

2  Strong  form. 

3  This  is  the  only  form,  occurring  twice, 

from  a  possible  stem  hint-,  beside  himena, 

from  hima-.  It  might,  however,  be  an  I. 

from  the  latter  stem.  Cp.  372. 


4  Cp.  BrugmaNN,  Grundriss  2,  580. 

5  For  *dam-s  (like  a-gan  for  *a-gam-s) 
occurring  only  in  the  expressions  fidtir  dan 
and  pdti  dan  and  equivalent  to  ddm-patih  and 
ddm-patl  at  the  end  of  a  tristubh  line.  Cp. 
Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  453. 

6  With  irregular  accent;  cp.  above  94  a. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Consonant  Stems. 


2 1 9 


5.  Stems  in  Sibilants. 

1.  a.  Stems  in  radical  s  and  s. 

339.  In  radical  stems  ending  in  s  and  y,  the  sibilants  are  identical  in 
origin,  both  being  alike  etymologically  based  on  the  dental  jr,  which  remains 
after  a,  but  is  cerebralized  after  other  vowels  and  after  k.  In  the  RV.  there 
are  of  radical  T-stems  some  40  derived  from  about  15  roots;  of  radical 
y- stems,  some  50  derived  from  about  15  roots;  in  both  groups  taken  together 
there  are  nearly  20  monosyllabic  stems,  the  rest  being  compounds.  Masculine 
and  feminine  stems  are  about  equally  numerous;  but  there  are  altogether 
only  7  or  8  neuters. 

a.  The  distinction  between  strong  and  weak  forms  appears  in  three  words: 
pumdms  and  plans -  ‘male’;  nas-  and  nas-  ‘nose’;  uktha-sas-  and  uktha-sas-  ‘uttering  verses’. 
TheA.pl.  has  the  accentuation  of  weak  stems  in  the  masculines  jhas-as,  pums-as,  mas- as 
and  in  the  feminines  is- as,  us-as,  dvis-ds. 

b.  The  stem  as-  ‘face’  is  supplemented  in  its  inflexion  by  the  an-  stem  as-an -; 
the  stem  is-  is  supplemented  before  consonant  endings  by  idd- 1 ;  and  dds-  ‘fore-arm’  is 
supplemented  by  dos-dn-  in  the  dual  form  dosani  (AV.  IX.  77| 

c.  Transitions  to  the  a-  or  a -declension  appear  in  forms  made  from  as-  ‘face’, 
is-  ‘refreshment’,  has-  ‘cough’,  nas-  ‘nose’,  mas -  ‘month’,  a-sas-  ‘hope’,  ni-mis-  ‘winking’. 
1.  From  as-,  beside  and  probably  through  the  influence  of  the  I.  sing,  ds-a,  is  formed  the 
adv.  dsaya  ‘before  the  face  of’  (as  from  a  stem  dsa-,  and  with  adverbial  shift  of  accent 
instead  of  *  dsaya).  —  2.  Forms  like  G.  is- as  gave  rise  to  isa-m;  and  the  supplementary 
stem  idd-  probably  started  from  the  I.  sing,  id- a,  which  itself  was  probably  due  to  id- 
the  form  assumed  by  is-  before  bh-  endings;  the  stem  is-  further  shows  a  transition  to 
the  i-  declension  in  the  D.  isaye.  —  3.  From  kas -  ‘cough’  there  is  the  transition  V.  kdse 
(AV.).  —  4.  The  strong  dual  form  nds-d  furnished  a  transition  to  an  d-  stem,  from  which 
is  formed  the  dual  nase  (AV.).  —  5.  As  pad-am  gave  rise  to  a  new  N.  pada-s,  so  from 
mas-am  arose  the  new  stem  masa-,  from  which  are  formed  the  N.  sing,  masa-s  and  the 
A.  pi.  masdn. —  6.  In  the  RV.  the  stem  a-sds-  alone  is  used;  but  in  the  AV.  appears  the 
A.  as  dm  (perhaps  a  contraction  for  d-sdsam)  which,  understood  as  dsd-m,  was  probably 
the  starting  point  of  the  dsa-,  the  only  stem  in  the  later  language.  —  7.  From  ni-mis- 
‘winking’  there  appear,  beside  the  regular  compound  forms  A.  d-nimis-am,  I.  a-nimis-d  f. 
‘non-winking’,  the  transition  forms  N.  a-nimisa-s,  A.  a-nimisa-m,  I.  a-nimisena,  N.  pi.  a-nimisds, 
adj.  ‘unwinking’,  with  the  regular  BahuvrThi  accent  (90  B  c). 

Inflexion. 

340.  In  the  N.  sing,  the  sibilant  is  of  course  dropped  if  preceded  by 
a  consonant,  as  an-dk  ‘eyeless’,  puman  ‘man’.  Otherwise  s  remains,  while  y 
becomes  t1 2 *.  Before  bh-  endings,  t  becomes  d  in  two  forms  which  occur 
( mad-bhis ,  mdd-bhyas) 3  and  r  in  the  only  other  one  (dor-bhydm) ;  while  y 
becomes  d  in  the  only  example  occurring  ( vi-prud-bhis ). 

The  forms  actually  occurring,  if  made  from  mds -4  m.  ‘month’  as  an 
s-  stem,  and  from  dvis-  f.  ‘hatred’  as  a  y-stem,  would  be  as  follows: 

Sing.  N.5  mas ;  dvit.  A.  mdsam ;  dvis  am.  I.  masd\  dvisa.  D.  masd; 
dvise.  Ab.  mdsas;  dvisas.  G.  mas  as;  dvis  as.  L.  mdsi;  dvisi.  —  Du.  N.  A.  masa; 
dvisa.  G.  masos.  L.  masos  (AV.TS.).  —  PI.  N.  mdsas;  dvisas.  A.  mdsas;  dvisas 
and  dvisas.  I.  madbhis;  dvidbhis.  D.  madbhyds  (AV.).  Ab.  madbhyas  (AV.). 
G.  masdm;  dvis  dm.  L.  massu  (AV.). 

The  forms  actually  occurring  are: 


1  As  ksdp-  and  ksip-  by  ksapa-  and  ksipd- 

respectively. 

2  It  becomes  k  only  in  the  n.  form  dadhrk 

‘boldly’,  used  as  an  adv.  from  dadhfs-,  if  the 

word  is  derived  from  dhrs-  ‘be  bold’;  but  the 

word  is  perhaps  more  probably  derived  from 
drh-  ‘be  firm’,  see  BR.  s.  v.  dadhrk ,  and  cp. 
Bartholomae,  IF.  12,  Anzeiger  p.  28. 


3  Cp.  J.  Schmidt,  KZ.  26,  340. 

4  In  this  word  (derived  from  ma-  ‘mea¬ 
sure’)  the  s  is  really  secondary,  probably 
representing  the  suffix  -as  {mas-  =  md-as -); 
cp.  Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  p.  398. 

5  The  only  V.  occurring  is  pumas. 


220 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


Sing.  N.  1.  m.  pitman 1  ‘male’;  candrd-mas  ‘moon’,  dure-bhas 2  ‘shining  to 
a  distance’,  su-dds 3  ‘worshipping  well’.  —  f.  a-jnas  ‘having  no  kindred’,  8-sfs* 
‘prayer’.  —  n.  bhds  ‘light’,  mds  ‘flesh’;  dos  ‘arm’,  yds  ‘welfare’,  sam-ybs  ‘luck 
and  welfare’.  —  2.  m.  an-dk 5  ‘blind’,  edhamana-dvit 6  ‘hating  the  insolent’.  — 
f.  vi-prut  (AV.)  ‘drop’. 

A.  1.  m.  mdsam  ‘month’,  pumdmsam ;  a-ydsam  ‘dexterous’,  uktha-sdsam 7 8 
‘uttering  verses’,  su-ddsam ,  su-bhdsam  ‘shining  beautifully’,  sv-asisa 5 6m 4  ‘well¬ 
praising’,  sv-dsam  ‘fair-mouthed’.  —  f.  kdsam 8  (AV.)  ‘cough’;  a- sis  am 4,  pra- 
sisam 4  ‘precept’9. —  2.  m.  ghrta-pri'isam  ‘sprinkling  ghee’,  jara-dvisam  ‘hating 
decrepitude’,  brahma-dvisam  ‘hating  sacred  knowledge’,  visvd-piisam  ‘all-nourish¬ 
ing’.  —  f.  Maw  ‘refreshment’,  dvisam  ‘hatred’,  prksam  ‘satiation’;  d-nimisam 
‘non-winking’,  dosani-srisam  (AV.)  ‘leaning  on  the  arm’,  hrdaya-srisam  (AV.) 
‘clinging  to  the  heart’.  Also  the  adverbial  A.  d-vy-usam  (AV.)  ‘till  the  dawn’.  — 
n.  dadhfk  ‘boldly’  as  adv. 

I.  1.  m.  mdsd.  —  f.  kdsd  (AV.),  nasd  (AV.)  ‘nose’,  sdsd  ‘ruler’10;  abhi-sasa 1 1 
‘blame’,  ava-sdsd  (AV.)  ‘wrong  desire’,  d-sasa  ‘hope’,  d-sisd ,  nih-sdsa  ‘blame’, 
pard-sasd  (AV.)  ‘calumny’,  pra-sisa  (AV.  VS.).  —  n.  tfjvi  ‘mouth’,  bhdsd.  — 
2.  m.  visva-pusd 12 * .  ■ —  f.  isd,  tvisd  ‘excitement’;  d-nimisd,  prd-zfsd  (AV.  TS.) 
‘rainy  season’,  presd 13  ‘pressure’.  —  n.  ghrta-prusd. 

D.  1.  m.  pumse  (AV.);  su-ddse.  —  n.  bhdse' (Y S.  xm.  39).  —  2.  m.  d-prd- 
yuse 14  ‘not  careless’;  d-zi-dvise  (AV.)  ‘for  non- enmity’,  rsi-dvise  ‘hating  the 
seers’,  brahma-dvise\  gav-ise  ‘wishing  for  cows’,  pasv-ise  ‘wishing  for  cattle’ ; 
sdkam-ukse 15  ‘sprinkling  together’.  —  f.  isd l6,  tvisd,  prksd,  rise  ‘injury’,  prdse 

(VS.  v.  7). 


Ab.  1.  m.  pumsds.  —  f.  kdsds  (AV.)  —  n.  asds.  —  2.  f.  isds,  irisds, 
dvisas ,  risds ;  abhi-srisas  ‘ligature’,  ni-misas  ‘winking’. 

G.  1.  m.  pumsds-,  a-sdsas  ‘not  blessing’,  su-ddsas ,  sv-dsas.  —  f.  d-sisas  (TS. 
iv.  6.6 3). —  2.  m.  srhga-vrsas17  a  man’s  name.  —  f.  isds ,  ‘dawn’,  dvisas , 

prhsds;  abhra-prusas  ‘sprinkling  of  the  clouds’,  ni-misas. 

L.  1.  m.  pumsi ,  masL  —  f.  upasi  ‘in  the  lap’,  Tzzm  (VS.);  <z-/Az  (AV.), 
pra-sisi  (AV.).  —  2.  f.  ni-misi ,  pra-vfsi,  vy-usi  ‘dawn’. 

V.  m.  pumas l8. 

Du.  N.  A.  1.  m.  uktha-sdsd 19 ,  sdryd-mdsa 20  ‘sun  and  moon’.  —  f.  ndsa21. 
—  I.  1.  n.  dorbhyam  (VS.xxv.  3).  —  G.  1.  f.  nasJs.  —  L.  1.  f.  /ztfiAr  (AV.  TS.). 

PI.  N.  1.  m.  a-ydsas,  V.  aydsas,  uktha-sdsas 19 ,  su-samsdsas22  (AV.) 
‘well-directing’.  —  f.  d-sdsas;  d-sisas,  pra-sisas ,  vi-sisas  (AV.)  ‘explanations’, 


1  On  the  Sandhi  of  this  N.  see  Lanman 
495 :- 

2  See  Lanman  4951. 

3  There  are  also  the  transition  forms 
mdsa-s  and  a-nimisa-s. 

4  The  root  in  a- sis-  and  pra-sis-,  being  a 
reduced  form  of  sds-  ‘order’,  is  here  treated 
as  belonging  to  the  j-class. 

5  From  afi-aks-  ‘eyeless’. 

6  The  N.  of  is-  would  be  *it:  its  place  is 
supplied  by  the  extended  form  ida. 

1  Strong  stem  from  sas -  =  saws-  ‘pro¬ 
claim’. 

8  Accented  kasam  (AV.  v.  2211). 

9  Also  the  transition  forms  a-nimisam  and 

dsam  (AV.). 

i°  Cp.  Lanman  495  (bottom). 

i1  From  sas-  =  saws-  ‘proclaim’. 

*2  There  is  also  the  transition  form 

a-mmisena. 


13  Accented  thus  as  a  monosyllabic  stem 
instead  of  presd  (==  pra-is-a). 

*4  From  pra-\-yu-  ‘separate’  with  s  as  root 
determinative. 

15  Perhaps  also  aram-ise  (vill.  461 7)  ‘hasten¬ 
ing  near’,  Pada  dram  ise;  cp.  Lanman  4961. 

16  Also  the  transfer  to  the  /-declension 

is  dye. 

17  In  a  compound  vocative  with  napdt. 

t8  In  the  f.  are  found  the  transfers  to  the 
J-declension  ide  and  kdse  (AV.). 

19  Strong  forms ;  Pp.  uktha-sdsd,  -sdsas. 

20  This  might  be  from  the  transition  stem 
-mdsa-. 

21  There  is  also  the  transition  form 

ndse  (AV.). 

22  There  are  also  the  transition  forms 

!  7?i d sds,  a-nimisas. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Consonant  Stems.  221 


sam-sisas  (AV.)  ‘directions’;  vi-srdsas 1  (AV.)  ‘falling  apart’,  su-srasas  (AV.) 
‘falling  off  easily’,  svayam-srasas  (AV.)  ‘dropping  spontaneously’.  —  2.  m. 
tnaksas  ‘flies’,  musas  ‘mice’;  anrta-dvisas  ‘persecuting  untruth’,  V.  a-saca-dvisas 
‘hating  non-worshippers’,  gav-isas,  ghrta-prusas,  pari-prusas  ‘sprinkling’, 
brhad-uksas  ‘shedding  copiously’,  brahma-dvisas ,  yajha-musas  (TS.  ill.  5.  41) 
‘sacrifice  stealer’,  v  at  a- 1  vis  as  ‘having  the  impetuosity  of  the  wind’.  —  f.  isas, 
tvisas ,  pfksas ;  an-a-dhrsas  (AV.)  ‘not  checking’,  ghrta-prusas ,  ni-misas  (AV.), 
nemann-isas 2 3  ‘following  guidance’,  pati-dvisas  ‘hating  her  husband’,  vy-usas 
(AV.),  sam-isas  ‘darts’,  sakam-uksas ,  su-pfksas  ‘abounding  with  food’. 

A.  1.  m.  jhasds  ‘relatives’,  pumsds ,  mas  as  t  an-dsas  ‘faceless’,  an-urdhva- 
bhlsas  ‘whose  splendour  does  not  rise’,  a-ydsas ,  a-sasas ,  hrtsv-asas  ‘throwing 
into  the  heart’.  —  f.  a-sasas ;  a-sisas,  pr  a-sisas.  —  2.  m.  brahma-dvisas.  —  f.  Ady 
and  AzA 4,  zasyA,  dvisas  and  dvisds 5 6 7,  pfksas ;  camrisas °,  vi-prusas  (AV.). 

I.  1.  m.  madbhis.  —  2.  f.  vi-prudbhis 7  (VS.).  —  D.  1.  m.  madbhyds  (AV.). 
—  Ab.  1.  m.  madbhyas  (AV.).  —  G.  1.  m.  pumsdm  (AV.),  mas  dm,  v  as  dim 8 
‘abodes’;  a-ydsam.  —  2.  f.  Ai/zz,  dvisdm.  —  L.  1.  m.  pumsit 9  (AV.). 

1.  b.  Stems  in  derivative  -s. 
ci*  Stems  in  -/s  and  -ws. 

341.  The  stems  formed  with  the  suffixes  -A  and  -zat  may  best  be  treated 
together,  as  their  inflexion  is  identical.  The  -A  stems,  numbering  about  a 
dozen,  consist  primarily  of  neuters  only10;  these  when  they  are  final  members 
of  compounds  are  secondarily  inflected  as  masculines  also,  but  only  in  a 
single  form  (N.  sing,  svd-socis  ‘self-radiant’)  as  feminine.  The  -us  stems, 
numbering  sixteen  (exclusive  of  compounds)  in  the  RV.,  include  primary 
masculines  (two  also  as  f.)  as  well  as  neuters;  three  of  the  latter  as  final 
members  of  compounds  are  also  inflected  as  feminine.  Eleven  of  the  -us 
stems  are  neuter  substantives,  all  but  one  accented  on  the  radical  syllable; 
four  of  these  are  also  used  as  m.  adjectives11  accented  in  the  same  way  (dr us-, 
caksus-,  tdpus-,  vapus-).  Three  of  those  -us  stems  which  are  exclusively  m. 
are  adjectives  accented  on  the  suffix,  while  two  are  substantives  accented 
on  the  root  (ndh-us-,  man-us  ) 1 2. 

a.  The  N.  A.  pi.  n.  are  distinguished  as  strong  forms  by  lengthening  and  nasa¬ 
lizing  the  vowel  of  the  suffix  (as  in  the  -as  stems),  e.  g.  jyotlmsi  and  caksumsi. 

b.  Among  these  stems  appear  a  number  of  transitions  to,  and  a  few  from,  other 
declensions.  1.  The  N.  sing,  n.,  as  in  soc-is  and  caks-its,  having  in  some  passages  the 
appearance  of  a  N.  sing.  m.  soci-s  and  caksu-s,  led  to  formations  according  to  the  /-  and 
u- declension.  Such  are  N.  pi.  socayas  (AV.)  ‘flames’,  V.  sing,  pavaka-soce  ‘shining  brightly’, 
bhadra-soce  ‘shining  beautifully’,  sukra-soce  ‘shining  brilliantly’;  N.  pi.  ^arcayas  ‘beams’, 
I.  pi.  arci-bhis.  The  form  of  krav-is-  ‘raw  flesh’  in  the  compound  a-kravi-hasta-  ‘not  having 
bloody  hands’  is  probably  due  to  the  same  cause.  From  caks-us -  ‘eye’  is  once  formed 
the  Ab.  cakso-s  and  the  V.  sahasra-cakso  (AV.)  ‘thousand-eyed’.  From  tcip-us-  ‘hot’  is  once 


1  The  Mss.  read  vi-srasas;  see  Whitney’s  | 
note  on  AV.  XIX.  343. 

2  nernan-  is  here  probably  a  locative. 

3  There  is  also  the  transition  form 
masdn. 

4  isas  occurs  63  times,  isas  7  times  in  the 
RV.  ' 

5  dvisas  occurs  39  times,  dvisds  4  times 
in  the  RV. 

6  The  meaning  of  this  word  is  perhaps 
‘libations  in  ladles’. 

7  There  is  also  the  transition  form  iddbhis 

as  an  I.  pi.  of  is-. 


8  This  word,  occurring  in  this  form  only, 
might  be  a  f. 

9  massu-  occurs  Pane.  Br.  iv.  4.  1  and 
mask  (like  pumsii  for  puins-sti)  TS.  VII.  5.  22. 
The  f.  transition  form  iddsu  occurs  as  the 
L.  pi.  of  is-. 

There  seems  no  reason  why  am-is- 
occurring  in  L.  s.  only,  should  exceptionally 
be  regarded  as  m.  (BR.,  Lanman,  Grass- 
mann). 

r 1  One  of  these,  lapus-  ‘hot’,  has  a  single 
f.  form,  A.  du.  tdpusd. 

12  See  above  p.  S4,  19. 


222  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


formed  the  G.  lapo-s-,  from  van-us-  ‘desiring’,  as  if  vanu-s  in  N.,  the  A.  sing,  vanu-m  and 
pi.  van  ft  7i ;  from  dy-us-  ‘life’  occurs  not  only  the  I,,  sing,  ayu-n-i,  but  several  compound 
forms,  V.  dirghayo  ‘long-lived’,  adabdhayo  (VS.)  ‘having  unimpaired  vigour’.  A.  vrddhayu-m 
‘full  of  vigour’,  n.  visvayu  ‘all-quickening’,  A.  m.  visvayu-ni ,  D.  viivayavc ,  G.  visvayo-s1.  — 
2.  There  are  also  some  transition  forms  from  three  masculines  in  -us,  by  extension  of 
the  stem,  to  the  a-  declension:  from  nah-us-  ‘neighbour’,  starting  perhaps  from  the  G. 
nahus-as  taken  as  a  N.  sing,  nahusa-s,  are  made  the  G.  nahusa-sya  and  the  L.  ndhuse ; 
from  man-us -  ‘man’,  starting  from  the  N.  pi.  mdnus-as  taken  as  a  N.  sing,  mdnusa-s,  come 
the  D.  mdnusdya  and  the  G.  mattusa-sya;  from  vdp-us-  ‘beauty’,  once  D.  vdpusaya  beside  the 
frequent  vdpzis-c.  —  3.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  a  few  transitions  from  the 
declension  of  /-  and  u-  stems  to  that  of  stems  in  -is  and  -us.  Beside  su-z^abhi-  ‘fragrant’, 
the  superlative  form  su-rabhis-famam 2 3 *  occurs  once;  and  beside  numerous  compounds 
formed  with  tuvi-  appear  the  stems  luvis-mant-  ‘powerful’  and  tuvis-tama -  ‘strongest’ A 
Beside  the  G.  dhdkso-s  and  ddkso-s 4  ‘burning’,  there  appears  once  the  form  daksus-as 5, 
which  is  doubtless  due  to  the  false  analogy  of  forms  like  tasthusas.  Though  mdn-ns- 
‘man’  may  be  an  independent  formation  beside  man-u -,  the  probability  is  rather  in  favour 
of  regarding  it  as  secondary  (starting  from  a  N.  mdnu-s),  because  manti -  shows  eight 
case-forms,  but  ?)id7ius-  only  three®.  The  stem  d-pz'dyus-,  occurring  only  once  beside  the 
less  rare  d-pi'dyu-,  probably  represents  a  transition  from  the  latter  stem. 


Inflexion. 

342.  The  final  s  becomes  s  before  vowel  endings,  and  r  before  -bh. 
The  inflexion  of  the  n.  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  m.  except  in  the  A.  sing., 
N.  A.  du.  and  pi.  The  only  f.  forms  occurring  are  in  the  N.  or  A.  They 
are  the  following:  N.  sing,  sva-socis  ‘self-radiant’;  cdksus  ‘seeing’,  d-ghora-caksus 
‘not  having  an  evil  eye’,  hrade-caksus  ‘reflected  in  a  lake’;  citrdyus  ‘possessed 
of  wonderful  vitality’;  A.  du.  tdpusd  ‘hot’;  A.  pi.  gj-vapusas  ‘having  the  form 
of  cows’. 

The  actual  forms  occurring,  if  made  from  socls-  ‘glow’  in  the  n.,  and 
from  -sods-  in  the  m.  (when  it  differs  from  the  n.),  and  from  cdksus-  ‘eye’  as  n. 
and  ‘seeing’  as  m.,  would  be  as  follows: 

1.  Sing.  N.  sods.  A.  sods;  m.  -socisam.  I.  socisa.  D.  sodse.  Ab.  sodsas. 
G.  sodsas.  L.  sod  si.  V.  sods.  —  PI.  N.  A.  socimsi;  m.  -socisa  s.  I.  sodrb/iis. 
D.  m.  -socirbhyas.  G.  socisam.  L.  sodssu. 

2.  Sing.  N.  cdksus.  A.  cdksus;  m.  cdksusam.  I.  cdksusd.  D.  cdksuse. 
Ab.  G.  cdksusas.  L.  cdksusi.  —  Du.  N.  A.  cdksusT;  m.  cdksusd.  D.  cdksurbhyam 
(VS.). —  PI.  N.  A.  cdksumsi;  m.  cdksusas.  I.  cdksurbhis.  D.  cdksurbhyas  (VS.). 
G.  cdksusam. 

The  forms  which  actually  occur  are  the  following: 

Sing.  N.  m.  1.  a-havis  ‘not  offering  oblations’,  krsna-vyathis  ‘whose  path 
is  black’;  citra-jyotis  (VS.  xvii.80)  ‘shining  brilliantly”,  sukrd-jyotis  (VS.xn.  15) 
‘brightly  shining’,  satyd-jyotis  (VS.  xvii.  80)  ‘truly  brilliant’,  su-jyotis  (VS. 
xxxvii.  21)  ‘shining  well’;  citrd-socis  ‘shining  brilliantly’,  durdka-socis  ‘glowing 
unpleasantly’,  sukrd-socis  ‘bright-rayed’;  jwd-barhis  (AV.)  ‘having  a  fresh  litter’, 
su-barhis  (VS.  xxi.  15)  ‘having  a  goodly  litter’,  stlrnd-barhis  ‘who  has  strewn  the 
litter’;  svd-rocis  ‘self-shining’;  sv-arcis 1  ‘flashing  beautifully’.  —  2.  cdksus  ‘seeing’, 
vapus 8  ‘beautyful’,  vidiis  ‘attentive’9;  d-dabdha-caksus  (AV.)  ‘having  undamaged 
sight’,  ksitdyus  ‘whose  life  goes  to  an  end’,  dirghayus  ‘long-lived’,  duh-sdsus 
‘malignant’,  vi-parus  (AV.)  ‘jointless’,  visvdtas-caksus  ‘having  eyes  on  all  sides’, 
sdrva-parus  (AV.)  ‘having  all  joints’,  sahdsrayus  (AV.)  ‘living  a  thousand  years’. 


1  There  is  probably  insufficient  reason  to 
assume  a  primary  independently  formed  stem 
-ay-71-  beside  ay-us--,  cp. Lanman 569 (bottom). 

2  Retaining  the  j  of  the  N.  like  indz-as- 
vazit-. 

3  tuv-is-  as  an  independent  formation  would 

be  irregular,  since  the  radical  vowel  otherwise 

shows  Guna  before  the  suffix  -is  (134). 


4  Desiderative  adj.  from  dak-  ‘burn’. 

5  The  Pada  text  has  dhaksusas. 

6  Cp.  Lanman  570  (bottom). 

7  There  are  also  the  transition  forms 
arci-s  and  sod-s,  the  neuters  becoming  mas¬ 
culines  of  the  i-  declension. 

8  Also  the  transition  forms  caksu-s,  tapii-s. 

9  This  may  be  an  «-stem ;  vidu-s. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Consonant  Stems.  223 


N.  A.  n.  1.  arcis  ‘flame’,  kravis  (AV.)  ‘raw  flesh’,  chadis  ‘cover’,  chardis 
‘fence’,  jyotis  ‘light’,  barhis  ‘litter’,  vartis  ‘circuit’,  vydthis  ‘course’,  sods  ‘lustre’, 
sarpis  ‘clarified  butter’,  hav’is  ‘oblation’;  vaisvanard-jyotis  (VS.  xx.  23)  ‘light 
of  Vaisvanara’,  sukrd-jyotis  (TS.  iv.  1.  93),  svar-jyotis  (VS.  v.  32)  ‘light  of 
heaven’.  —  2.  drus  (AV.)  ‘wound’,  dyus  ‘life’,  cdksus  ‘eye’,  tdpus  ‘glow’, 
dhdnus  ‘bow’,  pdrus  ‘joint’,  ydjus  ‘worship’,  vdpus  ‘beauty’,  sdsus  ‘command’; 
indra-dhanus  (AV.)  ‘lndra’s  bow’,  sv-ayus 1  (VS.  iv.  28)  ‘full  vigour’. 

A.  m.  1.  a-grbhita-socisam  ‘having  unsubdued  splendour’,  ajird-socisam 
‘having  a  quick  light’,  urdhvd-socisam  ‘flaming  upwards’,  citra-docisam,  dlrghdyu- 
socisam  ‘shining  through  a  long  life’,  pavakd-socisam  ‘shining  brightly’,  sird- 
socisam  ‘sharp-rayed’,  su  krd-socisa  m ,  sre'sth  a  -so  d sa  m  ‘most  brilliant’;  citra- 
barhisam  ‘having  a  brilliant  bed’,  vrkta-barhisam  ‘having  the  litter  spread’, 
su-bar/dsam ,  stirnd-barhisam  (VS.  xiv.  49);  ddksina-jyotisam  (AV.)  ‘brilliant  by 
the  sacrificed  gift’,  hiranya-jyotisam  (AV.)  ‘having  golden  splendour’.  — 
2.  janusam  ‘birth’,  dirghdyusam ,  purv-dyusam  ‘bestowing  much  vitality’, 
satayusam 2  ‘attaining  the  age  of  a  hundred’. 


I.  1.  n.  arcisd,  kravisd ,  chardisd  (VS.  xm.  19),  jyotisd,  barhisd  (VS. 
xviii.  63 ;  TS.),  rodsa  ‘brightness’,  socisd ,  sarpisa ,  havisd .  —  m.  manthi-socisd 
(VS.  vii.  18)  ‘shining  like  mixed  Soma’,  sukrd-jyotisa  (VS.).  —  2.  n.  dyusd , 
caksusd,  jafiusd ,  tdpusd,  dhanusd  (Kh.  in.  9),  pdrusd ,  yd; usd,  satdyusd , 
samista-ydjusd  (VS.  xix.  29)  ‘sacrifice  and  formula’,  sv-ayusd  (VS.  iv.  28) 
‘full  vigour  of  life’.  —  m.  tdpusd ,  nahusd  ‘neighbour’,  manusd  ‘man’,  vanusa 
‘eager’. 

D.  1.  n.  ardse  (TS.  VS.  xvn.  11),  jyotise  (VS.  AV.),  barhise  (VS.  11.  1), 
sodse,  havise.  —  m.  tigmd-sodse  ‘sharp-rayed’,  pdvakd-sodse ,  sukrd-socise , 
vrkta-barhise ,  stlrna-barhise ,  rdtd-havise  ‘liberal  offerer’,  su-hdvise  ‘offering  fair 
oblations’.  —  2.  n.  dyuse  (VS.  AV.),  caksuse ,  januse ,  tdpuse  (AV.),  ydjuse  (VS. 

l.  30),  vapuse .  —  m.  caksuse ,  mdinuse,  vanusc$. 

Ab.  1.  n.  jyjtisas  (AV.),  bar/dsas ,  havisas.  —  2.  n.  (TS.  iv.  1.  43), 

cdksusas  (TS.  v.  7.  71),  j an  us  as,  pdrusas  (TS.  iv.  2.  92),  vapusas.  —  m.  ?id/iusas , 
mdnusas,  vapusas. 

G.  1.  n.  kravisas,  chardisas,  jydtisas,  bar/dsas,  socisas,  sarpis as,  havisas.  — 

m.  pdvaka-socisas,  vrddhd-socisas  ‘blazing  mightily’,  vdsu-rocisas  ‘shining  brightly’, 
vrktd-barhisas 4.  —  2.  n.  dyusas,  cdksusas,  tdpusas,  tdrusas  ‘superiority’,  pdrusas, 
vapusas.  —  m.  cdksusas ,  ndhusas ,  mdnusas,  vanusas 5 *;  ista-yajusas  (VS.vm.  12) 
‘having  offered  the  sacrificial  verses’. 

L.  1.  n.  arcisi,  dmisd  ‘raw  flesh’,  jyddsi,  barhisi,  sdd/dsi  (VS.  xm.  53) 
‘resting-place’,  havisi ;  tri-barhisi  ‘with  threefold  litter’.  —  2.  n.  dyusd ,  tdrusi , 
pdrusi,  vdpusi. 

V.  1.  n.  barhis 8;  deva-havis  ‘oblation  to  the  gods’  (VS.  vi.  8).  —  2.  m. 
ekdyus9  ‘first  of  living  beings’. 

Du.  N.  A.  2.  n.  caksusi  (AV.,  Kh.  iv.  nn),  janusT.  —  m.  caksusd> 
jay  usd  ‘victorious’.  —  D.  2.  n.  cdksurbhydm  (VS.  vn.  27). 


1  Also  the  transition  form  visvciyu  ‘all- 
quickening’. 

2  Also  the  transition  forms  vanu-m , 
vrddhayu-m ,  visvayu-m. 

3  Transition  forms:  visvdyave\  mduusaya, 
vapusaya ;  a-prdyuse  ‘not  careless’. 

4  Also  perhaps  a  transition  form  sods;  cp. 
Lanman  568. 

5  Also  the  transition  forms  tdpos,  visvdyos; 

nahusasya;  vianu$asya ;  dhaksusas (341  b,  p.  222). 


6  Accounted  a  m.  by  BR.,  Grassmann, 
Lanman. 

7  Also  the  transition  form  ayuni ;  and  m. 
nahuse. 

8  Also  the  transition  forms  pdvaka-soce, 
bhadra-soce,  sukra-soce. 

9  Also  the  transition  forms  adabdhdyo  (y S.j, 
dlrghayo,  sahasra-cakso  (AV.). 


224  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

PI.  N.  m.  1.  dgrbhita-socisas ,  ajird-socisas ,  vata-dhrajisas  (Kh.  1.  3 3) 
‘having  the  impulse  of  wind’,  vrkta-barhisas ,  V.  vrkta-barhisas ,  sadma-barhisas 
‘preparing  the  litter’,  Y.  su-barhisas,  su-jyjtisas  and  su-jyotisas ,  sva-rocisas  \  — 
2.  ndhusas,  mdnusas ,  V.  manusas ,  v  aims  as ,  vapusas. 

N.  A.  n.  1.  arclmsi ,  jyotimsi ,  barhlmsi  (VS.  xxvm.  21),  socimsi ,  havimsi. 

—  2.  dyuinsi ,  cdksumsi ,  janttmsi ,  tdpumsi ,  pdrumsi  (TS.  VS.  AV.),  ydjumsi 

(VS.  AV.),  vdpumsi. 

A.  m.  1.  su-jyutisas.  —  2.  ndhusas ,  mdnusas ,  vanusas1 2. 

I.  1.  n.  havirbhis 3.  —  2.  n.  dhdnurbhis  (AV.),  yajurbhis  (VS.lv.i),  vdpur- 
bhis.  —  D.  1.  m.  urdhva-barhirbhyas  (VS.  xxxvm.  15)  ‘being  above  the  litter’. 

—  2.  n.  yajurbhyas  (VS.  xxxvm.  11). 

G.  1.  n.  jyotisam ,  havtsam  (AV.).  —  2.  n.  caksusam  (AV.),  Janus  am, 
yajusam  (AV.),  vapusdm.  —  m.  van  us  am,  visvd-manusam  ‘belonging  to  all  men’. 
L.  1.  n.  havissu. 


(?.  Stems  in  -as. 

343.  Primarily  this  declension  consists  almost  entirely  of  neuters,  which 
are  accented  on  the  root,  as  mdn-as-  ‘mind’;  but  these  as  final  members  of 
adjective  compounds  may  be  inflected  in  all  three  genders,  as  N.  m.  f. 
su-mdnas ,  n.  su-mdnas  ‘well-disposed’.  There  are  besides  a  few  primary 
masculines,  which  are  accented  on  the  suffix,  being  either  substantives,  as 
raks-ds-  ‘demon’,  or  adjectives,  some  of  which  occur  in  the  f.  also  (as  well 
as  n.),  as  ap-ds-  ‘active’;  and  one  feminine,  us-ds-  ‘dawn’4 5. 

a.  Strong  cases  are  regularly  distinguished  only  in  the  N.  A.  pi.  n.,  where  the 
vowel  of  the  suffix  is  lengthened  and  nasalized  5  (as  in  the  -is  and  ms  stems),  as 
amhamsi  ‘troubles’.  Otherwise  the  stem  usds-  shows  in  the  A.  sing.,  N.  A.  du.,  N.  V.  pi., 
strong  forms  with  lengthened  vowel  in  the  suffix,  which  occur  beside  the  unlengthened 
forms6,  the  latter  being  nearly  three  times  as  frequent  in  the  RV.  The  long  vowel  is 
here  required  by  the  metre  in  20  out  of  28  occurrences,  and  is  favoured  by  the  metre  in 
the  rest7;  so  that  the  lengthening  may  be  due  to  metrical  exigencies.  The  strong  form 
usasas 8  occurs  once  (x.  391)  for  the  weak  usdsas  as  the  G.  sing,  or  A.  pi.  There  is  further 
the  single  strong  form  N.  du.  m.  bosasd 9  ‘bestowing  abundantly’10. 

b.  Supplementary  stems  ending  in  -as  beside  -an  are  fbhvas-  ‘skilful’  (as  well  as 
fbhva-)  beside  rbhvan -,  and  sikvas-  ‘strong’  (as  well  as  sikva-)  beside  sikvan-. 

c.  There  is  here  a  large  number  of  transition  forms  both  to  and  from  the  fir- 
declension.  Many  pairs  of  stems  in  -a  and  -as  are  common  in  both  forms  and  seem 
therefore  to  be  of  independent  derivation.  But  there  are  also  a  good  many  such  doublets 
of  which  the  one  is  the  normal  stem,  while  the  other  has  come  into  being  through 
mistaken  analogy  or  metrical  exigency.  1.  In  the  transitions  to  the  a-  declension  several 
may  be  explained  as  starting  from  the  misleading  analogy  of  contracted  forms.  To  this 
group  belong  the  following:  from  dhgiras -,  a  name  of  Agni,  L.  sing,  ahgire  besideN.pl. 
ahgiras ;  from  dn-dgas-  ‘sinless’,  A.  pi.  an-agdn  beside  A.  sing,  dn-dgam  and  N.  pi.  an-dgds ; 
from  ap-saras-  ‘water-nymph’,  apsarabhyas  (AV.),  apsardsu  (AV.),  apsard-pates  (AV.)  beside 
apsardm  (AV.);  from  usds-  ‘dawn’,  N.  du.  use  (VS.),  usabhydm  (VS.),  beside  A.  sing,  usarn 
and  pi.  usds’,  from  janas-  m.  ‘old  age’,  f.  sing.  ~N.Jard  (AV.  VS.),  D.  jarayai (AV.),  beside 


1  Also  the  transition  forms  arcayas, 

socdyas. 

2  Also  the  transition  form  vanun. 

3  Also  the  transition  form  arct-bhis. 

4  The  derivation  of  a  few  stems  ending 
in  -as  is  obscure;  as  upas-  ‘lap’  (only  L.  sing.), 
and  risadas-  ‘destroying  enemies’. 

5  On  the  origin  of  this  form  as  a  com¬ 
bination  of  -dn-i  and  -as-i  see  Johansson, 
BB.  18,  3  and  cp.  GGA.  1S90,  p.  762. 

6  The  lengthened  vowel  never  occurs  in 

the  Pada  text  in  these  forms  (excepting  of 

course  the  N.  usds). 


7  See  Arnold,  Vedic  Metre,  p.  130, 11  (a); 
|  cp.  Lanman  546. 

8  The  Pada  text  has  usasah. 

9  Here  the  long  vowel  appears  in  the 
Pada  text  also.  This  is  the  only  form  made 
from  the  stem  bo  ids-  (from  bus-  ‘drip’). 

10  The  form  sa-psarasas  ‘enjoying  in  com¬ 
mon  (?)’,  occurring  once,  must  be  the  pi. 
of  sa-psa)'d-  (BR.,  Grassmann),  not  of 
psards-  (Lanman  546,  Geldner,  VS.  3,197), 
because  - as  is  never  accented  in  Bahuvrlhi 
compounds;  see  Wackernagel  21,  p.  301  d; 
note,  su-medhds -  ‘very  wise’  is  not  a  Bahuvrlhi. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Consonant  Stems. 


A.  / aram 1 ;  from  sa-josas-  ‘united’,  N.  du.  sa-josau  beside  pi.  sajosds.  There  is  a  further 
group  of  transitions  to  the  a-  declension  starting  not  from  contracted  forms,  but  from  the 
N.  sing.  n.  understood  as  m.2 3.  From  dvas-  ‘favour’  is  thus  formed  I.  avena ;  from  krdndas- 
‘battle-cry’,  D.  kranddya 3  (AV.),  and  the  compound  suci-kranda-m  ‘crying  aloud’;  from 
sardhas-  n.  ‘troop’  the  m.  forms  sardha-m ,  sardhena,  sardhdya,  sdrdha-sya,  sdrdhdn  4  ;  from 
hedas-  n.,  once  (I.  9412)  hela-s  N.  m.,  hence  A.  heda-m  (AV.),  L.  he  le ;  also  the  compound 
forms  N.  f.  du.  a-dvese  ‘not  ill-disposed’,  beside  dvesas -  ‘hate’;  dur-dka-m  (vii.  43)  ‘un¬ 
wonted’  beside  okas-  ‘abode’;  vi-dradhe  (iv.  3223)  ‘unclothed’ (?)  beside  dradhasT  (TS.) 
‘garments’ ;  prthu-jrdya-m  (iv.  441)  ‘far-extending’  beside  jrayas  ‘expanse’  ;  puru-pesdsu 
‘multiform’  beside  pesas  ‘form’  5 6 *. 

2.  The  second  class,  comprising  transitions  to  the  -as  declension,  consists  of  the 
two  groups  of  transfers  from  the  radical  -a  stems  and  the  derivative  -a  stems.  The 
former  group  embraces  forms  of  compounds  made  from  ksd-  ‘abode’,  pra-ja-  ‘offspring’, 
-dd-  ‘giving’,  -dha-  ‘bestowing’,  besides  md-s  ‘moon’,  starting  from  the  N.  in  a-s  which  is 
identical  in  form  with  that  of  stems  in  -as.  The  forms  of  this  type  are  the  following: 
N.pl.  diva-ksas-as  beside  N. sing,  diva- ksd- s  ‘having  an  abode  in  heaven’;  A.  sing,  a-prajas-am 
(AV.  VS.)  ‘childless’,  A.  pi.  f.  ida-prajas-as  (TS.  MS.),  A.  sing,  su-prajds-am  (AV.),  N.  pi.  m. 
su-praj  as-as  (AV.  TS.)  ‘having  a  good  son’  beside  N.  sing.  m.  su-praj  a-s ;  V.  dravino-das 6 
beside  N.  sing,  dravino-dd-s ,  A.  dravino-dd-m  ‘wealth-giving’;  varco-das-au  (VS.)  ‘granting 
vigour’;  reto-dhas-as  (VS.)  ‘impregnating’  beside  N.  sing.  m.  reHo-dha-s;  A.  vayo-dhas-am  (VS.), 
I.  v ayo-dhas-d  (VS.),  v ayo-dhds-e  (VS.),  V.  vayo-dhas,  N.  pi.  vayo-dhas-as  (AV.)  beside  N.  sing. 
vayo-dha-s  ‘bestowing  vigour’;  D.  sing,  varco-dhas-e  (AV.)  beside  N.  sing,  varco-dha-s  ( AV.) 
and  A.  sing.  f.  varco-dha-m  (VS.);  of  candra-mds-l  ‘moon’  all  the  forms  occurring,  except 
the  N.sing.,  which  is  their  starting-point,  are  transfer  forms:  A.  candra-?nasam  (VS. xxm. 591, 
I.  candrd-masd  (AV.),  D.  candrd-77iase  (VS.),  G.  candrd-masas,  L.  candrd-masi  (AV.),  V.  candra- 
mas  (AV.),  N.  du.  candrd-masd,  surya-candra-?ndsd  and  suryd-candra-masau. 

3.  There  are  further  several  sporadic  transition  forms  from  -as  stems  occurring 
beside  the  ordinary  corresponding  -a  stem.  These  may  sometimes  have  started  from 
an  ambiguous  N.  sing.,  but  they  seem  usually  to  be  due  to  metrical  exigencies.  Such 
forms  are  the  following:  daksas-e ,  daksas-as ,  puta-daksas-d  and  putd-daksas-as  beside  very 
frequent  forms  of  ddksa-  ‘skill’;  dosds-as 8  (AV.)  once  beside  forms  of  dosa-  ‘evening’; 

( visvayii)-posas-am  beside  the  common  posa- ;  N.  sing,  sa-bhards ,  A.  visva-bharas-a?ti  beside 
the  frequent  bhdra-  ‘supporting’;  ves  as-as  9  ( AV.)  beside  vesd-  ‘neighbour’;  sepas  as  A.  sing, 
in  AV.  (Xiv.  2^)  for  the  sepam  of  the  RV.,  from  sepa-  m.  ‘tail’,  N. sing.  scpa-s\  N.sing.  m. 
su-sevas  occurs  in  the  AV.  as  a  variant  for  su-seva-s  ‘very  dear’  of  the  RV.;  sahdsra-sokas 
occurs  once  as  N.  sing.  m.  beside  the  common  soka-  ‘flame’;  A.  sing,  tuvi-svands-am  and 
N.  pi.  iuvi-svands-as,  beside  svana-  ‘sound’;  A.  pi.  f.  gharmd-svaras-as  beside  svard-  ‘roaring’ ; 
also  the  D.  dhruvds-e  (vii.  7c1)  for  dhruvdya  to  which  it  is  preferred  owing  to  the  metre 
and  the  influence  of  infinitives  in  -dse,  and  similarly  vrdhds-e  (v.  64s)  parallel  to  vrdhaya 
(viil.  836). 

4.  There  are  besides  a  few  quite  abnormal  transition  forms.  The  occurrence  of 
the  very  frequent  N.  pi.  m.  of  vi-  ‘bird’  with  a  singular  verb  (1.  1418)  and  once  as  an 
A.  pi.  (1.  1041)  may  have  produced  the  impression  of  a  n.  collective  vayas-  and  thus 
led  to  the  n.  pi.  vdydmsi  (AV.),  helped  perhaps  by  the  existence  of  the  very  frequent  n. 
stem  vayas-  ‘food’.  The  isolated  form  N.  sing.  m.  sv-dhcds  is  probably  lengthened  for 
sv-ahca-s  (like  su-sevas  for  su-sevas )  which  started  from  the  A.  sing.  m.  sv-dhc-am.  The 
G.  du.  rodas-os  occurs  once  (ix.  225),  evidently  on  account  of  the  metre  instead  of  the 
ordinary  rddasl-os10. 


1  Lanman  552  thinks  that  medha-  ‘wis¬ 
dom’  in  N.  medha ,  I.  medhaya ,  N.pl.  medhas, 
I.  medhabhis  started  from  medham  as  con¬ 
tracted  A.  of  medhas -  found  in  su-medhas-. 
This  seems  doubtful  to  me. 

2  In  VI.  666  rokas  might  be  taken  as 
N.  sing.  m.  (as  Grassmann  takes  it)  beside 
rokas ,  m. 

3  Cp.  also  the  D.  carayai  (vii.  771)  beside 
cardse  (i.  9c4,  V.  474),  and  tdrdya  (ll.  1312) 
beside  tdrase  (ill.  l88). 

4  Cp.  Lanman  353  and  554,  8. 

5  There  is  also  an  -as  stem  extended 
with  -a  in  the  D.  a-jarasaya  (x.  8548)  ‘till 
old  age’,  based  on  the  adv.  compound 
a-j aras-am  (B.) 

6  Cp.  Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  p.  39S. 

Indo-arischc  Philologie.  I.  4. 


7  From  mas-  (A.  mds-am ,  etc.),  where  the 
s  belongs  to  the  stem.  It  is  formed  probably 
with  -as  from  md-  ‘measure’  ( rnd-as ),  being 
thus  in  origin  a  contracted  -as  stem,  in  which, 
however,  the  N.  mas  giving  rise  to  the 
transition  forms  was  understood  as  the 
lengthened  form  of  *mas. 

8  In  usaso  dosdsas  ca  (AV.  xvr.  46)  ob¬ 
viously  due  to  parallelism  with  usdsas. 

9  Clearly  owing  to  the  metre  instead  of 
vesasas. 

i°  Similarly  aks-ds  occurs  in  AV.  v.  ii1^ 
(but  contrary  to  the  metre)  for  aksl-os.  On 
the  transition  forms  of  the  -as  declension 
cp.  Lanman  546  —  558. 


15 


226  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


Inflexion. 

344.  The  N.  sing.  m.  f.  lengthens  the  vowel  of  the  suffix;  e.  g.  m. 
aiigiras x,  f.  usds.  In  about  a  dozen  compounds  the  long  vowel  appears 
(owing  to  the  influence  of  the  m.)  in  the  n.  also;  e.  g.  firna-mradas  ‘soft  as 
wool’.  Before  endings  with  initial  bh  the  suffix  -as  becomes  -o1 2 *.  The  forms 
actually  occurring,  if  made  from  dpas-  n.  ‘work’  and  apds-  m.  f.  ‘active’,  would 
be  as  follows: 

Sing.  N.  dpas;  apds.  A.  dpas;  apdsam.  I.  dpasa;  apdsa.  D.  apase; 
apdse.  Ab.  dpasas;  apdsas.  G.  dpasas;  apdsas.  L.  dpasi;  apdsi .  V.  dpas; 
dpas.  —  Du.  N.  A.  V.  dpasi;  apdsa  and  apdsau k  D.  apdbhydm  (VS.). 
G.  dpasos  (VS.). —  PI.  N.  dpamsi;  apdsas.  A.  dpamsi;  apdsas.  I.  dpobhis; 
apdbhis.  D.  dpobhyas;  apdbhyas.  Ab.  dpobhyas.  G.  dpasam;  apdsam. 
L.  dpassu;  apdssu 4. 

The  forms  actually  occurring  are  as  follows: 

Sing.  N.  m.  aiigiras 5  an  epithet  of  Agni,  damUnas  ‘domestic’,  nodhds 
name  of  a  seer,  yasds  ‘glorious’,  raksds  ‘demon’,  vedhds  ‘ordainer’;  com¬ 
pounds :  a-cetds  ‘senseless’,  aty-amhds  (VS.  xvii.  80)  ‘beyond  distress’,  ddri- 
barhas  ‘fast  as  a  rock’,  d-dvayas  ‘free  from  duplicity’,  an-agas 6  ‘sinless’, 
an-udhds  ‘udderless’,  dnuna-varcas  ‘having  full  splendour’,  an-ends  ‘guiltless’, 
d-pracetas  ‘foolish’,  abhibhuty-ojas  ‘having  superior  power’,  dmitaujas  ‘almighty’, 
a-rapds  ‘unhurt’,  dvayata-helas  ‘whose  anger  is  appeased’,  asamdty-ojds  ‘of 
unequalled  strength’,  a-hands  ‘exuberant’,  uru-cdksas  ‘far-seeing’,  uru-vydcas 
‘widely  extending’,  fsi-manas  ‘of  far-seeing  mind’,  rsvdujas  ‘having  sublime 
(rsvd-)  power’,  karu-dhciyas  ‘favouring  the  singer’,  krtti-vdsds  (VS.  in.  61) 
‘wearing  a  skin’,  keta-vedas  ‘knowing  the  intention’,  khddo-arnas  ‘having  a 
devouring  flood’,  gabhlrd-vepas  ‘deeply  moved’,  gurta-mands  ‘having  a  grateful 
mind’,  gurtd-sravas  ‘the  praise  of  whom  is  welcome’,  gd-nyoghds  ‘streaming 
among  milk’,  ghrtd-prayds  ‘relishing  ghee’,  jata-vedas  ‘knowing  created  beings’, 
tdd-apas  ‘accustomed  to  that  work’,  tad-okas  ‘rejoicing  in  that’,  tdd-ojas  ‘endowed 
with  such  strength’,  tardd-dvesas  ‘overcoming  foes’,  tigmd-tejas  (VS.  1.  24)  ‘keen- 
edged’,  tri-vayds  ‘having  threefold  food’,  dabhrd-cetas  ‘little-minded’,  dasmd- 
varcds  ‘of  wonderful  appearance’,  dlrghd-tamas  N.  of  a  seer,  dirghdpsas 
‘having  a  long  fore-part’,  dur-osas  ‘hard  to  excite’,  devd-psaras  ‘serving  the 
gods  as  a  feast’,  devd-sravas  ‘having  divine  renown’,  dvi-bdrhas  ‘doubly 
strong’,  nd-vedas  ‘cognisant’,  nr-cdksas  ‘watching  men’,  nr-mdnas  ‘mindful  of 
men’,  uy-bkds  ‘domestic’,  pdvaka-varcas  ‘brightly  resplendent’,  puru-rdvas  (VS. 
v.  2)  N.,  prthu-jrdyas  ‘widely  extended’,  prthupdjas  ‘far-shining’,  prd-cetas  ‘atten¬ 
tive’,  prd-vayas  ‘vigorous’,  bahv-ojas  ‘strong  in  the  arm’,  brhdc-chravas  ‘loud- 
sounding’,  brhdd-ravas  (VS.  v.  22)  ‘loud-sounding’,  brhcid-vayas  (TS.  1.  5.  io2) 

, grown  strong’,  bodhin-mands  ‘watchful-minded’,  bhdri-retas  (VS.  xx.  44) 
‘abounding  in  seed’,  bhfiry-ojas  ‘having  great  power’,  mddhu-vacas  ‘sweet¬ 
voiced’,  mano-javas  ‘swift  as  thought’,  mahd-yasds  (Kh.  iv.  8s)  ‘very  glorious’, 
mitrd-mahas  ‘rich  in  friends’,  raghu-patma-jamhas  ‘having  a  light-falling  foot’. 


1  The  stems  sva-iavas-  and  sv- civets-  form 
the  irregular  N.  svci-tavan  and  sv-dvdn,  VS. 
sv-avd. 

2  Except  in  f.  uscidbhis  and  m.  svd- 
tavadbhyas  (VS.);  cp.  Brugmann,  Grundriss  2, 
p.  713  (bottom). 

0  The  ending  - au  is  here  very  rare  and 
occurs  chiefly  in  the  later  Samhitas. 

4  Represented  in  f.  by  apsarbssu  (Kh.)  and 

m.  apdsu  if  for  apdssu. 


5  The  s  of  the  N.  sing,  is  perhaps  lost  in 
us  and ;  but  this  form  may  be  a  transition, 
starting  from  the  A.  usanbm  (=  usbnasam) 
after  the  analogy  of  the  f . ;  another  instance 
is  perhaps  an-ehd  (x.  6112). 

The  form  dn-avayds  (AV.  VII.  90 5), 
meaning  perhaps  ‘not  producing  concep¬ 
tion’,  may  belong  to  this  declension.  See 
Whitney’s  note.  Lanman  443,  places  it 
under  radical  -a  stems. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Consonant  Stems. 


227 


rathaujds  (VS.  xv.  15)  ‘having  the  strength  of  a  chariot’,  risddas  ‘destroying 
enemies’,  vdsu-sravas  ‘famous  for  wealth’,  vdta-ramhds  ‘fleet  as  wind’,  vi-cetds 
‘clearly  seen’,  vi-mands  ‘very  wise’,  visva-caksas  ‘all-seeing’,  visvd-dhayas  ‘all- 
sustaining’,  visva-b  haras'1  (VS.xi.  32/  all-supporting’,  visvd-bhojas  ‘all-nourishing’, 
visvd-manas  ‘perceiving  everything’,  visvd-vcdas  ‘omniscient’,  visvd-vyacas  (VS. 
xiii.  56)  ‘embracing  all  things’,  visvdujas  ‘all-powerful’,  vi-hdyas  ‘mighty’,  vTlit- 
dvesas  ‘hating  strongly’,  vilii-haras  ‘holding  fast’,  vrddhd-mahas  ‘of  great  might’, 
vrddha-vayas  ‘of  great  power’,  vrddha-sravas  ‘possessed  of  great  swiftness’, 
sata-tejds  (VS.  1.  24)  ‘having  a  hundredfold  vital  power’,  satd-payas  (TS.  VS.) 
‘having  a  hundred  draughts’,  sukrd-varcas  ‘having  bright  lustre’,  sraddhd-manas 
‘true-hearted’,  sri-mands  (VS.)  ‘well-disposed’,  sd-canas  ‘being  in  harmony  with’, 
sa-cetas  ‘unanimous’,  sa-josas  ‘united’,  satyd-radhas  ‘truly  beneficent’,  satydujas 
(AV.  VS.  TS.)  ‘truly  mighty’,  sa-prdthas  ‘extensive’,  sam-okas  ‘dwelling  together’, 
sahdsra-caksas  ‘thousand-eyed’,  sahdsra-cetas  ‘having  a  thousand  aspects’, 
sahdsra-pathas  ‘appearing  in  a  thousand  places’,  saZiasra-retas  ‘having  a 
thousandfold  seed’,  sahasra-sokas 1  ‘emitting  a  thousand  flames’,  sahasrapsas 
‘thousand-shaped’,  su-ddmsas  ‘performing  splendid  actions’,  su-manas  ‘well- 
disposed’,  su-medhds 2  ‘having  a  good  understanding’,  su-rddhas  ‘bountiful’, 
su-reknas  ‘having  fair  possessions’,  su-retas  ‘having  much  seed’,  su-vdrcas 
‘splendid’,  su-vdsds  ‘having  beautiful  garments’,  soma-caksds  (TS.  11.  2.  124) 
‘looking  like  Soma’,  stoma-vahas  ‘receiving  praise’,  sparha-radhas  ‘bestowing 
enviable  wealth’,  sv-ahcds 1  ‘going  well’,  sv-dpds  ‘skilful’,  svdbhuty-ojds  ‘having 
energy  from  inherent  power’,  svd-yasas  ‘glorious  through  one’s  own  acts’, 
svar-caksas  ‘brilliant  as  light’,  svar-canas  ‘lovely  as  light’,  sv-bjds  ‘very  strong’. 

f.  usds1  dawn’;  dti-cchandas  (TS.,  VS.  xxi.  22)  a  metre,  d-dvayas ,  ap-sards 
‘water-nymph’,  a-repds  ‘spotless’,  a-hands ,  uru-vyacds ,  Urna-mradas  ‘soft  as  wool’, 
dvi-bdrhas ,  mcd-vayas  ‘whose  strength  is  low’,  nr-mdiids,  prd-cetds,  mddhu-vacas , 
yavaydd-dvesas  ‘driving  away  enemies’,  vi-cchandas  (TS.  v.  2.  n1)  ‘containing 
various  metres’,  vi-Zidyds ,  vrsa-manas  ‘manly-spirited’,  sukra-vdsas  ‘bright-robed’, 
sd-cetds,  sa-cchafidds  (TS.  v.  2.  n1)  ‘consisting  of  the  same  metres’,  sa-jbsds , 
sa-prdthas,  sd-bharas 1  ‘furnished  with  gifts’  (?),  saha-yasds  (TS.  iv.  4.  122 *) 
‘glorious’,  su-ddmsas,  su-pesds  ‘well-adorned’,  su-mdnas ,  su-medhds 2,  su-vdsds. 

N.  A.  n.  dmhas  ‘distress’,  any  as  ‘ointment’,  a-dvesas  ‘without  malevolence’, 
anas  ‘cart’,  an-ehds  ‘without  a  rival’,  d?idhas  ‘darkness’  and  ‘plant’,  dpas 
‘work’,  apds  ‘active’,  dpnas  ‘property’,  dpsas  ‘hidden  part  of  the  body’,  dmbhas 
‘water’,  dyas  ‘metal’,  a-raksds  ‘harmless’,  a-rapds ,  drnas  ‘flood’,  dvas  ‘favour’, 
dgas  ‘sin’,  dpas  ‘religious  ceremony’,  uras  ‘breast’,  fidhas  ‘udder’,  enas  ‘sin’, 
okas  ‘abode’,  ojas  ‘strength’,  ksudas  ‘rushing  water’,  cdnas  ‘delight’,  cetas 
(VS.  xxxiv.  3)  ‘intellect’,  chdndas  ‘metrical  hymn’,  j dmhas  ‘course’,  juvas 
‘quickness’,  jrdyas  ‘expanse’,  tdd-apas,  tdpas  ‘heat’,  tdmas  ‘darkness’,  tdras 
‘velocity’,  tejas  ‘sharp  edge’,  tydjas  ‘abandonment’,  ddmsas  ‘marvellous  power’, 
duvas  ‘worship’,  drdvinas  ‘property’,  dvesas  ‘hostility’,  nabhas  ‘vapour’,  ?idmas 
‘obeisance’,  pdksas  ‘side’,  pdyas  ‘milk’,  pdsas  (VS.  xx.  9)  ‘penis’,  pdjas  ‘vigour’, 
pdthas  ‘place’,  plvas  ‘fat’,  puru-bhojas  ‘greatly  nourishing’,  pesas  ‘ornament’, 
prdthas  ‘width’,  prdyas  ‘enjoyment’,  psdras  ‘feast’,  bhdrgas  ‘radiance’,  bhdsas 
‘light’,  manas  ‘mind’,  mdyas  ‘joy’,  mdhas  ‘greatness’,  mahds  ‘great’,  mrdhas 
‘disdain’,  medas  ‘fat’,  ydsas  ‘fame’,  rdksas  ‘damage’,  rajas  ‘region  of  clouds’, 
rdpas  ‘infirmity’,  rdbhas  ‘violence’,  radhas  ‘bounty’,  reknas  ‘wealth’,  retas  ‘flow’, 
repas  ‘stain’,  rddhas  ‘bank’,  vdksas  ‘breast’,  vdcas  ‘speech’,  vdyas  ‘bird’  and 


1  Probably  a  transition  form  (p.  225,  3,  4). 

2  Perhaps  a  transfer  form  from  medhd-, 

since  the  latter  stem  is  common,  while  the 


-as  stem  occurs  only  in  su-medhdsam  (once) 
and.  su-medhasas  (four  times  in  a  refrain). 


15* 


228 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


‘food’,  vdrivas  ‘space’,  varcas  ‘vigour’,  vdrpas  ‘figure’,  vag-djas  (VS.  xxxvi.  1) 
‘speech-energy’,  vdsas  ‘garment’,  vdhas  ‘offering’,  vedas  ‘wealth’,  vepas  ‘quivering’, 
vydcas  ‘expanse’,  vrdyas  ‘superior  power’,  sdrdhas  ‘troop’,  sdvas  ‘power’,  sir  as 
‘head’,  sesas  ‘offspring’,  srdvas  ‘renown’,  sa-jdsas ,  sddas  ‘seat’,  sdnas 1  (Kh. 
hi.  i5,s)  ‘gain’,  sa-prdthas ,  sa-bddhas  ‘harassed’,  sdras  ‘lake’,  sd/ias  ‘force’, 
sahdu/as  (VS.  xxxvi.  1)  ‘endowed  with  strength’,  su-rctas ,  srdtas  ‘stream’, 
svd-tavas  ‘inherently  strong’,  haras  ‘flame’,  hi  las  ‘passion’,  hvdras  ‘crookedness’. 
—  Ending  in  -as2  (like  m.):  asrT-vdyas 3  (VS.  xiv.  18),  uru-prathds  (VS. 
xx.  39)  ‘far-spread’,  Urna-mradas ,  gurtd-vacas  ‘speaking  agreeably’, 
vyacas  ‘affording  space  for  the  gods’,  dvi-bdrhas ,  visvd-vyacas  (AV.),  zV- 
spardhas  (VS.  xv.  5)  ‘emulating’,  vird-pesas  ‘forming  the  ornament  of  heroes’, 
vllu-hards,  sa-prdthas  (AV.  VS.  TS.),  sumdnas  (TS.  iv.  5.  i2)4. 

A.  m.  jardsam  ‘old  age’,  tavdsam  ‘strong’,  ‘strength’,  tyajdsam  ‘offshoot’, 
ddmunasam ,  pdrmasam  (1 60) ‘abundance’,  bhiydsam  ‘fear’,  yasdsam,  raksdsam , 
vedhdsam ;  a-cetdsam ,  anasta-vedasam  ‘having  one’s  property  unimpaired’,  azz- 
agasam ,  dnu-gayasam  ‘followed  by  shouts’,  an-endsam  (TS.i.  8. 5 3),  an-ehdsam , 
apdsam ,  d-pratidhrsta-savasam  ‘of  irresistible  power’,  a  bh  ibh  uty-'j as  a  m ,  ar<z- 
manasam  ‘obedient’,  a-radhdsam  ‘not  liberal’,  a-repdsam ,  arcandnasam  ‘having 
a  rattling  carriage’  (N.  of  a  man),  a-hanasam ,  uccais-sravasam  (Kh.  v.  145) 
‘neighing  aloud’  (N.  of  Indra’s  horse),  upakd-caksasam  ‘seen  close  at  hand’, 
uru-cdksasam ,  uru-jrdyasam  ‘extending  over  a  wide  space’,  uru-vydcasam , 
ftrna-mradasam  (VS.  11.  2),  urdhvd-nabhasam  (VS.  vi.  16)  ‘being  above  the 
clouds’,  ksetra-sddhasam  ‘who  divides  the  fields’,  gatha-sravasam  ‘famous 
through  songs’,  gayatrd-cchandasam  (VS.viii.  47)  ‘to  whom  the  Gayatrl  metre 
belongs’,  gayatrd-vepasam  ‘inspired  by  songs’,  gir-vanasam  ‘delighting  in 
invocations’,  gir-vdhasam  ‘praised  in  song’,  gurtd-sravasam ,  gd-arnasam 
‘abounding  in  cattle’,  gd-dhayasam  ‘supporting  cows’,  cikitvin-manasam  ‘atten¬ 
tive’,  citrd-mahasam  ‘possessing  excellent  bounty’,  tr a- radii  as  a  m  ‘granting 
excellent  gifts’,  jdgac-cha?idasam  (VS.  vm.  47)  ‘to  whom  the  Jagatl  metre 
belongs’,  jatd-vedasam ,  tuvi-rCidhasam  ‘granting  many  gifts’,  tuvi-svandsam 5 
‘loud-sounding’,  tuvy-djasaui  ‘very  powerful’,  tristup-chandasam  (VS.  vm.  47), 
danaukasam  ‘delighting  (JAzi-)  in  a  sacrificial  meal’,  dyuksd-vacasam  ‘uttering 
heavenly  words’,  dvi-bdrhasam ,  dvi-savasam  ‘having  twofold  strength’,  dhrsnv- 
ojasam  ‘endowed  with  resistless  might’,  ndrydpasam  ‘doing  manly  (ndrya-) 
deeds’,  nr-cdksasam,  pankti-radhasam  ‘containing  fivefold  gifts’,  purupisasam 
‘multiform’,  puru-bhdjasam ,  puru-vdrpasam  ‘having  many  forms’,  puru-vepasam 
‘much-exciting’,  prd-cetasam,  prd-tuahsasam  ‘energetic’,  brdhma-vdhasam  ‘to 
whom  prayers  are  offered’,  bh fi ri-caksasa m  ‘much-seeing’,  bh iiri-dh dyasa m 
‘nourishing  many’,  mdtio-javasam  (TS.  11.  4.  71),  yajha-vanasam  ‘loving  sacri¬ 
fice’,  yajha-vdhasam  ‘offering  worship’,  risddasam 6,  vdja-sravasa?n  ‘famous  for 
wealth’,  vi-cetasam ,  vt-josasam  ‘forsaken’,  vi-dvesasam  ‘resisting  enmity’,  visvd- 
dhayasam ,  visvd-bharasam 7,  visvd-vedasam,  visvd-vyacasam ,  visvdyu-posasam 7 
‘causing  prosperity  to  all  men’,  visvdyu-vepasam  ‘exciting  all  men’,  vi-hdyasam , 
viti-radhasam  ‘granting  enjoyment’,  sd-cetasam ,  sa-jdsasam ,  satya-girvdhasam 
‘getting  true  praise’,  satyd-radhasam  (VS.xxii.  1 1),  satyd-savasam  ‘truly  vigorous’, 


1  Though  sdnas  does  not  otherwise  occur 
[sana-  in.  is  found  as  last  member  of  a 
compound),  the  context  in  Khila  ill.  1 5 x5 
seems  to  require  an  A.:  ahdtn  gandhdrva- 
ruperia  sana  a  vartaydmi  te. 

2  Cp.  Lanman  560. 

3  Of  doubtful  meaning;  the  form  may 

possibly  be  N.  pi.  of  asrivi-.  Cp.  BR. 


4  Cp.  Lanman  560;  see  also  the  neuters 
in  d-s,  Lanman  445  (mid). 

5  For  this  form,  TS.  ill.  3.  II2  has  errone¬ 
ously  tuvis-mandsam. 

6  Also  the  transition  form  vayo-dhdsam 
(VS.)  ‘bestowing  strength’. 

7  Probably  to  be  explained  as  a  transition 
form  (p.  225,  3). 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Consonant  Stems. 


229 


sddma-makhasam  ‘performing  sacrifice  in  a  sacred  precinct’,  sa-prdthasam 
(VS.  xxi.  3),  samudra-vasasam  ‘concealed  in  the  waters’,  samudrd-vyacasa?n 
‘extensive  as  the  sea’,  sdrva-vedasam  (VS.  xv.  55;  TS.  iv.  7.  131 2 3 4)  ‘having 
complete  property’,  sahdsra-caksasam ,  sahasra-bharnasam  ‘a  thousandfold’, 
sahdsra-varcasa?n  ‘having  a  thousandfold  power’,  su-cetasam  ‘very  wise’,  su- 
damsasam,  su-pcsasam ,  su-praydsam  ‘well  regaled’,  su-bhbjascun  ‘bountiful’, 
su-medhdsam1 ,  su-radhasam ,  su-retasam ,  su-vdrcasam  (TS.  hi.  2.  85),  su-srdvasam 
‘famous’,  srprd-bhojasam  ‘having  abundant  food’,  svd-yasasam ,  sv-dvasam 
‘affording  good  protection’,  hdri-dhayasam  ‘giving  yellow  streams’,  hari- 
varpasatn  ‘having  a  yellow  appearance’.  —  Contracted  forms:  usanam 
N.  of  a  seer,  mahdtn ,  vedhdm. 

f.  usdsam  and  usdsam2,  dhvardsam  ‘deceiving’;  dn-agasam ,  an-ehdsam , 
a-raksdsam ,  a-repdsam ,  asva-pesasam  ‘decorated  with  horses’,  ud-ojasam 
‘exceedingly  powerful’,  uru-vydcasam ,  cikitvln-ma?iasam ,  puru-bhdjasain ,  yavaydd- 
dvesasam ,  vdja-pesasam  ‘adorned  with  precious  gifts’,  visva-dbhasam  ‘yield¬ 
ing  all  things’,  visvd-dhayasam ,  visvd-pesasa?n  ‘containing  all  adornment’, 
visva-bhojasam ,  satdrcasam  ‘having  a  hundred  supports’  (reds-),  suci-pesasam 
‘brightly  adorned’,  sahasra-bharnasam ,  svd-yasasam ,  hdri-varpasam.  — 
Contracted  forms :  us  dm,  jar  dm,  medhetm  ‘wisdom’,  vaydm  ‘vigour’;  dn-agam , 
ap-sardm  (AV.)  b 

I.  m.  jarasd,  tdrusasa  ‘giving  victory’,  tavdsa,  tvesdsa  ‘impulse’,  pdrinasa, 
bhiydsa 4,  yasdsa ,  sdhasa  ‘mighty’,  havdsd  ‘invocation’;  an-ehdsa ,  a-raksdsa , 
gb-parTnasd  ‘having  abundance  of  cows’,  prthu-pdjasd ,  mano-javasa ,  vis'vd- 
pesasd,  su-pesasd ,  su-sravasd ,  sv-dpasd  (VS.  xxv.  3). 

f.  usdsd ,  yajdsd  ‘worshipping’;  dti-cchandasa  (VS.  1.  27),  a-repasd,  uru- 
cdksasd  (VS.  iv.  23). 

n.  dhjasa ,  dnasa,  dndhasa,  dpasa ,  apdsa ,  a-raksdsa ,  drnasa ,  dvasa ,  urasd 
(VS.TS.),  e'nasd ,  ojasd ,  o/iasd  ‘prospect’,  ksodasd,  gd-arnasa,  cdtksasa  ‘brightness’, 
cetasa ,  chandasa  (VS.  TS.),  j dvasa  and  (once)  javdsa 5  ‘with  speed’,  tanasa 
‘offspring’,  tdpasa,  tdmasa ,  tdrasa ,  tejasa ,  tydjasa,  tvdksasa  ‘energy’,  ddmsasa, 
dohasa  ‘milking’,  dhdyasa  ‘nourishing’,  dhrdjasa  ‘gliding  power’,  ndb/iasa , 
ndmasa ,  pdyasa,  pdjasd ,  pfvasd ,  pesasd  (VS.  xx.  41),  prdyasa ,  bd/ivojasa , 
bhrdjasa  ‘lustre’,  m  anas  a,  mdhasa ,  medasa ,  yasdsa 6  ‘glorious’,  rdksasa, 

reknasd ,  ret  as  a,  vdcasa ,  v  dnasa  ‘enjoyment’, 
vdsasd,  vdhasa,  ve'dasa ,  vepasd ,  s dvasa ,  slrasd 
sdhasa ,  su-ddmsasa ,  su-retasd ,  srdtasa,  hdrasa , 

he'sasd  ‘vigour’8. 

D.  m.  tavdse ,  duvase  ‘worshipper’,  yasdse ,  raksdse,  vedhdse ,  sikvase  ‘adroit’, 
sdhase  ‘mighty’;  abhisti-savase  ‘granting  powerful  aid’,  ukthd-vahase  ‘offering 
verses’,  uru-vydease ,  rtd-pesase  ‘having  a  glorious  form’,  gdyatrd-vepase ,  gir-vanase , 
glr-vdhase ,  ghord-caksase  ‘of  frightful  appearance’9,  jatd-vedase ,  tdd-apase,  tdd- 
okase,  dlrghd-yasase  ‘renowned  far  and  wide’,  dlrghd-sravase  ‘famous  far 


rajasd ,  r  dpasa,  rddhasa, 
v  ay  as  a 7 ,  v  arc  as a,  vdrpasa, 
(Kh.  1.  91),  sesasd,  sr dvasa, 


1  Perhaps  to  be  explained  as  a  transition 
form  starting  from  N.  su-medha-s. 

2  In  Pada  text  usdsam. 

3  Cp.  J.  Schmidt,  Heteroklitische  nomina¬ 
tive  singularis  auf  -5^  in  den  arischen  spra- 
chen,  KZ.  26,  401 — 409;  27,284;  Collitz, 
BB.  7,  180;  Prellwitz,  BB.  22,  83. 

4  Also  contracted  to  Mwd  with  adverbial 
shift  of  accent  occurring  3  times  (bhiydsa  1 1 
times). 

5  In  iv.  271. 

6  Cp.  Grassmann,  s.  v.  yasas-. 


7  Also  the  transition  form  vayo-dhdsa  (VS. 
xv.  7). 

8  A  few  forms  in  appear  to  have  the 
value  of  instrumentals  as  agreeing  with  a 
word  in  that  case:  Z'ffVtf.r  (l.  262  etc.),  yajna- 
vacas  (AV.  XI.  3I9),  savas  (1.  8 14);  edhas  (AV. 
xii.  32);  cp.  Bloomfield,  SBE.  42,  645; 
see  Lanman  562,  and  cp.  Caland,  KZ.  31, 
261. 

9  Also  the  transition  form  candrd-mase 
(VS.  xxx.  21). 


230  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

and  wide’,  dyumna-sravase  ‘producing  a  clear  sound’,  nr-cdksase,  ny-okase , 
puru-r  dvase ,  prthujrayase ,  prthu-pdjase,  pra-cetase ,  prd-tavase  ‘very  strong’, 
brdh m a-vdh ase,  mrktd-vahase  ‘carrying  off  what  is  injured’,  N.  of  a  seer,  yajnd - 
vdhase1,  visvd-caksase,  vi-hayase ,  satya-radhase ,  sahdsra-caksase ,  svd-tavase , 
svd-yasase. 

f.  usdse,  vrdhdse  ‘furtherance’;  dti-cchandase  (VS.  xxiv.  13),  dur-vCisase 
‘ill-clothed’,  parjdnya-retase  ‘sprung  from  the  seed  of  Parjanya’. 

n.  apdse ,  a-pesdse  ‘formless’,  dvase ,  caksase,  javdse ,  tdpase ,  tdmase , 

tdrase,  tejase  (VS.  xv.  8),  ddksase  ‘ability’,  dhdyase,  d/iru vase  ‘stopping’,  nabhase 
(VS.  vii.  30),  ndmase ,  pdjase ,  prdyase ,  psdrase ,  mdnase ,  mdhase  (VS.  xix.  8), 
ydsase  (VS.  xx.  3),  yddase  (VS.  xxx.  20)  ‘voluptuousness’,  rdksase ,  rddhase , 
re'tase ,  vdcase ,  vdrcasc ,  sdrase  (VS.  xxxviii.  1 5)  ‘skin  of  boiled  milk’,  s dvase, 
srdvase ,  sd/iase,  svd-yasase ,  hdrase. 

Ab.  m.  a-radhdsas ,  jardsas ,  tavasas ,  p drTnas as,  raksdsas 2,  sdhasas.  — 
f.  usdsas.  —  n.  dm/iasas 3,  dnasas,  djid/iasas ,  dpasas,  drnasas,  dgasas  (TS.  iv.  7. 
152),  cnasas,  okasas,  djasas,  ksodasas,  jrdyasas,  tap  as  as,  tamasas,  drdvinasas, 
pdyasas,  p djasas,  prdthasas ,  bhdmsasas  ‘intestine’,  mdnasas 4,  rdjasas,  rddhasas, 
vedasas ,  sddasas,  sdrasas,  sdhasas. 

G.  m.  dhgirasas,  apdsas,  dpnasas,  tavasas,  parmasas,  raksdsas ,  vedhasas ; 
dn-agasas ,  dpaka-caksasas  ‘shining  from  afar’,  abhl-vayasas  ‘refreshing’,  a-raksdsas , 
upama-sravasas  ‘most  highly  famed’,  krsnd-jam/iasas  ‘having  a  black  track’, 
jatd-vedasas,  dandpnasas  ‘having  abundance  of  gifts’,  dlrg/id-sravasas ,  dvi- 
bdrhasas,  nr-cdksasas,  pdri-dvesasas  ‘enemy’,  puru-bhojasas,  prthu-srdvasas  ‘far- 
famed’,  prd-cetasas,  prd-mahasas  ‘very  glorious’,  praydsas  (TS.  iv.  1.  82),  bhd- 
tvaksasas  ‘having  the  power  of  light’,  vi-cetasas,  vidmandpasas  ‘working  with 
wisdom’,  visva-manasas,  vrka-dvarasas 5,  satyd-radhasas  (TS.  in.  3. 1 1 ‘),  satyd- 
savasas  (VS.  iv.  18)  ‘having  true  impulsion’,  sa-bddhasas ,  su-praydsas  (VS. 
xxvii.  15),  svd-yasasas.  —  f.  usdsas 6. 

n.  dmhasas ,  dnasas,  dndhasas,  dpasas,  dyasas,  drnasas,  drsasas  (VS.xn.  97) 
‘piles’,  dvasas,  dnasas  (VS.  vm.  13),  okasas,  djasas,  gd-arnasas,  tdpasas  (VS. 
iv.  26;  Kh.iv.  1113),  tamasas ,  ty djasas,  daksasas 1 ,  drdvinasas,  ndbhasas,  ndmasas, 
pdyasas,  pdjasas  (Ivh.  1.  7 2),  pr dyasas,  mdnasas,  mddasas,  rdjasas,  r dpasas, 
rddhasas,  rdtasas,  vdcasas,  vapsasas  ‘fair  form’,  z 'dyasas,  vdrpasas,  vdsasas, 
s dvasas 8,  sr dvasas,  sddasas,  sdrapasas 5,  sdhasas,  hd rasas9.  —  Contracted 
form:  nr-manas  (x.  92 14). 

L.  m.  ahgirasi10  (VS.  iv.  10),  gd-arnasi,  jatd-vedasi,  ddmunasi ,  prthu-sravasi , 
yajhd-vahasi  (VS.  ix.  37),  satyd-sravasi  ‘truly  famous’,  N.  of  a  man.  —  f.  usasi.  — 
n.  dmhasi,  dhjasi ,  apdsi ,  dvasi,  dgasi,  dkasi,  krdndasi  ‘battle-cry’,  cdksasi, 
tdmasi ,  ?id??iasi,  pdyasi,  pdthasi  (VS.  xm.  53),  mdnasi,  rdjasi,  rddhasi ,  rdtasi, 
srdvasi,  sddasi,  sdrasi,  hddasi  (TS.  ill.  3.  114). 

V.  m.  dhgiras,  nodhas,  ved/ias ;  uktha-v alias ,  upama-sravas,  karu-dhayas , 


1  Also  the  transition  form  vayo-dhase  (VS. 
XXVIII.  46). 

2  Also  the  transition  form  reto-dhasas  (VS. 
vm.  10). 

3  In  vi.  31  am  has  is  probably  the  stem 
used  instead  of  the  very  frequent  Ab.  amk- 
as-as,  rather  than  the  Ab.  of  cimh~,  as  this 
would  be  the  only  form  from  such  a  stem, 
and  the  accent  would  be  irregular. 

4  Also  the  adv.,  in  the  sense  of  the  Ab., 
niedas-tas  (VS.  xxi.  60). 

5  Of  uncertain  meaning. 


6  Once  the  strong  form  usdsas  (x.  391)  for 
the  weak. 

7  This,  as  well  as  the  D.  n.  ddksase,  is  a 
transition  form  (p.  225,  3). 

8  The  stem  sdvas  in  vm.  36  may  be  used 
for  the  G.  Perhaps  also  sddas-pdti-  stands 
for  sddasas-pdti-.  Cp.  Lanman  563k 

9  Transition  forms  are  sdrdhasya,  nir- 
avasya ;  candrd-inasas ,  reto-dhasas  (VS.); 
daksasas,  dosasas  (A V.). 

Also  the  transfer  forms  dhgire,  hele ; 
candra-masi  (AV.). 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Consonant  Stems. 


2  21 


gir-vanas ,  gir-vdhas l,  jdta-vedas ,  deva-sravas ,  dhrsan-manas  ‘bold-minded’, 
nr-caksas ,  nr-manas ,  puru-ravas ,  prci-cetas 2,  brahma-vahas ,  mitra-mahas , 
vdja-pramahas  ‘superior  in  strength’,  visva-caksas ,  visva-dhayas ,  visva-manas , 
vrsa-manas ,  satya-radhas ,  su-dravinas  ‘having  fine  property’,  su-mahas  ‘very 
great’,  sva-tavas ,  sv-ojas 3.  —  f.  z/yaiq  a-hanas ,  tigma-tejas  (A V.  VS.).  — 
n.  dravinas ,  sdrdhas. 

Du.  N.  A.  V.  m.  apctsd ,  tavasa ,  tosdsd 4  ‘showering’,  yasdsa,  vedhasa ; 
a-repdsa ,  dsu-hesasa  ‘having  neighing  horses’,  Tya-caksasd  ‘of  far-reaching 
sight’,  uktha-vahasd ,  uru-cdksasa ,  krsty-ojasa  ‘overpowering  men’,  gambhTra- 
cetasd  ‘of  profound  mind’,  gb-parTnasa,  jatd-vedasa ,  tdd-okasa ,  na-vedasa , 
nr-cdksasd ,  nr-vdhasa  ‘conveying  men’,  puru-ddmsasa  ‘abounding  in  wonder¬ 
ful  deeds’,  puru-bhojasd ,  putd-daksasa 5  ‘pure-minded’,  prthupdksasa  ‘broad- 
flanked’,  prd-cetasa ,  prd-mahasa ,  bodhm-manasa ,  mata-vacasa  ‘heeding  prayers’, 
mano-javasd ,  yajna-vdhasd ,  risddasa ,  vatsa-pracetasd  ‘mindful  ofVatsa’,  zv- 
cetasd ,  z n-paksasd  ‘going  on  both  sides’,  vipra-vahasd  ‘receiving  the  offerings 
of  the  wise’,  visva-bhojasa ,  visvd-vedasa ,  vy-enasa  ‘guiltless’,  srestha-varcasa 
‘having  most  excellent  energy’,  sa-jbsasd ,  V.  satyaujasa  (TS.  iv.  7.  1 5 2), 
sd-manasa  ‘unanimous’,  samana-varcasa  ‘having  equal  vigour’,  sdm-okasa , 
sa-vayasd  ‘having  equal  vigour’,  sd-vedasa  ‘having  equal  wealth’,  sindhu-vahasa 
‘passing  through  the  sea’(?),  su-ddmsasa ,  su-praydsd ,  su-rad/iasd ,  su-retasd , 
su-vbcasd  ‘very  eloquent’,  sv-dvasd ,  hitd-prayasa  ‘who  has  offered  an  oblation 
of  food’,  hiranya-pesasa  ‘having  golden  lustre’6.  —  With  aw:  a-repasau , 
V.  jata-vedasau  (TS.  1.  3.  72),  nr-caksasau ,  prd-cetasau  (VS.  xxviii.  7),  visvd- 
sardkasau  ‘forming  a  complete  troop’,  sd-cetasau  (VS.  v.  3;  Kh.  in.  1513),  ra- 
jbsasau  (VS.  xn.  74),  sd-manasau  (TS.  1.  3.  72),  sdm-okasau  (TS.  1.  3.  72)7.  — 
f.  usdsd  and  usdsa 8,  ndktosfisa  ‘night  and  morning’,  an-ehdsa ,  uru-vydcasa , 
nr-cdksasd  (AV.),  bhiiri-retasa ,  bhUri-varpasa  ‘multiform’,  visvd-pesasd ,  sd- 
cetasd,  sd-manasa ,  su-ddmsasa9,  su-pssasa.  —  With  -aw:  ap-sardsau  (AV.), 
a-repdsan ,  usdsau  (VS.  xxi.  50),  yas'dsau;  nr-caksasau ,  visvd-sardhasau ,  zq>- 
enasau  (AV.)10.  —  n.  and  hast,  krdndasi,  jdnasi,  drddhasl  (TS.  in.  2.  22)  ‘gar¬ 
ments’,  ndbhasi  (AV.),  nddhasT  ‘refuges’,  pdksasl( AV.),  pdjasl ,  rdjasT,  vdcasi, 
vdsasi  (TS.  1.  5.  io'). 

D.  m.  sa-jbsobhyam  (VS.  vir.  8). 

G.  n.  diksa-tapdsos 11  (VS.  iv.  2)  ‘consecration  and  penance’. 

PI.  N.  V.  m.  dhgirasas ,  apdsas,  tavasas ,  ddmunasas ,  duvdsas  ‘rest¬ 
less’,  mrgayasas  ‘wild  animals’,  yasdsas,  raksdsas,  vedhdsas ,  sikvasas\ 
d-giraukasas  ‘not  to  be  kept  back  by  hymns’  (gird),  a-cetdsas,  a-coddsas 
‘unurged’,  ddbhutainasas  ‘in  whom  no  fault  (enas)  is  visible’,  an-avabhrd- 
radhasas  ‘giving  undiminished  wealth’,  dn-agasas,  an-ehdsas,  a-repdsas , 


d-vicctasas  ‘unwise’,  a-sesasas  ‘without  descendants’,  dsva-radhasas  ‘equipping 
horses’,  d-sami-savasas  ‘having  complete  strength’,  d-hanasas ,  ukthd-vahasas , 
ud-ojasas ,  uru-vyacasas  (VS.  xxvir.  16),  ksetra-sddhasas,  gamb/iird-vepasas, 


1  In  vi.  246  Grassmann  would  read 
girvavdhas ,  as  N. ;  cp.  Lanman  5^42. 

2  TS.  1. 5.  1 1  3  has  pracelo  raj  an-,  the  original 
passage,  RV.  1.  2414,  has  praceta  rajan  (Pada, 
pracetak );  see  Lanman  564U 

3  Transition  forms  are  sa-praiha  (TB.), 
candra-mas  (AY.),  vayo-dhas,  dravino-das. 

4  With  lengthened  vowel. 

5  Probably  to  be  explained  as  a  transition 
form  (p.  225,  3). 

6  Also  the  transition  forms  candramasa , 

suryd-candramasa. 


7  Also  the  transition  forms  surya-candra- 
masau,  varco-dasau  (VS.  vii.  27),  sa-josau. 

8  In  the  Pada  text  usasd. 

9  In  VII.  731  puru-damsd  is  perhaps  a  con¬ 
tracted  form. 

10  Also  the  transition  forms  zasV  (VS.), 
a-dvese ,  vi-dradhe. 

11  There  are  also  in  the  f.  the  transition 
forms  usabhydm  I.  and  rddasos  G. 


232  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

ghrsvi-radhasas  ‘granting  with  joy’,  ghora-varpasas  ‘of  terrible  appear¬ 
ance’,  citrd-radhasas,  tdd-okasas,  tuvi-svanasas 1 ,  dvi-barhasas ,  dhrsnv-ojasas , 
nd-vedasas,  nr-cdksasas,  pathi-rdksasas  (VS.  xvi.  60)  ‘protecting  roads’,  putd- 
daksasas 1 ,  prthu-pdjasas ,  prd-cetasas,  prati-juti-varpasas  ‘assuming  any  form 
according  to  impulse’,  prd-tavasas ,  prd-tvaksasas ,  prd-sravasas  ‘farfamed’,  bdhv- 
bjasas ,  bhalandsas  N.  of  a  people,  zziddhu-psarasas  ‘fond  of  sweetness’,  mddhye- 
cchandasas  (TS.iv.  3.  113)  ‘sun’  or  ‘middle  of  the  year’  (Comm.),  yajna-vahasas , 
yutd-dvesasas  ‘delivered  from  enemies’,  risddasas ,  rukmd-vaksasas  ‘wearing  gold 
ornaments  on  the  breast’,  vdruna-sesasas  ‘resembling  sons  of  Vanina’,  vdta- 
ranihasas ,  vdta-svanasas  ‘roaring  like  the  wind’,  vi-cetasas,  vidmandpasas , 
vidyun-mahasas  ‘rejoicing  in  lightning’,  vipra-vacasas  ‘whose  words  are  in¬ 
spired’,  vi-mahasas  ‘very  glorious’,  visvd-dhayasas ,  visvd-mahasas  ‘having  all 
splendour’,  visvd-vedasas ,  vi-:pardhasas  ‘vying’,  vi-hdyasas,  vrddha-savasas 
‘of  great  strength’,  srestha-varcasas ,  sd-cetasas,  sa-josasas ,  satya-savasas ,  ^<2- 
bharasas x,  sd-maziasas,  sdm-okasas ,  sd-vayasas ,  sd-srotasas  (VS.  xxxiv.  1 1) 
‘flowing’,  sahd-ccha?idasas  ‘accompanied  by  metre’,  scihdsra-pajasas  ‘having 
a  thousandfold  lustre’,  sahdujasas  (VS.  x.  4),  su-cdksasas  ‘seeing  well’, 
su-cctasas ,  su-ddmsasas ,  su-pTvasas  ‘very  fat’,  su-pcsasas ,  sn-prdcetasas  ‘very 
wise’,  su-prajdsas 2  (TS.i.  6.  21;  AV.)  ‘having  a  good  son’,  su-mdnasas,  su-inahasas , 
su-medhasas 3,  si/-rdd/iasas,  sfira-caksasas  ‘radiant  as  the  sun’,  siirya-tvacasas 
(VS.  x.  4)  ‘having  a  covering  bright  as  the  sun’,  sfirya-varcasas  (VS.  x.  4) 
‘resplendent  as  the  sun’,  st'mia-vahasas  ‘giving  praise’,  sva-tavasas ,  sv-dpasas, 
sv-dp?iasas  ‘wealthy’,  sva-yasasas ,  sv-dvasas,  hitd-prayasas.  —  Contracted 
forms:  dngiras,  dn-agas 4 5,  ndvedas ,  sajdsas.  —  f.  apdsas ,  usdsas  and  usdsas 5, 
yasdsas ;  agn'i-bhrajasas  ‘fire-bright’,  an-ehdsas,  ap-sardsas,  uru-vydcasas  (TS. 
iv.  1.  82),  trsu-cydvasas  ‘moving  greedily’,  dhdnv-arnasas  ‘overflowing  the  dry 
land’,  nr-pesasas  ‘adorned  by  men’,  prd-cetasas,  prd-svadascis  ‘pleasant’,  mddhv- 
arnasas  ‘having  a  sweet  flood’,  vl-cetasas,  su-pesasas ,  snda-dohams  ‘milking 
sweetness’,  sv-dpasas,  svd-yasasas.  —  Contracted  forms:  mcdhds ;  d-josas 
‘insatiable’,  nd-vedas ,  su-rddhas. 

N.  A.  n.  dmhamsi ,  dnkamsi  ‘bends’,  dndhamsi ,  dpamsi ,  drnamsi,  dvavisi , 
dgamsi ,  eziainsi }  ok  am  si,  djainsi ,  kdramsi  ‘deeds’,  chdndanisi ,  jdvamsi ,  jrdyamsi , 
tdmamsi,  tvdksamzi ,  ddmsamsi ,  duvainsi ,  dvesamsi ,  pdyamsi ,  pdjamsi ,  pathainsi 
(VS.  xxi.  46),  pesamsi,  prdyamsi ,  bhdsamsi ,  mdiiayisi ,  mdhamsi ,  rdksainsi , 
rajamsi ,  rdpamsi ,  rddhamsi,  retamsi,  rddhamsi ,  rohamsi  ‘heights’,  vdhsanisi , 
Z’dcamsi,  vdyamsi ,  vdramsi  ‘expanses’,  vdrivamsi ,  vdrcamsi  (VS.  ix.  22), 
vdrpamsi ,  vasamsi ,  sdrd/iamsi ,  sdvamsi ,  srdvamsi ,  sddamsi,  sdrayisi ,  sdhamsi , 
skdndhamsi  ‘branches’,  helamsi ,  hvaramsi. 

A.  m.  dngiras  as 6,  dhvardsas,  yasdsas ,  raksdsas ,  vedhdsas ;  dn-agasas , 
a?i-ehdsas ,  d-pracetasas,  a-radhdsas,  uru-caksasas ,  tuvi-rddhasas,  putd-daksasas 7, 
prd-cetasas ,  brhdc-chravasas ,  yajnd-vanasas ,  risddasas ,  vi-tnahasas,  vi-spardhasas , 
sa-josasas  (VS.  111.  44),  sd-manasas  (VS.  vn.  25),  su-pesasas ,  su-rddhas  as,  sv- 
dpnasass.  —  Contracted  forms:  dn-agas ,  su-medhds 9.  —  f.  apdsas,  usdsas IO, 
yasdsas;  a-javdsas  ‘not  swift’,  an-apndsas  ‘destitute  of  wealth’,  an-ehdsas ,  ap- 
sardsas,  ari-dhayasas  ‘willingly  yielding  milk’,  gharmd-snarasas7  ‘sounding  like 
(the  contents  of)  a  boiler’,  tdd-apasas,  bhdri-varpasas,  vdja-dravinasas  ‘richly 


1  Probably  a  transition  form  (p.  225,  3). 

2  Probably  a  transition  form  (p.  225,  2). 

3  Probably  a  transfer  form;  see  p.  227,  note  2. 

4  Perhaps  also  an-ehus  (x.  6112);  see  Lan¬ 
ai  an  55 1 J. 

5  In  the  Pada  text  usdsas. 

6  In  I.  11218  Lanman  would  take  dngiras 

sa  A.  pi.  m.  without  ending. 


7  Probably  a  transition  form  (p.  225,  3). 

8  Also  the  transition  forms  sardhan ,  an- 
dgan. 

9  It  is  somewhat  doubtful  whether  this  is 
a  contracted  A.  pi.  (vii.  P1^)* 

10  Once  also  usdsas.  In  III.  67  and  vm. 
413  Lanman  (566)  would  take  zAraj  as  A.  pi. 
without  ending. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Consonant  Stems.  233 


rewarded’,  vdja-sravasas ,  visvd-dohasas ,  visvd-dhayasas ,  su-pesasas 1 .  —  Con¬ 
tracted  form:  usds  (ix.  41 5). 

I.  m.  ahgirobhis ;  agni-tapobhis  ‘having  the  heat  of  fire’,  svd-yasob/iis.  — 
f.  sva-yasobhis;  with  -ad-  for  - 0 usddbhis  (44  a,  3). 

n.  d-yavobhis  (VS.  xii.  74)  ‘dark  halves  of  the  month’,  dr  nob  his,  dvobhis , 
djobhis,  chandobhis  (Kh.  v.  3  *),  tdpobhis ,  tdmobhis,  tdrobhis,  ddmsobhis,  dvesob/tis, 
.  dhdyobhis,  ndbhobhis ,  ndmobhis ,  pdksobhis  (VS.  xxix.  5  ;  TS.  v.  1.  1 12),  pdyobhis, 
prdyobhis,  md  hob  his,  r  djobhis ,  rddhobhis ,  vdcobhis ,  vdyobhis ,  vdrobhis ,  savobhis, 
sr  dvobhis ,  sd  hob  his. 

D.  m.  dhgirobhyas;  with  -ad-  for  - 0 svd-tavadbhyas  (VS.  xxiv.  16).  — 
n.  medobhyas  (VS.  xxxix.  10),  rdksobhyas ,  vdyobhyas  (AV.),  sdrobhyas  (VS. 
xxx.  16).  —  vAb.  n.  dvesobhyas . 


G.m.  dhgirasam ,  apdsam ,  tavdsam ,  yasdsam ,  vedhdsam  ;  ddbhutainasam , 
dasm a-varcasam ,  mahd-manasam  ‘high-minded’,  stJma-vdhasdm.  —  f.  apdsam, 
usds  am)  ap-sardsam ,  ndksatra-savasam  ‘equalling  the  stars  in  number’.  — 
n.  chdndasam ,  tdrasam  (AV.),  ?ti:dasa??i  (VS.  xxi.  40),  rdhsasam  (VS.  11.  23), 
rddhasam,  vedasam 2. 

L.  f.  ap-sardssu  (Kh.  iv.  83).  —  n.  am/iassu 3  (AV.),  ddhassu,  rdjassu , 
vdksassu ,  vdyassu  (AV.),  srdvassu ,  sddassu 4. 


y.  Stems  in  -yams. 

345-  The  primary  suffix  -yams  (1 3  7) 5  is  used  to  form  comparative  stems. 
It  is  added  either  directly  or  with  connecting  -f-  to  the  root,  which  is  always 
accented.  There  are  seven  duplicate  stems  formed  in  both  ways:  tdv-yams-  and 
tav-Tyams-  ‘stronger’;  ndv-yams-  and  nav-Tyams-  ‘new’;  pan-yams-  and  p du¬ 
ly  ams-  ‘more  wonderful’;  bhdyams-  and  bhdvlyams-  ‘more’;  rabhyams-  and 
rdbhlyams-  (VS.)  ‘more  violent’;  vdsyams-  and  vasty  ams-  ‘better’;  sdh-yams-  and 
sahl-yams-  ‘mightier’.  Strong  and  weak  forms  are  regularly  distinguished. 
In  the  latter  the  suffix  is  reduced  by  loss  of  the  nasal  and  shortening  of  the 
vowel  to  -yas.  These  stems  are  declined  in  the  m.  and  n.  only,  as  they 
form  their  f.  by  adding  -l  to  the  weak  stem;  e.  g. preyas-T-  ‘dearer’.  No  forms 
of  the  dual  occur,  and  in  the  plural  only  the  N.  A.  G.  are  found. 

Inflexion. 

346.  The  V.  sing.  m.  ends  in  -as6.  The  forms  actually  occurring,  if 
made  from  kdnlyams -  ‘younger’,  would  be  as  follows: 

Sing.  N.  m.  kdniyan ,  n.  kdmyas.  A.  m.  kdmyamsam ,  n.  kdntyas. 
I.  m.  n.  kdnlyasa.  D.  m.  n.  kdnlyase.  Ab.  m.  n.  kdniyasas.  G.  m.  n.  kanlyasas. 
L.  m.  kdnlyasi.  V.  m.  kdntyas.  —  PI.  N.  in.  kdntyamsas.  A.  m.  kanlyasas. 
N.  A.  n.  kdnlyamsi.  G.  m.  kdniyasam. 

The  forms  which  occur  are  the  following: 

Sing.  N.  m.  a-tavydn1  ‘not  stronger’,  djlyan  ‘stronger’,  kdniyan ,  jdvlyan 
‘swifter’,  jydyan  ‘mightier’,  tdrlydn 8  ‘easily  passing  through’,  tdviyan  ‘stronger’, 
tdvyan  ‘stronger’,  dhdvlyan  ‘running  fast’,  ndvlyan  ‘new’,  mamhlyan  ‘more 
bountiful’,  yajlydn  ‘worshipping  more’,  yodhlyan  ‘more  warlike’,  vanlyan 
‘imparting  more’,  varlyan  ‘better’,  z >  dr  sly  an  (VS.  xxm.  48)  ‘higher’,  vasyan 


1  Also  the  transition  forms  ida-praj asas 
(TS.  1.5.6-  MS.  1.  53,  p.  70). 

2  The  form  vayam  is  perhaps  contracted 
for  vayasdni  ([.  1 65 x5  etc.);  see  Lanman 

5523- 

3  All  the  Mss.  read  amhasu\  see  Whitney’s 
note  on  AV.  VI.  352. 

4  The  form  apdsu  (vm.  41^)  is  perhaps 


for  m.  apassic •  cp.  Wackernagel  I,  p.  ill, 
note. 

5  Cp.  J.  Schmidt  KZ.  26,  377—400  ;  Hirt, 
IF.  12,  201  f. 

6  As  in  the  -inant,  -vant  and  -vdms  stems. 

7  On  the  Sandhi  of  these  nominatives  see 
Lanman  514  (middle). 

8  Cp.  Reichelt,  BB.  27,  104  b 


234  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

‘better’,  vcdlyan  ‘knowing  better’,  sreyan  ‘better’,  sdnlyan  (TS.  111.  5.  5-)  ‘winning 
much’,  sa/uyan  ‘mightier’,  skdbhlyan  ‘supporting  more  firmly’. 

N.  A.  n.  fjlyas  ‘straighter’,  ojiyas,  kdnlyas x,  jydyas,  tdvTyas,  ddviyas 
‘farther’,  drdghlyas  ‘longer’,  ndvlyas ,  ndvyas,  nedlyas  ‘quite  near’,  preyas 
‘dearer’,  bhdyas 2  ‘more’,  vdrlyas ,  vdrsiyas ,  vdsiyas  (TS.  VS.),  vdsyas,  sreyas 
(TS.  VS.),  svddlyas  ‘sweeter’. 

A.  m.  jydyainsam ,  tdzyamsam ,  drdg/i lyamsam,  navyamsam,  paziydmsam 
‘more  wonderful’,  varslyamsam  (AV.),  sdsTyanisam*  ‘more  frequent’,  sreyamsam , 
sdhtydmsam  (AV.). 

I.  m.  jdvlyasa ,  ndvyasa ,  bhdyasa ,  sdhiyasa  (Kh.  1.  i1).  —  n.  tejlyasa 
‘keener’,  tvdksiyasa  ‘very  strong’,  ndviyasa ,  ndvyasa ,  pdnyasa ,  bhdvlyasa 
‘more  abundant’,  bhdyasa ,  vdsyas  a ,  sdhiyasa. 

D  .m.  tdvyase ,  ndviyase,  pdmyase,pa?iyase,  bdhyase( AV.)  ‘mightier’,  vdrsiyase 
(VS.  xvi.  30),  sreyase  (VS.  xxxi.  11),  sdnyase  ‘older’,  sdhyase,  hdniyase 

(VS.  xvi.  40)  ‘more  destructive’.  —  n.  ndviyase ,  ndvyase ,  sdnyase. 

Ab.  m.  tdvJyasas ,  rdbhyasas  ‘more  violent’,  sdhiyasas ,  sd/iyasas.  — 
n.  bhdyasa s. 

G.  m.  kdniyasas ,  jydyasas,  tdvyasas ,  ndviyasas ,  ndvyasas,  bhdyasas.  — 
n.  ndvyasas. 

L.  m.  vdrsjyasi  (VS.  vi.  11),  sdhiyasi.  —  V.  m.  ojiyas ,  jydyas. 

PI.  N.  m.  tiksniyamsas  (AV.)  ‘sharper’,  bhdiyamsas  (TS.  VS.  AV.), 
sre'yamsas.  —  n.  ndzyamsi. 

A.  m.  kdniyasas ,  ziedlyasas ,  bhdyasas ,  rdbhlyasas  (VS.  xxi.  46),  vdrslyasas 
(AV.),  vasyasas ,  vd/uyasas  ‘driving  better’,  sreyasas  (VS.  TS.). 

G.  m.  d-stheyasam  ‘not  firm’  (137).  The  f.  form  ndvyaslnam  is  twice  used 
owing  to  metrical  exigencies  instead  of  navy  as  am  in  agreement  with  marutam 5. 

()'.  Stems  in  -vams. 

347.  The  suffix  -vams6  is  used  to  form  the  stem  of  the  perfect  parti¬ 
ciple  active.  Strong  and  weak  stem7 8  are  regularly  distinguished;  but 
the  latter  assumes  two  different  forms  according  as  it  is  followed  by  a  vowel 
or  a  consonant.  The  suffix  is  reduced  before  vowels,  by  loss  of  the  nasal 
a.nd  Samprasarana,  to  -z/x  which  becomes  -zat;  before  a  consonant  (i.  e.  /Vz), 
it  is  reduced,  by  loss  of  the  nasal  and  shortening  of  the  vowel,  to  -zw, 
which  becomes  -vats.  The  latter  form  of  the  stem  occurs  only  three  times 
in  the  RV.  There  are  thus  three  stems  employed  in  the  inflexion  of  these 
participles:  -vams,  -vat,  -us.  The  weakest  form  of  the  stem  (-zat)  appears 
instead  of  the  strong  twice  in  the  A.  sing.  m.  and  once  in  the  N.  pi.  m. 
The  accent  rests  on  the  suffix  in  all  its  forms  except  in  compounds  formed 
with  the  negative  a-  or  with  jzz-  ‘well’  and  z/zzi--  ‘ill’,  where  it  shifts  to  these 
particles.  This  declension  is  restricted  to  the  m.  and  n.,  as  the  f.  is  formed 
by  adding  -r  to  the  weakest  stem,  as  jagmus-l-  ‘having  gone’.  There  are 
altogether  (including  compounds)  about  75  stems  in  -vams  in  the  RV. 

Inflexion. 

348.  No  specifically  n.  forms  occur  except  two  in  the  A.  sing.  No  L. 
has  been  met  with  in  any  number;  all  the  other  weak  cases  are  wanting  in 


1  The  form  javiyas  occurs  in  VS.  XL.  4  (Isa  I 

upO- 

2  Once  to  be  read  bhavlyas:  Lanman  5144. 

3  Comparative  of  the  root  from  which 
sas-vat-  ‘constant’  is  derived. 

4  To  be  read  sdhyase  in  1.  714. 

5  See  Lanman  515. 


6  On  this  suffix  cp.  J.  Schmidt,  KZ.  26, 
329— 377- 

7  On  the  formation  of  this  perfect  stem, 
see  above  181  and  below  491. 

8  This  form  was  transferred  to  the  N.  A. 
sing.  n.  in  which  no  consonant  (-bh  or  -s) 
followed;  cp.  44  a,  3. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Consonant  Stems. 


235 


the  dual  as  well  as  the  D.  Ab.  in  the  plural.  The  V.  sing.  m.  is  regularly 
formed  with  -z /as1.  The  forms  actually  occurring,  if  made  from  cakrvdms- 
‘ having  done’,  would  be  the  following: 

Sing.  N.  m.  cakrvan.  A.  m.  cakrvdmsam,  n.  cakrvdt.  I.  cakrusa . 
D.  m.  cakruse.  Ab.  cakrusas.  G.  cakrusas.  V.  m.  cakrvas.  —  Du.  N.  A.  m. 
cakrvdmsa.  —  PI.  N.  m.  cakrvdinsas.  A.  m.  cakrusas.  I.  m.  cakrvddbhis . 
G.  m.  cakrusdm. 

The  forms  actually  occurring  are  the  following: 

Sing.  N.  m.  a-cikitvan 2  ‘not  knowing’,  d-prosivan  ‘not  gone  away’3, 
a-rarivdn  ‘not  liberal’,  d-vidvan 4  ‘not  knowing’,  cakrvdn  ‘having  done’,  cikitvdn 
‘having  noticed’,  jaganvdn  ‘having  gone’,  jaghanvdn  ‘having  slain’,  jajnivdn 5 
‘having  recognized’,  jiglvdn 6 7  ‘having  conquered’,  jujurvdn  ‘having  grown  old’, 
jujusvdn  ‘having  enjoyed’,  jnjuvdn  ‘having  sped’,  tatanvdn  ‘having  stretched’, 
tasthivdn  ‘having  stood’,  dadasvdni  ‘having  bitten’,  dadasvdn  ‘become  ex¬ 
hausted’,  dadrsvdn  ‘having  seen’,  dadvdin  ‘having  given’,  dadlumvdji 8  ‘having 
streamed’,  dadhrsvdn  ‘having  become  bold’,  dasvdn 4  ‘worshipping’,  dldivdn 
‘having  shone’,  nir-j agmivdn  (TS.  iv.  2.  14)  ‘having  gone  out’,  papivdn  ‘having 
drunk’ 9,  pupusvdn  ‘having  made  abundant’,  babhuvdn  ‘having  become’,  bibhlvdn 
‘having  feared’,  mamrvdn  ‘having  died’,  midhvdn 4  ‘bountiful’,  yayivdn  ‘having 
gone’,  rarivdn  ‘having  given’,  rurukvdn  ‘having  shone’,  vavanvdn  ‘having 
accepted’,  vidvdn 4  knowing’,  vivikvdn 10  ‘having  divided’,  vividvdn  ‘having 
found’,  vividhvdn 1 1  ‘having  wounded’,  susukvdn 12  ‘having  shone’,  susruvdn, 
‘having  heard’,  sasavdn  ‘having  won’,  sasahvdn  ‘having  conquered’,  sahvdn 4 
‘having  overcome’. 

A.  m.  lyivdmsam  13  ‘having  gone’,  cakrvdmsam,  cakhvdmsam  14  ‘stretching 
out’,  cikitvdmsam ,  jagrvdmsam  ‘waking’,  jujuvdrnsam ,  tastabhvdmsam  ‘having 
held  fast’,  tasthivdmsam ,  dasvdmsam 4’,  dldivamsam ,  dur-vidvamsam  ‘ill-disposed’, 
papivdinsam 15,  paptivdmsam  ‘having  flown’,  pipivdijisam  ‘having  swelled’, 
mamrvdinsa?n ,  ririhvdmsam  ‘having  licked’,  vavrvdmsam  ‘having  enclosed’, 
vavrdhvdimsam  ‘having  grown  strong’,  vidvdmsam 4,  (pra-)viviHvdvtsam  (TS.  iv. 
7.151),  susuvdmsam  ‘having  increased’,  sasavdmsam,  sasrvdmsajn  ‘having 
sped’,  sasakvdmsam,  su-vidvainsam 4  ‘knowing  well’,  susupvdmsa?n  ‘having 
slept’,  susuvdmsam  ‘having  pressed  (Soma)’.  —  Weak  forms  for  strong: 
cakrusam  (x.  1 3 7 1 )  for  cakrvdmsam ;  emusatn  (vm.  66'°)16  ‘dangerous’. 

A.  n.  tatanvdt  ‘extending  far’,  sam-vavrtvdt  ‘enveloping’. 

I.  m.  d-bibhyusa  ‘fearless’,  cikitusa  ‘wise’,  vidusa 4.  —  n.  a-bibhyusd , 
bibhyusa. 

D.  m.  d-raruse ,  ucuse 17  ‘pleased’,  cakruse,  cikituse,  jagmuse  ‘ having  gone’, 
jigyuse,  dadasuse  ‘worshipping’,  das  use 16 ,  bib  hy  use,  milhuse lS,  viduse l8,  seduse 19 
‘having  sat  down’. 

Ab.  m.  d-rarusas,  jujurusas.  —  n.  tastkusas20. 


1  Cp.  the  -mant  and  -vant  stems  (316) 
and  the  -yams  stems  (346). 

2  On  the  Sandhi  of  these  nominatives  see 
LANMAN  512. 

3  From  pra  and  ‘dwell’. 

4  Without  reduplication. 

5  From  jhd-  ‘know’. 

6  From  ji-  ‘conquer’. 

7  From  dams-  ‘bite’. 

8  From  dhanv-  ‘run’. 

9  Lanman  adds  paprivdu (?). 

10  From  zvA  ‘separate’. 


11  From  vyadfi -  ‘pierce’. 

12  From  jW-  ‘shine’. 

From  z'-  ‘go’. 

J4  From  a  root  Z7za-. 

15  Lanman  adds  paprivainsa?n(l!). 

16  From  am-  ‘be  injurious’,  with  weak 
stem,  together  with  anomalous  accent,  for 
* e m-i-vam sam ;  cp.  Lanman  5123. 

U  From  uc-  ‘find  pleasure’. 

18  Unreduplicated  form. 

*9  From  sad-  ‘sit  down’. 

-°  This  may  be  A.  pi.  m. 


236 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


G.  m.  d-dasusas  ‘not  worshipping’,  d-rarusas ,  lyusas,  cikitusas ,  jagmusas , 
jaghnusas ,  j anus  as 1  ‘knowing’,  jigyusas ,  tatarusas  ‘having  crossed’,  tasthusas, 
dadusas,  das  us  as 5,  dldiyusas,  papusas ,  bibhyusas ,  mamrusas  (AV.),  mllZiusas 5, 
vividusas  ‘having  found’,  sedusas,  susuvusas.  —  n.  vavavr usas 2  ‘enveloping’. 

V.  m.  cikitvas  ‘seeing’,  titirvas  ‘having  crossed’,  didivas  ‘shining’,  midhvas 5. 

—  With  -pa/7:  cikitvan 3  (AV.). 

Du.  N.  A.  m.  okivdvisa 4  ‘accustomed  to’,  jaganvdmsa ,  jagrvdmsa ,  tasthi- 
vdvisa,  dldivdyisa ,  papivdmsd ,  ravanvdmsd ,  vidvamsa 5,  susuvamsa ,  susruvdmsd . 

—  With  aw:  vidvdyisau 5. 

PI.  N.  m.  d-vidvamsas ,  cakrvdmsas ,  cikitvdmsas,  jaksivdmsas  (TS.  1. 4.  442) 
‘having  eaten’,  jaganvdmsas,  jdgrvdyisas ,  jiglvdmsas,  tasthivdyisas,  titirvd visas , 
tustuvdmsas  ‘having  praised’,  dadrvdmsas  ‘having  burst’,  dasvd visas 5,  papivd visas 
(TS.  1.  4.  442),  paptivd visas,  mldhvd visas 5,  ririkvdyisas 6  ‘having  abandoned’, 
vidvdmsas  5,  susukvdmsas,  susuvd visas,  sasavdyisas ,  sasrvamsas,  sasa/ivd visas, 
sahvd visas5,  su-vidva visas  (TS.  iv.  6.  52),  susupvdmsas.  —  Weak  form  for 
strong:  a-bibhyusas1  (1.  n5).  The  AV.  has  the  hybrid  form  bhakti- 
vd  visas 8. 

A.  m.  cikitusas,  jagmusas ,  jigyusas,  tasthusas ,  das  us  as5,  mllhusas 5, 
vidusas  5,  sedusas. 

I.  m.  jagrvddbhis.  —  G.  m.  d-dasusam  5,  jigyusdm,  dadusam,  niil/iusam 5, 
vidus  dm 5 . 


2.  Radical  Stems  in  -s. 


349.  This  declension  comprises  only  radical  stems,  both  monosyllabic 
and  compound,  formed  from  some  dozen  roots,  numbering  altogether  about 
sixty.  Some  forty  of  these  occur  in  the  m.,  nearly  thirty  in  the  f,  and  half  a 
dozen  in  the  n.  Nine  monosyllabic  stems  are  f.,  viz.  a'a/-  ‘worship’,  oV/- 
‘direction’,  oAr-  ‘look’,  //wV-  ‘night’,  /w/-  ‘sight’,  pis-  ‘ornament’,  prds'-9 *  ‘dispute’, 
Z’/V-  ‘settlement’,  Z77/-  ‘finger’;  but  only  two  m.,  viz.  //-  ‘lord’  and  jr/w/-  ‘spy’; 
all  the  rest  are  compounds,  about  20  of  which  are  formed  from  oAf-.  The 
inflexion  is  the  same  in  all  genders:  the  only  n.  forms  which  would  differ 
from  the  m.  and  f.  (N.  A.  du.  and  pi.)  do  not  occur. 


a.  The  only  trace  of  the  distinction  of  strong  and  weak  forms  appears  in  the 
nasalization  of  the  stem  in  the  N.  sing.  m.  of  some  half  dozen  compounds  of 
‘look’ro. 

b.  As  the  j  represents  an  old  palatal  (40),  it  normally  becomes  the  cerebral 
before  terminations  beginning  with  6/?,  as  vid-bhis\  but  in  and  -r/W-  it  becomes  a 
guttural,  owing  doubtless  to  the  influence  of  the  k  in  the  N.  sing,  and  L.  pi.  It  regularly 
becomes  k  before  the  -Si/  of  the  L.  pi.,  where  it  is  phonetic  (43  b  2);  it  usually  also 
becomes  k  in  the  N.  sing,  (which  originally  ended  in  -  A  But  in  four  stems  it  is  represented 
by  the  cerebral  /,  e.  g.  vit,  owing  to  the  influence  of  forms  in  which  the  cerebral  is 
phonetic.  In  pur 0- das  ‘sacrificial  cake’,  the  palatal  is  displaced  by  the  -s  of  the  N.11. 


1  Unreduplicated  form  from  jna-  ‘know’. 

2  With  anomalous  additional  reduplicative 
syllable. 

3  AV.  VII.  971  for  cikitvas  of  the  corre¬ 
sponding  verse  of  the  RV.  (ill.  29*6),  as  if 
from  a  -va?it  stem. 

4  From  uc-  ‘be  wont’. 

5  Without  reduplication. 

6  From  ric -  ‘leave’. 

7  See  Lanman  5133. 

3  In  AV.  vi.  793  for  the  reading  of  the 

edition  bhaktiva msah  syama  the  Paipp.  has 

bhaksimahi. 


9  From  pras-  ‘question’.  Lanman  wrould 
correct  the  reading  of  AV.  II.  27?  to  prasi, 
explaining  the  word  as  a  compound  ( pra-as -), 
where  the  accent  prasi  would  be  regular. 

i°  That  is,  -drn,  which  in  its  three  occur¬ 
rences  in  the  RV.  appears  before  vowels 
and  doubles  the  if.  -dphh. 

11  It  cannot,  however,  have  been  directly 
ousted  by  the  N.  -s  (the  former  existence  of 
which  in  consonant  stems  must  have  been 
long  forgotten),  but  was  doubtless  due  to 
the  influence  of  a-  stems,  such  as  dravino- 
da-s. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Consonant  Stems. 


237 


c.  There  are  two  transition  forms  to  the  a- declension  from  puro-dds - :  puroiasena 
(VS.  XIX.  85)  and  puroddsa-vaisd  (AV.  XII.  435)  ‘having  a  sacrificial  cake  as  a  calf’.  The 
D.  infinitive  dps  dye  is  a  transition  to  the  z-declension,  for  drs-e 1. 


L. 

D, 


Inflexion. 

350.  The  normal  forms  actually  occurring,  if  made  from  vis-  f.  ‘settle¬ 
ment’,  would  be  as  follows: 

Sing.  N.  V.  vit.  A.  visam.  I.  vis'd.  D.  vise.  Ab.  visas.  G.  visas . 
visi.  —  Du.  N.  A.  visa  and  visau .  —  PI.  N.  visas.  A.  visas.  I.  vidbhis. 
Ab.  vidbhyds.  G.  vis  fan.  L.  viksii. 

Forms  which  actually  occur  are  the  following: 

Sing.  N.  m.  1.  with  nasalized  stem:  kl-drh1  2 3  ‘of  what  kind?’,  sa-drii 3 
‘resembling’;  in  VS.  xvii.  81:  anya-drh  ‘of  another  kind’,  T-drii  ‘such’,  prdti - 
sadrii  ‘similar’4 5.  —  2.  ending  in  -k:  i-drk  (AV.),  eta-drk  ‘such’,  ta-drk  ‘such’, 
divi-sprk  ‘touching  heaven’,  ni-sprks  ‘caressing’,  yd-drk  ‘of  what  kind’,  ranvd - 
samdrk  ‘appearing  beautiful’,  svar-drk  ‘seeing  light’,  hiranya-samdrk  ‘resembling 
gold’,  hrdi-sprk  ‘touching  the  heart’.  —  3.  ending  in  -t:  spat ;  vi-spdt1 spy’. — 
4.  ending  in  -s:  puro-dds  ‘sacrificial  cake’  (occurs  twice). 

f.  2.  ending  in  -k:  dik  (VS.  AV.),  ndk;  an-apa-sprk  (AV.)  ‘not  refusing’, 
upa-drk  ‘aspect’,  ran v a- samdrk,  sam-drk  ‘appearance’,  su-drslka-samdrk  ‘having 
a  beautiful  appearance’.  —  3.  ending  in  - 1 :  vit;  vi-pat  (‘fetterless’)  N.  of  a  river. 

N.  A.  n.  eta-drk 6,  su-samdrk  ‘handsome’;  ta-drk  may  be  a  neuter  in  v.  44b. 

A.  m.  spas  am  \  puro-dds  am ;  upari-sprsam  ‘reaching  above’,  divi-sprsam , 
hrdi-sprsam ;  tvesd-samdrsam  ‘of  brilliant  appearance’,  pisanga-samdrsa/n  ‘of 
reddish  appearance’,  ranva-samdrsam ,  su-samdrsam ;  dure-drsam  ‘visible  far 
and  wide’,  su-drsam  ‘well-looking’,  svar-drsam ;  dura-adisam1  ‘announcing  far 
and  wide’.  —  f.  disam ,  prdsam  (AV.),  vis  am ;  a-disam  ‘intention’,  rta-sprsam 
‘connected  with  pious  works’,  pisahga-samdrsam  (AV.),  pra-disam  ‘direction’, 
vi-pasam ,  sukra-pisam  ‘radiantly  adorned’,  sam-drsam. 

I.  m.  visva-pisa  ‘all-adorned’,  su-samdrsa 6.  —  f.  das'a9,  disa ,  pisa,  visd ; 
pra-disa.  —  n.  divi-sprsa ,  dure-drsa. 

D.  m.  anar-vise  ‘seated  on  the  car’,  i-drse ,  divi-sprse ,  du-dase  (AV.) 
‘irreligious’,  dure-drse.  —  f.  dise  (AV.  VS.),  vise',  sam-drsexo. 

Ab.  m.  svar-drsas.  —  f.  (AV.),  visas-,  sam-drsas ,  sam-sprsas  (VS. 

xxxvm.  11). 

G.  m.  upa-sprsas  (AV.)  ‘touching’,  divi-sprsas,  prdti-prasas 1 1  (AV.)  ‘counter¬ 
disputant’,  su-drsas ,  svar-drsas ,  hiranya-samdrsas ,  hrdi-sprsas.  —  f.  (AV.), 

visas.  —  n.  sadana-sprsas  ‘coming  into  one’s  house’. 

L.  m.  divi-sprsi.  —  f.  *////  (AV.),  Vv//,  prasi  (AV.),  visi;  pra-disi ,  vi-pasi , 
sam-drsi.  —  V.  m.  tvesa-samdrk. 

Du.  N.  A.  V.  m.  rta-sprsa ,  divi-sprsa  and  divi-sprsa,  mithu-drsa 
‘appearing  alternately’,  svar-drsa.  —  f.  mithu-drsa.  —  With  -on/:  visau. 

PI.  N.  m.  spdsas;  upari-sprsas  (AV.),  rta-sprsas ,  divi-sprsas ,  mandi-ni- 
sprsas  ‘fond  of  Soma’,  ratha-sprsas  ‘touching  the  chariot’,  hrdi-sprsas;  dure- 


1  Cp.  Lanman  490  l 

2  kidfhh  i-  (x.  1 08  ^). 

3  sadrnh  always  before  a-  in  RV.  In  TS. 
II.  2.  8^  (B)  the  final  /£  is  preserved  before 
j- :  sadrnk  samanais. 

4  Also  sadfh:  all  four  before  <ra.  Cp. 
Lanman  4561  and  4631. 

5  From  ni-sprs-,  BR.,  Grassmann,  Lanman; 

from  ni-spfh-  ‘desirous  of’  (loc.),  BoHTLlNGK 

(p\v.). 


6  The  form  mananak  (x.  6D),  perhaps  the 
same  as  manak  ‘a  little’,  is  explained  by 
Grassmann  as  mand-nas  ‘dispelling  wrath’. 

7  For  dure -a- disam. 

8  In  the  Isa  Upanisad  (VS.  XL.  1)  also 
occurs  Jid. 

9  Cp.  Lanman  490  (bottom). 

10  There  is  also  the  transition  form  drsciye. 
Cp.  Whitney’s  note  on  AV*  11.  271.  The 

accent  should  be  prati-prdsas. 


2.^8 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


dfsas,  yaksa-drsas  ‘having  the  appearance  of  a  Yaksa’,  su-drsas ,  svar-drsas ; 
tvesa-samdrsas ,  su-samdrsas ;  visva-pisas ,  su-pisas  ‘well  adorned’ ;  su-sadrsas 

.  1  i  r*  -t  r  f  ft  ■»  i  /  r  /-T-rr*  t  .  1 


u.  y  *  O 

appearance’,  svar-drsas ,  hiranya-sa?ndrsas.  —  f.  disas,  visas,  vrisas;  a-disas, 
pra-disas ,  sam-drs'as. 

I.  m.  su-samdfgbhis.  —  f.  padbhis 1  (iv.  212)  ‘with  looks’,  vidbhis.  — 
D.  f.  digbhyds  (VS.  vi.  19).  —  Ab.  f.  digbhyds ,  vidb/iyds .  —  G.  f.  disam , 
vis  dm ;  a-disam.  —  L.  f.  diksu  (A  V.  VS.),  viksu. 


6.  Radical  stems  in  -A. 

351.  This  declension  comprises  some  80  stems  formed  from  about  a 
dozen  roots.  All  three  genders  appear  in  its  inflexion;  but  the  neuter  is  rare, 
being  found  in  only  two  stems  and  never  in  the  plural.  Of  monosyllabic 
stems  six  or  seven  are  f.,  one  m.,  and  one  n.  All  the  remaining  stems  are 
compounds,  about  three-fourths  of  which  are  formed  from  the  three  roots 
dr iih-,  vah-  and  sa/i-  (over  30  from  the  last).  The  origin  of  the  two  stems 
usnih-  (AV.)  a  metre,  and  sard/t-1 2 3  ‘bee’  is  obscure. 

a.  The  distinction  of  strong  and  weak  appears  in  compounds  of  vah-  and  sah--\ 
the  vowel  being  lengthened  in  the  N.  A.  sing,  and  N.  pi.  m.;  also  in  the  N.  A.  du.  m. 
forms  indra-vdha ,  indra-vdhau,  anad-vdhau ;  and  in  the  f.  sing.  N.  daksina-vat  and  A. 
havya-vaham.  The  strong  stem  - vah -  twice  appears  in  weak  cases,  while  it  is  metrically 
shortened  18  times  in  strong  cases4 5.  The  word  anad-vah -  ‘ox’  (lit.  ‘cart-drawer’) 
distinguishes  three  stems,  the  strong  one  being  anad-vah-,  and  the  weak  anad-uh-  before 
vowels  and  anad-ut- 5  before  consonants. 

b.  As  h  represents  both  the  old  guttural  aspirate  gh  and  the  old  palatal  jh ,  it 
should  phonetically  become  g  and  d  respectively  before  bh.  But  the  cerebral  appears 
for  both  in  the  only  two  case-forms  that  occur  with  a  -bh  ending:  sarddbhyas  from 
sarah-,  and  anad-udbhyas  (AV.)  from  anad-vah-,  where  the  dental  d  takes  the  place  of 
the  cerebral  by  dissimilation.  Before  the  -sit  of  the  L.  pi.,  k  would  be  phonetic;  but 
here  again,  in  the  only  form  occurring,  the  cerebral  appears:  anadutsu 6 *.  On  the  other 
hand  the  phonetic  k  appears  in  the  IN.  sing,  in  the  six  forms  -dhak,  - dhuk ,  -dhruk' ,  -ruk, 
-spfk,  usnik  (AV.) 8 ;  while  the  unphonetic  t  appears  in  the  two  forms  -vdf  and  -sat9.  The 
word  anad-vah-  forms,  instead  of  *anad-vaf,  the  anomalous  anadvdn  as  if  from  a  stem 
in  -vant. 

c.  The  stem  maha-  is  perhaps  a  transfer  to  the  a-declension  from  the  far  more 
frequent  but  defective  mah -  ‘great’.  Several  cases  are  formed  from  it:  sing.  N.  maha-s, 
G.  mahctsya,  L.  mahe ;  pi.  N.  maha  and  mahani,  n.,  G.  mahandm.  The  D.  sing,  mafidye, 
used  as  an  infinitive,  is  a  transfer  to  the  z'-declension  from  mah-. 

Inflexion. 

352.  The  forms  actually  occurring,  if  made  from  sdh-  ‘victorious’,  would 
be  as  follows: 


1  Bloomfield  is  of  opinion  that  here,  as 
well  as  in  the  5  other  passages  in  which 
this  form  occurs  in  the  RV.,  it  means  ‘with 
feet’;  Johns  Hopkins  University  Circular,  1906, 

p.  15—19. 

2  That  the  h  here  represents  an  original 
guttural  is  shown  by  the  N.  pi.  saraghas 
(SB.)  and  the  derivatives  saraghd-  and 
saragha-  (TB.). 

3  The  Pada  text  has  always  vah-  on  the 
one  hand,  but  sdh-  on  the  other. 

4  Cp.  Lanman  498  (middle). 

5  For  anad-ud,-  by  dissimilation. 

6  The  dental  again  by  dissimilation  for 

the  cerebral  t. 


7  Occurring  respectively  in  usd-dhak  ‘burn¬ 
ing  with  eagerness’,  in  three  compounds  of 
duh-  ‘milk’,  and  in  five  compounds  of  druh- 
‘injure’.  These  three  forms,  together  with 
usar-bhut ,  are  the  only  examples  of  the  resto¬ 
ration  of  initial  aspiration  in  the  declension 
of  the  RV. 

8  The  derivation  of  this  word  (AV.  VS.), 
is  uncertain  ;  it  occurs  in  the  RV.  only  in 
the  extended  form  of  usnihd-. 

9  "When  the  final  h  becomes  t,  the  initial 
s  is  cerebralized. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Consonant  Stems.  239 


Sing.  N.  sat.  V.  m  f.  sat.  A.  m.  f.  sdham.  I.  sahd.  D.  salts.  Ab.  sahas. 
G.  sahas.  L.  said.  —  Du.  N.  A.  V.  m.  f.  sdhd  and  sdhau.  N.  A.  n.  sahi.  — 
PI.  N.  V.  m.  f.  sdhas.  A.  m.  sahas  and  sahas,  f.  sahas.  D.  m.  f.  sad-bhyas  h 
G.  m.  saham.  L.  m.  sat s id. 

The  forms  actually  occurring  are  the  following: 

Sing.  N.  m.  1.  with  - k :  usa-dhak  ‘burning  with  eagerness’;  go-dhuk 
‘milkman’,  prati-dhuk1  2  (AV.  TS.)  ‘fresh  milk’;  aksnaya-dhruk  ‘injuring  wrongly’, 
a-dhruk  ‘free  from  malice’,  antaka-dhruk  ‘demon  of  death’,  abhi-dhruk 
‘inimical’,  asma-dhruk  ‘inimical  to  us’. 

2.  with  -t:  sdt;  abhi-sdt  ‘overpowering’,  rsi-sdt  ‘overcoming  the  seer’, 
jana-sat  ‘overcoming  men’,  tura-sdt  ‘overpowering  quickly’,  nis-sdt  ‘over¬ 
powering’,  m-sdp  (AV.)  ‘overcoming’,  pura-sdt  ‘victorious  from  of  old’,  prtana- 
sdt  ‘conquering  hostile  armies’,  prasu-sdt  ‘finishing  swiftly’,  bhuri-sdt 4  ‘bearing 
much’,  rayi-sdt  ‘ruling  over  wealth’,  vane-sdt  ‘prevailing  in  woods’,  vird-sdt 5 
‘ruling  men’,  visvd-sdt6  (AV.)  ‘all-conquering’,  vrthd-sdt  ‘conquering  easily’, 
satru-sdt1 8  (AV.)  ‘overcoming  foes’,  satra-sdt  ‘always  conquering’;  turya-vdt 
(TS.  iv.  3.  32)  ‘four-year-old  ox’,  ditya-vdp  (VS.  xiv.  10;  TS.  iv.  7.  io1)  ‘two- 
year-old  ox’,  pastha-vdt  (VS.  xiv.  9)  ‘four-year-old  ox’9,  madhyama-vdt  ‘driving 
at  middling  speed’,  havir-vdit  ‘conveying  the  oblation’,  havya-vdt  ‘conveying 
the  offering’.  —  Irregular  form:  anad-vdn  (AV.  TS.  VS.)  ‘ox’10. 

f.  1.  1 milk  (VS.  AV.)  a  metre,  gartd-n'ik 11  ‘ascending  the  car-seat’,  sabar- 
dhuk  ‘yielding  nectar’.  —  2.  daksina-vdt  ‘borne  to  the  right’ I2.  —  n.  r.  puru- 
spfk  ‘much  desired’. 

A.  m.  1.  Strong  forms  with  -vdham  and  -saham  (after  a)  or  -sdham 
(after  I  or  r):  anad-vdham ,  turya-vdham  (VS.  xxvm.  28),  ditya-vdham  (VS. 
xxvm.  25),  pastha-vdham  (VS.  xxvm.  29),  vlra-vdham  ‘conveying  men’,  svasti - 
vdham  ‘bringing  welfare’,  havya-vdham  (also  f.);  pra-sdham  ‘victorious’,  yajhd- 
sdham 13  ‘mighty  in  sacrifice’,  visvd-sdham ,  satra-sdham;  abhimati-sdham  ‘con¬ 
quering  adversaries’,  rti-sdham  ‘subduingassailants’,  nr-sdham  ‘overcoming  men’, 
prt and- sdham 14 .  —  With  metrical  shortening  of  -sdih-  or  -sd/t-  :  rtl-sdham , 
prtana-sdham 14 ;  cars ani-sd ham  15  ‘ruling  over  men’ ,  pra-sdham,  vibhva-sdham 
‘overcoming  the  rich’,  sadd-sdham  ‘always  holding  out’.  —  2.  a-druham ,  puru - 
sprham.  —  f.  guham  ‘hiding-place’,  dr u ham  ‘fiend’,  mlham  ‘mist’;  usniham 
(VS.  xxvm.  25);  parT-ndham  ‘enclosure’. 

I.  m.  dhanva-sdhd  ‘skilled  in  archery’,  puru-sprhd ,  visu-druha  ‘injuring 
in  various  parts’.  —  f.  guhd 16 ,  dru/td ,  mahd  ‘great’;  usnihd  (VS.  xxi.  13);  pra- 
sdhd 17  ‘might’,  vi-sruha  ‘plant’.  —  n.  mahd. 

D.  m.  druhe l8,  malts ;  a-druhe,  abhi-druhe ,  abhimdti-sdhe 19  (TS.  v.  2.  73), 
carsanT-sahe'S , satra-sdhe 20.  —  f.  malts \  usmhe{N S.xxiv.  1 2 )\go-duhe2x.  —  n.  malts. 


1  To  be  inferred  from  anadudbhyas  and 
anadutsu. 

2  There  is  no  evidence  to  show  the  gender 
of  this  word. 

3  For  ni-sat. 

‘  / 

4  For  bhn?'i-sat. 

5  For  vira-sat. 

6  For  visva-sdt. 

7  For  satru-sdt. 

8  Here  ditya-  seems  to  be  =  dvitlya-. 

9  Probably  from  pastha-  =  prstha -  ‘back’. 
The  TS.  (iv.  3.  32  etc.)  has  pastha-vat  with 
dental  7  for  cerebral  /. 

10  There  is  also  the  transfer  form  maha-s, 
supplying  the  place  of  a  N.  of  mah-. 

11  For  garla-ruk. 


12  The  N.  of  sarah -  ‘bee’,  occurs  as  sard/ 
in  TS.  v.  3.  I22  (B)  and  in  SB.  xm.  3.  I4. 

For  yajna- saham. 

14  With  unphonetic  cerebral  after  a  owing 
to  the  influence  of  the  N.  prtand-sdt. 

15  The  s  is  here  not  cerebralized  after  1. 

16  guhd  which  occurs  53  times  (beside 
guhd,  once)  is  used  adverbially,  ‘in  secret’, 
with  retracted  accent. 

17  From  pra-sah,  beside  pra-sah-. 

18  This  form  is  perhaps  f. 

z9  Strong  form  for  weak. 

20  Strong  form  for  weak  (11.  212),  but  the 
Pada  text  has  satrd-sdhe. 

21  There  is  also  a  transfer  to  the  /-de¬ 
clension:  mahaye  (as  an  infinitive). 


240  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

Ab.  m.  druhds ,  mahds ;  rti-sdhas.  —  f.  druhds  \  —  n.  mahds. 

G.  m.  druhds ,  mahds1 2;  a-druhas ,  anaduhas  (AV.),  prtand-sahas;  with 
strong  form:  abhimati-srfhas 3.  —  f.  druhds,  mihds;  pra-sdhas.  —  n.  mahds; 
puru-sprhas. 

L.  m.  anaduhi  (AV.)4.  —  f.  upa-ndhi  (AV.)  ‘shoe’,  parJ-ndhi  (AV.). 

V.  1.  m.  turd-sdt  (VS.  x.  22),  prtand-sat  (AV.),  havya-vdt.  —  2.  m.  £•<?- 
dhuk  (AV.).  —  f.  d-dhruk 5. 

Du.  N.  A.  V.  1.  m.  anad-zuihau ,  indra-vdha  and  indra-vdhau  ‘conveying 
Indra’,  dhur-sahau  (VS.iv. 33)  ‘bearing  the  yoke’;  shortened:  carsam-saha, 
ratha-sdha  ‘drawing  the  chariot’.  —  2.  m.  a-druha,  dn-abhidruha  ‘not  inimical’, 
puru-sprha.  —  f.  a-druha ,  a-druha.  —  n.  mahi. 

PI.  N.V.  1.  m.  anad-vdhas  (AV.),  indra-vdhas,  turya-vdhas  (VS.xxiv.  1 2), 
ditya-vtihas  (VS.),  pastha-vdhas  (VS.),  prsti-vdhas  (AV.)  ‘carrying  on  the 
sides’,  vajra-vdhas  ‘wielding  a  thunderbolt’,  vira-vdhas ,  saha-vdhas  ‘drawing 
together’,  susthu-vdhas  ‘carrying  well’,  havya-vdhas;  abhimati-sdhas,  satru-sdhas; 
shortened:  V.  carsanT-sahas. —  2.  m.  druhas ,  mahds6;  a-druhas,  V.  a-druhas , 
go-duhas ,  puru-sprhas,  V.  puru-sprhas. 

f. 7  rn'ihas ,  ruhas ‘sprouts’;  a-druhas,  a-ruhas (AV .) ‘shoots’ , ghrta-duhas ‘ giving 
ghee’,  puru-druhas  ‘injuring  greatly’,  puru-sprhas,  pra-ruhas  (AV.)  ‘shoots’, 
mano-muhas  (AV.)  ‘bewildering  the  mind’,  vi-sruhas. 

A.  m.  druhds 8,  mahds*,  a-druhas ,  anaduhas  (AV.),  puru-sprhas.  — 
f.  druhas,  nihas 0  (AV.  VS.)  ‘destroyers’,  mihas,  ruhas  (AV.) ;  aksa-ndhas 
‘tied  to  the  axle’,  a-druhas,  upa-ruhas  ‘shoots’,  pra-ruhas  (AV.),  sam-dihas 
‘mounds’. 

D.  m.  anadudbhyas  (AV.)  —  f.  sarddbhyas  ‘bees’.  —  G.  m.  mahdm10, 
carsanT-sdham  (VS.  xxvm.  1).  —  L.  m.  anadutsu. 

7.  Stems  in  semivowels:  /%  /,  y. 

353.  This  group  forms  a  transition  from  the  consonant  to  the  vowel 
declension  inasmuch  as  the  stem  often  assumes  a  vocalic  form  before  endings 
with  initial  consonant,  and  in  some  cases  takes  endings  which  otherwise  appear 
in  the  vowel  declension  only.  The  -r  stems  are  nearest  the  consonant 
declension  as  their  radical  division  conforms  almost  without  exception  to  that 
type;  their  derivative  division,  however,  has  several  points  in  common  with 
the  inflexion  of  vowel  stems. 


1.  Stems  ending  in  -r. 

354.  A.  Radical  stems.  Here  the  stems  ending  in  radical  r  must  be 
distinguished  from  those  in  which  the  r  belongs  to  a  suffix.  The  radical 
stems  numbering  over  50  are  formed  from  some  sixteen  roots,  the  vowel  of 
which  is  nearly  always  i  or  u.  Only  three  of  these  stems  contain  a  and 
only  two  a.  Nearly  a  dozen  are  monosyllabic,  but  the  rest  (numbering 
over  40)  are  compounds,  almost  a  dozen  of  which  are  formed  with  -tur. 


1  amhas  (vi.  31)  is  probably  not  an  Ab.  of 
amh-  ‘distress’  (which  does  not  occur  else¬ 
where),  but  by  haplology  for  amhas-as,  which 
is  very  frequent. 

2  There  is  also  the  transition  form 

mahdsya. 

3  The  Pada  text  has  -sdhas. 

4  There  is  also  the  transition  form  make 
(m.  n.). 

5  See  Whitney’s  note  on  AV.  vn.  736. 


6  With  irregular  accent. 

7  There  are  no  neuters  except  the  trans¬ 
ition  forms  mahd  and  mahani. 

8  With  irregular  accent  as  if  weak  forms. 
Cp.  above  94,  note  6  and  Lanman  501  (middle). 

9  The  derivation  of  this  word  is  uncertain: 
it  is  explained  by  Mahldhara  as  =  nihantr-. 
Whitney  (AV.  11.  6^)  would  emend  to  nidas. 

10  There  is  also  the  transition  form 
mahanam. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Consonant  Stems. 


241 


The  inflexion  is  the  same  in  all  genders  except  the  N.  A.  neuter.  A  pecu¬ 
liarity  is  the  lengthening  of  the  radical  i  and  u  when  a  consonant  ending 
follows  or  originally  followed l. 

a.  The  distinction  of  strong  and  weak  appears  in  dvcir-  f.  ‘door’,  which  is  reduced 
to  dur-  in  weak  cases;  in  tar-  and  star -  ‘star’,  from  which  are  made  taras  and  stfbhis ; 
and  in  the  n.  svar  ‘light’  two  weak  cases,  the  D.  and  G.  sing.,  are  formed  from  the  con¬ 
tracted  stem  stir-. 

b.  There  are  here  a  few  transitions  to  the  a-declension :  satd-durasya  and  satd- 
duresu  ‘having  a  hundred  doors’,  which  started  from  weak  cases  like  dur  as ;  su-dhura-s , 
N.  sing.  m.  ‘well-yoked’,  due  to  the  A.  su-dkur-am ;  perhaps  also  the  A.  sing.  f.  dn-apa- 
sphurd-m  ‘not  pushing  away’,  which  occurs  beside  the  N.  pi.  dn-apa-sphttr-as2.  On  the 
other  hand  the  N.  pi.  m.  vandhur-as  ‘car-seats’  seems  to  be  a  transition  from  the 
^-declension,  as  vandhura-  is  probably  the  older  stem. 

c.  The  form  yan-tur-am  ‘guide’,  which  occurs  twice  for  yan-tdr-am  has  been  formed 
as  if  from  tur  owing  to  the  parallelism  with  ap  turam  which  once  appears  beside  it3. 


Inflexion. 

355.  The  forms  actually  occurring,  if  made  from  pur-  f.  ‘stronghold’, 
would  be  as  follows: 

Sing.  N.  pfir.  A.  puram.  I.  purd.  D.  pure.  Ab.  purds.  G.  purds. 
L.  purl.  —  Du.  N.  A.  pur  a  and  purau.  ■ —  PI.  N.  V.  pur  as.  A.  pur  as. 
I.  purbhls.  D.  purbhyds  (VS.).  G.  purdm.  L.  pursu. 

The  forms  actually  occurring  are  as  follows: 


Sing.  N.  m. 


gir 


‘praising’,  z Gr4  ‘protector’;  muhur-gir  ‘swallowing 


suddenly’;  dur-asir  ‘badly  mixed’;  rajas-tfir  ‘traversing  the  air’,  ratha-thr 
‘drawing  a  chariot’,  visva-tdr  ‘all-surpassing’,  su-pra-ttir  ‘very  victorious’5.  — 
f.  gir  ‘praise’,  dvCir  (AV.)  ‘door’,  dhdr  ‘burden’,  pfir\  ama-jdr  ‘aging  at  home’, 
d-sir°  (AV.  TS.)  ‘mixture’. 

N.  A.  n.  vdr  ‘water’,  suar 7  ‘light’3,  suvar  (TS.  11.  2.  121). 

A.  m.  turam  ‘promoter’;  ap-turam 9  ‘active’,  dji-turam  ‘victorious  in 
battles’,  rajas-turam ,  ratha-turam ,  vrtra-turam  ‘conquering  enemies’;  a-juravi 
‘unaging’,  apa-sphiiram  ‘bounding  forth’,  rta-juram  ‘grown  old  in  (observing) 
the  law’,  gdvasiram  ‘mixed  with  milk’,  ydvasiram  ‘mixed  with  corn’,  sahdsra- 
dvaram  ‘having  a  thousand  doors’,  su-dhuram  ‘well  yoked’10.  —  f.  glram , 
dvdram  (AV.),  dhuram,  puram\  d-srram,  upa-stiram  ‘cover’,  savi-giram  ‘assent’. 

I.  m.  bdndhura 11  (AV.)  ‘binder’ (?).  —  f.  gird,  dhurd,  purd\  abhi-pra-mura 
‘crushing’,  abhi-svdrd  ‘invocation’,  a-slrd.  —  n.  visva-turd. 

D.  m.  gird)  nis-ture  ‘overthrowing’.  —  f.  upa-stire.  —  n.  sure. 

Ab.  f.  dhuras ;  ni-j liras  ‘consuming  by  fire’. 

G.  m.  gdvasiras ,  ydvasiras,  radhra-tiiras  ‘encouraging  the  obedient’.  — 
f.  ama-juras.  —  n.  sfiras  I2;  rdsdsiras  ‘mixed  with  juice’. 


1  That  is,  the  -s  of  the  N.  sing.  m.  and  f. 
This  rule  also  applies  in  vdr  (1.  1323)  if 
Grassmann  is  right  in  explaining  this  form 
as  a  N.  sing.  m.  meaning  ‘protector’,  from 
vdr-  (yr-  ‘cover’);  but  BR.,  s.  v.  var-,  regard 
this  form  as  a  corruption. 

2  In  the  later  language  dvar-  f.  and  pur-  f. 
went  over  to  the  a-  declension  as  dvara-  n.  and 
pura-  n.,  while  vdr-  n.  went  over  to  the  i- 
declension  as  vari-. 

3  See  Lanman  486  (bottom). 

4  If  this  form  is  not  a  corruption. 

5  There  is  also  the  transition  form  su- 
dhura-s. 

6  From  sr-  ‘mix’. 

Indo-arische  Philologie.  I.  1 


7  This  is  the  only  declensional  form  of 
this  word  occurring  in  the  AV. 

8  Neuter  compounds  ending  in  -r  are 
avoided;  thus  the  AV.  has  the  transition 
form  ndva-dvdra-vt,  N.  n. 

9  For  ap-[ci)-s-turam  ‘getting  over  work’. 

10  There  is  also  the  anomalous  form 
yanturam  for  yantdram . 

11  Probably  a  transfer  from  the  «-declen- 
sion. 

12  With  the  accentuation  of  a  dissyllabic 
stem  (suar).  In  vm.  6iJ7  for  sura  a  the 
Pada  text  has  sure  d,  but  it  is  probably  the  G. 
sfiras.  In  1.  6610,  6910  the  uninilected  form 
suar  seems  to  be  used  in  a  G.  sense. 

lb' 


242 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


L.  f.  dhuri ,  purl.  —  n.  suar  \ 

Du.  N.  A.  m.  vrtrci-tura ,  sand-jura  ‘long  grown  old’,  su-dhura.  — 
f.  dr  dm ;  mithas-turd  ‘alternating’;  with  au:  dvdrau ,  dhiirau. 

PL  N.  V.  m.  giras,  giras ,  miiras  ‘destroyers’;  ap-turas ,  a-muras 
‘destroyers’;  gdvasiras ,  try-d  sir  as  ‘mixed  with  three  (products  of  milk)’,  dddhy - 
dsiras  ‘mixed  with  curds’;  dur-dhiiras  ‘badly  yoked’,  dhiya-j liras  ‘grown  old 
in  devotion’,  nis-tiiras ,  bandhiiras  (AV.),  vandhiiras  ‘seat  of  the  chariot’, 
vrtra-t liras  (YS.vi. 34).  —  f.  giras ,  giras  (AV.),  tdras  ‘stars’1 2,  dvaras 3,  dvaras , 
paras-,  dn-apasphuras  ‘not  struggling’,  ama-j liras,  mithas-tiiras. 

A.  m.  giras-,  d-m liras,  gdvasiras ,  mithas-tiiras ,  ydvasiras,  sam-giras, 
su-dhiiras.  —  f.  giras,  diiras 4,  dhiiras ,  piiras,  psiiras 5  ‘victuals’;  ?ii-purasb 
(VS.  AV.),  pard-purasb  (VS.  AV.),  vi-stiras  ‘expansion’,  sam-stiras  ‘con¬ 
traction’. 

I.  m.  rath a-tiirb his.  —  f.  glrbhis,  purbhis1 * * ,  strbhis 8  ‘stars’.  —  D.  n. 
varbhyds  (VS.).  —  G.  m.  sam-asirdm  ‘mixed’.  —  f .  girdm,  purdm.  —  L.  m. 
tursii.  —  f.  girsii,  dhursii ,  pursii.  —  n.  prtsu-tiirsu 9  ‘victorious  in  battle’. 

356.  B.  Derivative  stems.  —  Derivative  stems  ending  in  r  consist 
of  two  groups,  the  one  formed  with  the  suffix  -<?r,  the  other  with  -/#r.  The 
former  is  a  small  group  containing  only  eight  stems,  the  latter  is  a  very 
large  one  with  more  than  150  stems.  Both  groups  agree  in  regularly 
distinguishing  strong  and  weak  cases.  The  strong  stem  ends  in  -ar  or 
-dr,  which  in  the  weak  forms  is  reduced  to  r  before  vowels  and  r  before 
consonants.  Both  groups  further  agree  in  dropping  the  final  of  the  stem  in 
the  N.  sing.  m.  f.,  which  case  always  ends  in  -dlc.  They  resemble  the  vowel 
declension  in  adding  the  ending  -n  in  the  A.  pi.  m.,  and  -s  in  the  A.  pi.  f. 
and  in  inserting  n  before  the  -dm  of  the  G.  pi.  They  have  the  peculiar, 
ending  -ur  in  the  G.  sing. XI. 


a.  Stems  in  -ar. 

357.  There  are  only  five  simple  m.  and  f.  stems  in  -ar,  viz.  us-ar-  t. 
‘dawn’,  dev-dr-  m.  ‘husband’s  brother’,  ndnand-ar-  f.  ‘husband’s  sister’,  ?idr-12  m. 
‘man’,  svdsar- 13  f.  ‘sister’;  and  the  two  compounds  svar-nar-  m.  ‘lord  of  heaven’ 
and  saptd-svasar-  ‘having  seven  sisters’.  Of  these,  us  dr-  shows  only  case- 
forms  according  to  the  consonant  declension,  while  ndr-  and  svdsar-  have 
some  according  to  the  vowel  declension  also.  Of  ndnandar-  only  the  G.  and 
L.  sing,  and  of  dev  dr-  only  the  A.  sing,  and  the  N.  and  L.  pi.  occur.  Nearly 
all  case-forms  are  represented  by  these  five  stems  taken  together.  There  are 
also  the  three  neuters  dh-ar-  ‘day’,  ndh-ar-  ‘udder’,  and  vddh-ar-  ‘weapon’, 
which  occur  in  the  N.  A.  sing.  only.  The  first  two  supplement  the  -an  stems 
d/i-an-  and  fidh-an-  in  those  cases. 


1  This  form  is  used  5  times  as  a  L.  sing, 
dropping  the  -i  like  the  -an  stems,  as  ahan 
beside  ahani. 

2  Strong  form  of  tar-  =  star-  ‘star’.  The 
gender  is  uncertain. 

3  Once  the  weak  form  diiras. 

4  The  strong  form  dvaras  is  once  used. 
The  accentuation  of  a  weak  case,  diiras, 
occurs  once. 

5  Occurring  only  in  X.  263;  it  is  a  n.  sing, 
according  to  BR. 

6  The  meaning  and  derivation  of  these  two 

words  is  uncertain;  see  Whitney’s  note  on 

AV.  xvin.  223. 


7  From  pur-  ‘stronghold’  and  piir -  ‘abun¬ 
dance’. 

8  Weak  form,  accented  like  a  dissyllabic 
stem.  In  Kh.  I.  116  normally  accented,  but 
spelt  with  ri  as  stribhis. 

9  With  L.  pi.  ending  kept  in  the  first 
member. 

In  this  they  resemble  the  N.  m.  of  nouns 
of  the  -an  declension. 

11  Except  ndr-as  and  usr-as. 

12  This  word  is  probably  derived  with  the 
suffix  -ar\  cp.  Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  p.  359. 

1 '  Here  -sar  is  probably  a  root;  cp. 
Brugmann,  op.  cit. ,  2,  p.  8,  footnote. 


VJ.  Declension.  Nouns.  Consonant  Stems. 


243 


Inflexion. 

358.  Sing.  N.  m.  hata-svasa  (A V.)  ‘whose  sisters  have  been  slain’.  — 
f.  svdsa ;  sapta-svasd  ‘having  seven  sisters’.  —  n.  dhar ,  nd/iar ,  vadhar . 

A.  m.  dev  dram ,  ndram.  —  f.  svdsaram.  —  I.  f.  svdsra .  —  D.  m.  ndre\ 
svdr-nare.  —  f.  svasre.  —  Ab.  f.  svdsur1.  —  G.  m.  ndras .  —  f.  usras , 
na?iandur  (AY.),  svdsur.  —  L.  m.  ndri.  —  f.  usri 2 3  and  usrdm 3,  nanandari 4 5. 
—  V.  f.  z/yar. 

Du.  N.  A.  m.  ndra,  V.  zza/vz  and  tiarau.  —  f.  svasdra  and  svdsarau .  — 
L.  f.  svdsros. 

PI.  N.  m.  dev  dr  as,  ndras ,  V.  naras ,  suar-naras.  —  f.  svasaras.  — 
A.  m.  nni  s.  —  f.  usras,  svdsrs.  —  I.  m.  nfbhis.  —  f.  svdsrbhis.  — 
D.  m.  nrbhyas.  —  Ab.  m.  nrbhyas.  —  G.  m.  nardm 6  and  nrndm 7.  — 
f.  svdsram 6  and  svasrnani.  —  L.  devrsu ,  nrsu. 


b.  Stems  in  -far. 

359.  This  group  includes  two  subdivisions,  the  one  forming  its  strong 
stem  in  -tar,  the  other  in  -tar.  The  former  consists  of  a  small  class  of 
five  names  of  relationship:  three  masculines,  pi-tar-  ‘father’,  bhrd-tar-  ‘brother’, 
nap-tar-*  ‘grandson’,  and  two  feminines,  duhi-tdr- ‘daughter’,  and  ma-tdr-  ‘mother’; 
and  the  m.  and  f.  compounds  formed  from  them.  The  second  class  consists 
of  more  than  150  stems  (including  compounds),  which  are  either  agent  nouns 
accented  chiefly  on  the  suffix,  or  participles  accented  chiefly  on  the  root. 
These  are  never  used  in  the  f.,  which  is  formed  with  -l  from  the  weak  stem 
of  the  m.,  e.  g.  jdnitr-T-  ‘mother’  (377). 

a.  This  declension  is  almost  restricted  to  the  m.  and  f.  gender.  The  only  n.  stems 
are  dhar-iar-  ‘prop’,  dhmd-tdr -  ‘smithy’,  stha-tar-* stationary’,  vi-dhar-tdr •  ‘meting  out’;  and 
from  these  only  about  half  a  dozen  forms  occur.  The  only  oblique  cases  met  with  are 
the  G.  sthdtur  and  the  L.  dhmatdri  (Pada  - tari ).  The  N.  A.  sing,  which  might  be  expected 
to  appear  as  -tar,  seems  to  have  attained  to  no  fixity  of  form,  as  it  was  of  extremely 
rare  occurrence.  It  seems  to  be  represented  by  the  following  variations :  sthdtar  (vi.  496), 
sthdtfn  (i.  726),  sthdtur  (i.  5 S^,  6S1,  707),  dhartdri  (IX.  8642;  II.  23U),  vi-dhartdri  (VIII.  592 ; 
ix.  474)9. 

Inflexion. 

360.  The  inflexion  is  exactly  the  same  in  the  m.  and  f.  except  that  the 
A.  pi.  m.  ends  in  -tfn,  but  the  f.  in  -trs. 

The  forms  actually  occurring,  if  made  from  matdr-  f.  ‘mother’,  as  re¬ 
presenting  a  name  of  relationship,  and  from  janitdr-  m.  ‘begetter’,  as  re¬ 
presenting  an  agent  noun,  would  be  as  follows : 

Sing.  N.  matd;  janitd.  A.  matdr  am ;  janitdr  am.  I.  matrd ;  janitrd. 
D.  mated]  janitrd.  Ab.  mdtur]  janitdr.  G.  matdr]  janitdtr.  L.  matdri ; 
janitdri.  V.  mdtar]  jdnitar. 

Du.  N.  A.  matdra  and  matarau]  janitdra  and  janitdrau.  I.  janitrbhyam 
(VS.).  D.  jatiitfbJiyam.  G.  matrds]  janitrds.  L.  main's ;  janitrds. 


1  The  ending  '• ur  in  this  declension 
appears  to  represent  original  -rz  through 
-rr;  cp.  Lanman  426,  Brugmann,  KG.  p.  381 
(middle). 

2  The  metre  requires  usdri.  As  to  the  sr 
cp.  57,  I  a. 

3  The  ending  -am  is  a  transfer  from  the 
l -  declension.  The  metre  requires  usdrdtn  in 
which  -dm  is  added  direct  to  the  stem. 

4  The  metre  requires  ndnandri  (x.  8546). 

5  On  nfn  as  a  metrically  shortened  form 

for  other  cases  see  PlSCHEi.,  VS.  I,  p.  42  f. 


6  The  only  two  forms  in  the  derivative  -{t)ar 
declension  in  which  -dm  is  added  direct  to 
the  stem. 

7  Often  to  be  read  as  nfnctm ;  see  Lan¬ 
man  43. 

8  In  the  RV.  this  stem  occurs  in  weak 
forms  only,  being  supplemented  in  the  strong 
by  ndpat.  The  TS.  (i  3.  41)  however  has 
the  strong  form  ndptdram  with  long  vowel, 
like  svdsaram. 

9  See  Lanman  422  f. 

Hi* 


244 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


PI.  N.  mat  dr  as ;  janitdras.  A.  math,  janitfn.  I.  matrbhis ;  janitrbhis. 
D.  matrbhyas ;  janitrbhyas.  Ab.  matrbhyas ;  janitrbhyas.  G.  mat?  n  Aim ;  jani- 
tr/iAm.  L.  mdtrsu ;  janitrsu.  V.  m  A  tar  as ;  jdnitaras . 

Forms  actually  occurring  are  the  following: 

Sing.  N.  1.  m.  pitA ,  bhrAta;  ddksa-pita  (TS.  iv.  3.  41;  VS.  xiv.  3)  ‘having 
Daksa  as  father’,  tri-matA  ‘having  three  mothers’,  dvi-mdtA  ‘having  two  mothers’, 
hatA-bhrdta  (AV.)  ‘whose  brothers  have  been  slain’,  hatd-mata  (AV.)  ‘whose 
mother  has  been  slain’.  —  f.  duhitA ,  mat  A)  a-bhrdtd  ‘brotherless’,  sindhu- 
mdtA 1  ‘having  a  stream  as  mother’. 

2  2.  m.  anv-a-gantA  (VS.xviii.  59)  3,  avitA  ‘protector’,  upa-sattA  (TS.VS.  AV.) 
‘attendant’,  JzrostA  ‘jackal’  (‘yeller’),  janitA ,  jaritA  ‘praiser’,  trdtA  ‘protector’, 
tvAstd  ‘fashioner’,  ‘giver’,  dhartA  ‘supporter’,  netA  ‘leader’,  prati-grahltAi 

(VS.  vii.  48)  ‘receiver’,  prati-dhartA  (VS.  xv.  10)  ‘one  who  keeps  back’,  pra- 
vaktAi  (Kh.  iv.  88)  ‘speaker’,  vodhA  and  vbdha  ‘driving’;  etc. 

A.  1.  m.  pitdram ,  bhrAtaram ;  Adri-mataram  ‘having  a  rock  for  a  mother’, 
jd-mdtaram  ‘son-in-law’,  sindhu-mataram.  —  f.  duhitaram,  mdtdram ,  saptA- 
jndtaram  ‘having  seven  mothers’. 

2.  m.  adhi-vaktAram  ‘advocate’,  anu-ksattAram  (VS.xxx.  11)  ‘doorkeeper’s 
mate’,  abhi-sektAram  (VS.xxx.  1 2)  ‘consecrator’,  abhi-sartAram  (VS.)  ‘assistant’,  ava- 
sdtAram  ‘liberator’,  avitAram ,  astdram  ‘shooter’,  d-y  ant  Aram  ‘restrainer’,  is-kartA- 
ram  ‘arranging’,  upa-manthitAram  (VS.xxx.  12)  ‘churner’,  upa-scktAram  (VS.xxx. 
1 2) ‘pourer-out’,  kdrtdram  ‘agent’,  ksattAram  (VS.xxx. 13)  ‘door-keeper’, gantdram 
‘going’,  goptAram  (Kh.v.  3 3)  ‘protector’,  cettdram  ‘attentive’,  janitAiram  (VS.xm. 
51),  jaritAiramJetdram  ‘victorious’,  jostAram  (VS.xxviii.  1  o) ‘cherishing’,  tarutAram 
‘victor’,  tratA  ram,  tv  Astdram ,  datAram  ‘giver’,  dAtdram  ‘giving’,  dhartAram ,  ni- 
datAram  ‘one  who  ties  up’,  nis-kartAram  (TS.iv.  2.  73)4,  net  Aram  ‘leader’,  panitAram 
‘praising’,  pari-vestAram  (VS.  xxx.  1 2)  ‘waiter’,  pavitAram  ‘purifier’,  pura-etAram 
(VS.  xxxiii.  60)  ‘leader’,  p  edit  Aram  (VS.  xxx.  12)  ‘carver’,  pra-karitAram  (VS.xxx. 
12)  ‘sprinkler’,  pra-netAram  ‘leader’,  pra-datAram  (VS.vn.  46;  TS.)  ‘giver’,  pra- 
hetAram  ‘impeller’,  bodhayitAram  ‘awakener’,  bhettAram  (TS.i.  5 . 64)  ‘breaker’, 
mandhatAram  ‘pious  man’,  marditAram  ‘comforter’,  yantAram  ‘ruler’,  ydntaram 
‘restraining’,  y  at  Aram  ‘pursuer’,  yoktAram  (VS.  xxx.  14)  ‘exciter’,  raksitAram 
‘protector’,  v audit Aram  ‘praiser’,  vi-bhaktAram  ‘distributor’,  vi-moktAram  (VS.xxx. 
14)  ‘unyoker’,  samitAram  (VS.  xxvm.  10)  ‘slaughterer’,  srtam-kartAram  (TS. 
in.  1.  44)  ‘cooking  thoroughly’,  srotAram  ‘hearer’,  sanitAram  ‘bestower’,  sa?n- 
eddharam 5  ‘kindler’,  savitAram  ‘stimulator’,  stotAram  ‘praiser’,  hantAram  ‘slayer’, 
has-kartAram  ‘inciter’,  hetaram  ‘driver’,  Jidda  ram  ‘invoker’. 

I.  1.  m.  ndptra ,  pitrA ,  bhrAtrd  (AV.).  —  f.  duhitrA ,  mdtrA  (VS.  AV.).  — 
2.  m.  Astra,  tv  Astra  (AV.),  d/iatrA  ‘established,  pra-savitrA  (VS.  x.  30)  ‘impeller’, 
savitrA. 

D.  i.m.  nAptre ,  pitre.  —  f.  duhitre '  mdtre.  —  2.  m.  Astre  (AV.),  kartre  (AV.), 
krostre  { AV.),  jaritre \  jostre  (VS.xvn.  56),  tv  Astre  (VS.  xxn.  20),  datre \  dhartre 
(VS.  xvii.  56;  TS.  iv.  6.  32),  dhatre  (AV.),  prati-grahitre  (VS.  vn.  47),  raksitre 
(AV.),  vi-dhdtre  (AV.)  ‘disposer’,  samitre  (TS.  iv.  6.  33),  savitre ,  stotre \  Jiantre 
(VS.  xvi.  40),  hotre. 

Ab.  1.  m.  pitur ,  bhrAtur ,  vi-jdmdtur  ‘son-in-law’.  —  f.  duJiitur ,  mdtur.  — 
2.  m.  AsturftvAstur  (AV.),  d hat  nr ,  savitur ,  hotur. 


1  On  the  Sandhi  of  these  nominatives  in  cipient  use  as  a  periphrastic  future :  = ‘will 

-5  see  Lanman  423  —  5.  follow’. 

2  The  nominatives  of  the  m.  agent  nouns  4  RV.  x.  1405  and  VS.  xil.  110  have 

are  so  numerous  (140  in  the  RV.  alone)  that  is-kartdram  in  the  same  passage, 
examples  only  can  be  given  here.  1  5  P’or  * edh-tdram,  from  idh-  ‘kindle’. 

3  Used  with  the  A.,  an  example  of  in-  1 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Consonant  Stems. 


245 


G.  1.  m.  ndptur,  pitur ,  bhrdtur. —  f.  duhitar ,  ndnandur  (AV.),  matur.  — 
2.  m.  abhi-ksattur  ‘carver’,  avitur ,  a  star,  utthatur  (AV.)  ‘resolving’,  kartdr  (Kb. 
iv.  56,  l6),  ccttur  (AY.),  janitur ,  jaritdr ,  tratar, ,  tvdstur ,  datur,  dhatur  (VS.  TS. 
AV.),  ni-dhatur  ‘one  who  lays  down’,  nctur,  nestur  ‘leader’,  man  dhatur ,  yantdr 
(VS.  ix.  30),  vanditdr ,  vavdtur  ‘adherent’,  vddhur 1  ‘draught-horse’,  scimitar , 
sanitur ,  s avitur ,  mY/V  ‘presser  of  Soma’,  stotar ,  hotur. 

L.  1.  m.  pitdri.  —  f.  duhitdri ,  matdri.  —  2.  m.  netdri ,  vaktdri  (AV.) 
‘speaker’,  sotdri.  —  With  metrically  protracted  -f :  etdri 2,  kartari ,  vaktdri 3. 

V.  1.  m.  jamatar ,  pitar ,  bhratar .  —  f.  duhitar ,  matar.  —  2.  m.  aua- 
spartar  ‘preserver’,  avitar,  janitar ,  jaritar ,  tratar ,  tvastar ,  dartar  ‘breaker’, 
dosd-vastar  ‘illuminer  of  the  dark’,  dhartar ,  dhatar ,  netar ,  nestar ,  pra-netar , 
pra-yantar  ‘bringer’,  yajna-hotar  ‘offerer  at  a  sacrifice’,  vi-dhartar  ‘ruler’, 
vi-dhatar ,  vi-sastar  (AV.)  ‘slaughterer’,  sanitar,  savitar,  su-sanitar  ‘liberal  giver’, 
sotar,  stotar  (VS.xxiii.  7;  TS.vii.4. 20),  sthatar  ‘guider’,  hotar. 

Du.  N.  A.V.4  1.  m.  pit  dr  a  ^  bhrdtara ;  iheha-matara  ‘whose  mother  is  here 
and  there’,  ddksa-pitara ,  matdra-pitdra 5  ‘father  and  mother’,  sindhu-matara.  — 
f.  duhitar  a  ^  matara ,  sam-matdra  ‘twins’.  —  With  -aw:  m.  pitdrau,  sam- 
matdrau  (AV.).  —  f.  duhitar au  (AV.  Kh.m.  1 5^),  matar au .  —  2.  m.  avitdra, 
a-snatcird  ‘not  (fond  of)  bathing’,  ustdra  ‘ploughing  bulls’,  gantara ,  coditard 
‘instigators’,  janitctra ,  dhartdra ,  ni-cetara  ‘observers’,  pretdra  ‘lovers’,  yantdra 
‘guides’,  raksitdra ,  samitdrd ,  sthdtara,  hotar  a.  —  With  shortened  vowel: 
manotdra  ‘disposers’.  —  With  -aw :  anu-sthatdrau  (AV.)  ‘undertakers’, 
ksattdrau  (AV.)  ‘carvers’,  goptdrau  (AV.),  datdrau,  raksitdrau ,  hotarau  (VS. 
xx.  42),  hotarau  (TS.  iv.  1.  82).  —  With  shortened  vowel:  dhdnutarau 6 
‘running  swiftly’,  savatdrau  (VS.  xxvm.  6)  ‘having  the  same  calf’7. 

I.  2.  m.  hotrbhydm  (VS.xxi.  53).  —  D.  1.  m.  pitrbhyam 8.  —  G.  1.  m. pitros.  — 
f.  matrds.  —  2.  m.  pra-sdstros  (VS.)  ‘directors’.  —  L.  1.  m.  pitros.  —  f.  mdtrbs 9. 

PI.  N.  1.  m.  pitdras,  V.  pitar  as  ^  bhrdtaras;  daksa-pitaras ,  ddksa-pitaras 10 
(TS.  1.  2.  31),  go-mdtaras  ‘having  a  cow  for  mother’,  prsni-mdtaras  ‘having 
Prsni  for  a  mother’,  sindhu-mataras ,  su-matdras  ‘having  a  beautiful  mother’.  — 
f.  duhitaras,  mdtaras ,  V.  mdtaras;  a-bhrdtaras  and  a-bhrdtaras  (AV.).  — 
2.  m.  agni-hotdras  ‘having  Agni  for  a  priest’,  abhi-ksattdras ,  abhi-svartdras 
‘invokers’,  astaras,  upa-ksetdras  ‘dwelling  near’,  gdntdras,  cetdras  ‘avengers’, 
jaritdras,  jostdras,  tratar  as ,  daditdras  (VS.  vn.  14)  ‘keepers’,  datdras ,  dhartdras , 
dhdtaras ,  ni-cetdras  ‘observing’  and  ‘observers’,  ninditdras  ‘scorners’,  nr-patdras 
‘protectors  of  men’,  nctdras  and  netdras ,  panitdras ,  pari~vestdras  (VS.  vi.  13), 
pavltdras  ‘purifiers’,  pura-etdras  (VS.  xvn.  14;  TS.  iv.  6.  i4),  pra-jhdtdras  ‘con¬ 
ductors’,  pra-netdras ,  pravitdras  ‘promoters’,  pretdras ,  yantdras ,  raksitdras , 
vantdras  ‘enjoyers’,  vi-dhatdras ,  vi-yotdras  ‘separators’,  samitdras,  srotdras , 
sanitdras ,  sotdras,  stotar as ,  sthdtdras ,  svaritdras  ‘roaring’,  hetdras ,  hotar  as V 


1  For  *vah-tur,  from  vah-  ‘draw’. 

2  Grassmann  takes  this  form  (v.  4110; 
vi.  124)  as  a  N.  f.  of  etcir-  ‘one  who  approaches 
or  asks’. 

3  The  Pada  text  has  i  in  all  these  forms. 
Cp.  Neisser  BB.  20,  44. 

4  In  the  RV.  the  ending  -a  occurs  176 
times,  -uw  only  10  times:  LANMAN  427  (mid.). 

5  A  Dvandva  compound  in  which  both 
members  are  inflected. 

6  The  shortening  is  probably  metrical. 

7  This  is  the  interpretation  of  the  com¬ 

mentator;  but  the  derivation  of  the  word  is 

obscure. 


8  No  form  in  - bhydm  with  the  Ab.  sense 
occurs. 

9  These  G.  L.  forms  as  well  as  svctsros 
must  be  pronounced  trisyllabically  in  the  RV. 
except  matros  in  vn.  30.  See  I  anman  428. 

i°  With  long  grade  vowel. 

The  form  vasu-dhdtciras  (AV.  v.  276)  may 
be  N.  pi.  with  shortened  vowel,  but  Whit¬ 
ney  regards  it  as  a  comparative  N.  sing, 
‘greater  bestower  of  wealth’.  See  his  note 
on  AV.  V.  276. 


246 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sfrache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

A.  1.  m.  pitfn 1 ;  ddksa-pitrn ,  prsni-mdtrn.  —  f.  math2.  —  2.  m.  dstrzi, 
a-sndtfn,  kartfn  (AV.;  Kh.  iv.  53°),  goptfn  (AY.),  jaritfn ,  tratfn ,  datfn ,  patfn 
(AV.)  ‘drinkers’,  pra-vodhfn  ‘carrying  off’,  stotfn ,  sthatrn ,  hotrn. 

I.  1.  m.  n  rptrbhis ,  pitrbhis ,  bhrdtrb/iis ;  saptd-mdtrbhis.  —  f.  matrbhis.  — 
2.  m.  astrbhis,  kartrbhis ,  dhatfbhis ,  partrbhis  ‘with  aids’,  setrbhis  ‘bindings’, 
sotrbhis  and  sotrbhis ,  hetrbhis ,  hdtrbhis. 

D.  1.  m.  pitrbhyas.  —  f.  zndtrbhyas.  —  2.  m.  ksattrbhyas  (YS.xvi.  26)  ‘cha¬ 
rioteers’,  raksitfbhyas  (AV.),  stotrbhyas ,  sam-grahitrbhyas  (YS.  xvi.  26)  ‘drivers’. 

Ab.  1.  m.  pitrbhyas.  —  f.  matrbhyas. 

G.  m.  1.  pitrndm 3.  —  2.  unnetrndm  (YS.  vi.  2)  kind  of  Soma  priests, 
jaritrndm ,  datrndm 4  (AV.),  dhatrndm ,  stotrndm ,  hotrnam.  —  With  r:  1.  pitrndm 
(TS.  1.  3.  61  etc.);  2.  dhatrndm  (TS.  iv.  7.  143),  netrndm  (TS.  1.  3.  61)5. 

L.  1.  m.  pitrsu  (AV.).  —  f.  matrsu.  —  2.  m.  hdtrsu. 

2.  Stems  in  /  and  r. 

361.  These  stems,  of  which  there  are  only  five,  form  a  transition  to  the 
vowel  declension  because,  while  taking  the  normal  endings  like  the  ordinary 
consonant  declension,  they  add  in  the  N.  sing.  m.  f.  and  show  a  vowel 
before  the  endings  with  initial  consonant.  There  are  no  neuter  forms6. 

a.  Stem  in  -a/  (-<*0* 

362.  This  type  is  represented  by  only  one  word,  usually  stated  in  the 
form  of  rtf'z-,  which  never  appears  in  any  case.  This  word,  which  is  both 
m.  and  (rarely)  f.,  means  ‘wealth’,  being  in  origin  doubtless  connected  with 
the  root  ra-  ‘give’.  The  stem  appears  as  nzy-  before  vowels  and  before 
consonants.  The  forms  occurring  are:  Sing.  A.  rdm.  I.  nyvf.  D.  r<7y/. 
Ab.  ray  as.  G.  ray  as1.  —  PI.  N.  rdyas.  A.  ray  as*.  G.  ray  dm. 

a.  The  inflexion  of  ray-  is  supplemented  by  rap/-,  m.  f.,  from  which  occur  the  addi¬ 
tional  cases  sing.  N.  rayis,  A.  rayim ,  I.  rayyd  and  rayind ;  pi.  I.  rayibhis,  G.  raylndm. 

b.  There  are  three  forms  which  seem  to  be  irregular  compounds  of  ray- :  sing.  G. 
rdhdd-rayas  (‘increasing  wealth’)  N.  of  a  man,  D.  brhdd-raye  ‘having  much  wealth’,  and 
du.  N.  satd-rd  ‘having  a  hundred  goods’.  In  the  first  two  forms  the  vowel  of  the  stem 
has  probably  been  shortened  metrically9;  in  the  third  form,  the  stem  as  it  appears  before 
consonants  has  been  used. 

b.  Stems  in  -av  (-0)  and  -av  (- au ). 

363-  There  are  two  stems  in  - a 7',  viz.  gdv-  m.  ‘bull’,  f.  ‘cow’,  and 
dydv-  111.  f.  ‘heaven’,  ‘day’.  Both  distinguish  strong  forms,  in  which  the  vowel 
is  lengthened;  both  take  -s  in  the  N.  sing,  before  which  the  end  of  the  stem 
assumes  the  form  of  -au.  Both  show  various  irregularities  in  their  inflexion. 


1  On  the  Sandhi  of  these  accusatives  see 
Lanman  429. 

2  Once  with  m.  ending  mdtfn  (x.  352). 

3  With  n  before  the  ending  -dm  as  in  the 
vowel  declension,  and  accent  shifted  to  the 
ending  as  in  the  i-  and  u-  declension  when 
those  vowels  are  accented. 

4  See  Whitney’s  note  on  AV.  v.  243. 

5  Also  udgatrndm  (TS.  III.  2.  9s)  and  bhr a- 
trnam  (TS.  11.  6.  62).  See  Benfey,  Vedica, 
p.  1—38;  IS.  13,  101 ;  Lanman  430. 

6  Except  the  isolated  dyavT  occurring  once 

as  V.  du.  of  dydv-  ‘heaven’. 


7  The  G.  a  few  times  has  the  irregular 
accent  rdyas. 

8  Accented  thus  22  times  as  a  weak  case 
in  the  RV.,  and  four  times  rdyas  as  a  strong 
case  (also  VS.  II.  24).  The  SV.  1.4.1. 41  has 
the  A.  pi.  rds  in  the  variant  adhad  rah  for 
adhatta  of  RV.  vm.  9613. 

9  According  to  BR.  and  Grassmann,  they 
are  formed  from  the  stems  brhdd-ri-  and 
rdhdd-ri-.  Cp.  Lanman  43 1. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Stems  in  Semivowels. 


247 


The  inflexion  of  gav -,  which  is  almost  complete  (the  only  forms  not 
represented  being  the  weak  cases  of  the  dual)  is  as  follows: 

Sing.  N.  gaus.  A.  gdm.  I.  gdva.  D.  gave.  Ab.  gos.  G.  gas. 

L.  gavi.  —  Du.  N.  A.  gdva  and  gdvau.  —  PI.  N.  gdvas.  A.  gas.  1.  gdbZiis. 

D.  gJb/iyas.  G.  gdvam  and  gJndm.  L.  gdsu.  V.  gdvas. 

a.  Three  of  these  forms,  gam,  gas,  gos  must,  in  the  RV.,  be  read  as  dissyllables 
in  a  few  instances,  though  this  is  doubtful  in  the  case  of  gas  L 

b.  The  normal  G.  pi.  gdvam,  which  is  by  far  the  commoner,  occurring  55  times  in 

the  RV.,  is  found  only  3  times  at  the  end  of  a  Pada  (which  in  two  of  these  instances 
ends  iambically);  the  irregular  G.  gondm2,  occurring  20  times  in  the  RV.,  is  found  at 

the  end  of  a  Pada  only.  The  use  of  the  latter  form  thus  seems  to  have  arisen  from 

metrical  exigencies. 

c.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  from  the  point  of  view  of  accentuation  the  stem  is  not 
treated  as  a  monosyllable,  since  the  Udatta  never  shifts  to  the  ending  in  weak  cases. 

d.  There  are  three  compounds  formed  from  this  stem:  a-gos 3  G.  sing.  m.  ‘having 
no  cows’;  prsni-gdvas 4  N.  pi.  m.  ‘having  dappled  cows’;  rusad-gavi  L.  sing.  f.  ‘having 
bright  cows’. 

364-  The  strong  form  of  dydv-  (in  which  the  y  has  often  to  be 
read  as  i)  is  dydv-,  which  appears  as  dydu-  before  the  of  the  N.,  and 
with  loss  of  the  final  u,  in  the  A.  sing,  dydm 5.  The  normal  stem  dydv-  appears 
in  weak  cases  only,  in  the  contracted  Ab.  G.  dyds6  and  the  L.  dydvi ;  it  is 
otherwise  entirely  displaced  by  the  Samprasarana  form  div-  (from  which  the 
accent  shifts  to  the  ending  in  weak  cases)  before  vowels  and  dyii-  before 
consonants. 

The  weak  grade  stem  div-  has  not  only  entirely  ousted  dydv-  from 
the  I.  D.  sing.,  and  largely  from  the  Ab.  G.  L.  sing.,  but  has  even  encroached 
on  the  strong  forms:  divam  occurring  (21  times)  beside  dydm  (79  times), 
and  divas  (once)  beside  dydvas  (22  times)  in  the  N.  pi.  Similarly  dyu-7  has 
displaced  dydv-  in  the  weak  plural  forms:  A.  dydn  (for  * dydvas )  and  I.  dyiibZiis 
(for  *dyo-bZiis). 

The  inflexion  of  dydv-  is  less  complete  than  that  of  gav-,  the  D.  Ab. 
G.  L.  pi.  being  wanting  as  well  as  all  the  weak  cases  of  the  dual.  The  forms 
occurring  are  the  following: 

Sing.  N.  dydus,  A.  dydm;  divam.  I.  diva.  D.  dive.  Ab.  dyds;  divas s. 
G.  dyds;  divas 9.  L .  dydvi;  divil°.  V.  dydus  and  dydus TI.  —  Du.  N.  A.  V. 
dydva12;  dyavi13.  —  PI.  N.  V.  dydvas;  divas **  (once).  A.  m.  dydn;  f.  divas 15 
(twice).  I.  m.  dyiibZiis l6. 

a.  The  A.  dydm  seems  to  require  dissyllabic  pronunciation  in  a  few  instances. 
The  form  dydus  occurs  once  (I.  7 18)  as  an  Ab.  instead  of  dyds.  The  form  did  am 
doubtless  made  its  way  into  the  A.  sing,  owing  to  the  influence  of  the  very  fre¬ 
quent  weak  cases  divas  etc.,  which  taken  together  occur  more  than  350  times  in 
the  RV. 


1  See  Lanman  431  (bottom).  The  form 
gdvas  is  actually  used  for  the  A.  in  Kh. 
11.  6IS. 

2  Formed  on  the  analogy  of  the  vowel 
declension. 

3  This  might  be  formed  from  the  reduced 
stem  ci-gu-. 

4  There  is  also  from  the  reduced  stem 
-gu-  the  A.  sing.  m.  pfsni-gum,  as  the  N.  of 

a  man. 

5  For  *dya \u\m  like  gam  for  *gd\ii\m. 

6  Like  gos  for  *  gav  as. 

7  Based  on  din-. 

r\  r\ 

8  In  the  RV.  dyds  occurs  only  twice  as 
Ab.,  divas  50  times. 


9  In  the  RV.  dyds  occurs  4  times  as  G., 
divas  I  So  times. 

10  dydvi  occurs  12  times,  divi  11S  times 
in  the  RV. 

dydus,  that  is,  diaus  occurs  only  once 
and  is  to  be  read  as  a  dissyllable. 

12  In  the  G.  du.  of  the  Dvandva  divas- 
prthivyos,  the  G.  sing,  takes  the  place  of 
the  G.  du.,  which  would  be  divas. 

13  The  neuter  form  used  once  for  the  m. 

14  Also  twice  in  AV. 

15  Also  3  or  4  times  in  AV. 

16  dytin  and  dyiibhis  occur  only  in  the  RV. 
or  in  verses  borrowed  from  the  RV. 


I 


248 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


b.  Starting  from  div-cts  etc.  a  transition  stem  diva-  according  to  the  a-  declension 
came  into  being.  From  this  occur  the  forms  divci-m  ‘heaven’  and  dive-dive  ‘every  day’, 
and  in  compounds  tri-divct-m  (AV.)  ‘third  heaven’,  tri-dive ,  su-divd-m  (AV.)  ‘bright  day’. 

c.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  accentuation  of  forms  from  div-  follows  the  rule  of 
monosyllables,  while  that  of  forms  from  dyav-  and  dyii-,  as  may  be  inferred  from  dydvi 
and  dyubhis,  does  not,  being  the  same  as  that  of  gav-. 

d.  The  following  case-forms  of  compounds  of  dyav-  occur:  sing.  N. pra-dyaus  (AV.) 
‘highest  heaven’,  I .  pra-divd,  Ab.  pr a- divas,  L. pra-divi\  ahar-divi  ‘day  by  day’;  du.  N.  A. 
pr/hivt-dydvd  ‘earth  and  heaven’,  dydvd-ks  dma,  dyav  a  -pythivi,  dyavd-bhumi  ‘heaven  and 
earth’,  vrsti-dydvd  ‘having  a  raining  sky’;  pi.  N.  vrsii-dydvas,  su-divas. 

365.  There  are  two  stems  in  -av,  viz.  nav-  (nduj  f.  ‘ship’,  and  gluv-  (g/duj 
m.  or  f.  ‘lump’.  The  inflexion  is  very  incomplete,  as  no  dual  and  only  two 
plural  forms  are  found;  but  as  far  as  can  be  judged  from  the  forms  occurring 
it  is  quite  regular,  the  accentuation  being  that  of  monosyllabic  stems.  The 
forms  of  ndv-  are: 

Sing.  N.  ndus.  A.  ncivam ,  su-ndvam  ‘good  ship’  (VS.  xxi.  7).  I.  nazrd1. 
G.  navds.  L.  navi.  —  PI.  N.  ndvas.  I.  naubhis. 

From  gldv-  occur  only  the  two  forms  N.  sing,  glaits  (AV.)  and  I.  pi. 
glaubhis  (VS.  xxv.  8)2. 


B.  Vowel  stems. 

366.  The  vowel  declension  comprises  stems  ending  in  a ,  i,  u,  both  long 
and  short.  These  differ  considerably  in  their  inflexion  according  as  they  are 
radical  or  derivative.  The  radical  stems,  which  virtually  all  end  in  the  long 
vowels  d,  l ,  z?3,  are  allied  to  the  consonant  declension  in  taking  the  normal 
endings;  but  they  add  -s  in  the  N.  sing.  m.  f.  The  derivative  stems,  which 
end  in  both  long  and  short  vowels,  modify  the  normal  endings  considerably; 
though  they  for  the  most  part  add  -s  in  the  N.  sing.  m.  f.,  those  in  -a  and  -l 
regularly  drop  it. 

1.  a.  Stems  in  radical  -a. 


367.  Radical  a-  stems  are  frequent  in  the  RV.,  but  become  less  common 
in  the  later  Samhitas  where  they  often  shorten  the  final  vowel  to  d  and  are 
then  inflected  like  derivative  ^-sterns.  The  great  majority  of  the  forms 
occurring  are  nominatives  or  accusatives,  other  cases  being  rare  and  some 
not  occurring  at  all.  In  the  RV.  the  N.  sing,  forms  with  a  occur  ten  times 
oftener  than  those  with  the  shortened  vowel  <7,  and  five  times  oftener  than 
the  forms  with  a  in  the  AV.  On  the  other  hand,  the  AV.  has  only  slightly 
more  forms  with  d  than  with  d,  and  no  m.  forms  at  all  from  d-  stems  in  the 
oblique  cases4.  This  tendency  to  give  up  the  d  forms  in  the  later  Samhitas 
may  be  illustrated  by  the  fact  that  the  forms  of  the  RV.  N.  sing,  carsani - 
prd-s  ‘blessing  men’,  ndma-dhd-s  ‘name-giver’,  prathama-jd-s  ‘first-born’,  V.  soma- 
pd-s  ‘soma-drinker’,  are  replaced  in  the  AV.  by  carsani-pra-s ,  ndma-dhd-s , 
prathama-jd-s 5,  V.  soma-pa  respectively. 

This  declension  includes  stems  formed  from  about  thirty  roots.  Of  these, 
four  appear  as  monosyllables  in  the  m.:  jd-  ‘child’,  trd-  ‘protector’,  dd-  ‘giver’, 
sthd-  ‘standing’;  and  seven  in  the  f.:  hsd-6  ‘abode’,  -khd-  ‘well’,  gnd-7  ‘divine 


1  There  is  also  the  transition  form  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  d-  declension  I.  sing,  navayd ,  the 
accentuation  of  which  indicates  that  it 
started  from  navd. 

2  The  N.  pi.  gldvas  also  occurs  in  the 
AB. 

3  These,  however,  by  being  shortened 
often  appear  secondarily  as  d,  i,  u ,  when 
they  are  inflected  like  derivative  stems. 
Radical  i  u  and  r  stems  have  joined  the 


consonant  declension  by  almost  always 

adding  the  root  determinative 

4  See  Lanman  4351. 

5  The  form  prathama-jd-s,  however,  also 
occurs  in  the  AV. 

6  From  hsd-  =  ksi-  ‘dwell’,  ‘rule’. 

7  Perhaps  formed  with  suffixal  a  from  a 
root  *gan-  and  sometimes  to  be  pronounced 
as  a  dissyllable  ( gaud -),  but  inflected  as  if 
a  radical  stem. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Vowel  Stems. 


249 


woman’,  jd-  ‘child’,  jyd-  ‘bowstring’,  md-  ‘measure’,  vrdi- 1  ‘troop’;  the  rest  appear 
only  at  the  end  of  compounds:  -krdi~1 2  ‘doing’,  - krdi -3  ‘scattering’,  -ksd-  ‘ruling’, 
-khdi-  ‘digging’,  -khyd-  ‘seeing’,  -gd-  ‘going’,  -gd-  ‘singing’,  -jd-  ‘born’,  -jndi-  ‘knowing’, 
-jyd-  ‘power’,  -ta-  ‘stretching’,  -dd-  ‘giving’,  -drd-  ‘sleeping’,  -dhd-  ‘putting’,  -dhdi- 
‘sucking’,  -pdi-  ‘guarding’,  -pdi-  ‘drinking’,  -prd-  ‘filling’4 5,  -bhd-  ‘appearing’,  -md- 
‘measuring’,  -yd-  ‘going’,  -vd-  ‘blowing’,  -sd-  ‘winning’s,  -sthdi-  ‘standing’,  -snd- 
‘bathing’,  -hd-  ‘starting’. 

These  stems  are  inflected  in  the  m.  and  f.  only.  There  are  no  distinctively 
n.  forms6 7,  as  the  stem  shortens  the  radical  vowel  to  d  in  that  gender  and  is 
consequently  inflected  according  to  the  derivative  ^-declension. 


a.  Three  anomalously  formed  m.  derivative  stems  in  -a  follow  the  analogy  of  the 
radical  a-stems.  1.  From  the  adverb  ta-thd  ‘thus’  is  formed  the  N.  sing,  a-tathd-s  ‘not 
saying  “yes’”.  2.  usdtia-,  N.  of  a  seer,  forms  its  A.  usdndm  and  D.  tisane  7 ;  the  N.  sing, 
being  irregularly  formed  without  - s ,  has  the  appearance  of  a  N.  sing.  f.  from  a  derivative 
a  stem8 9.  3.  The  strong  stem  of  pathi-  ‘path’  is  in  the  RV.  panthd-  only:  N.  sing. 
pdnihd-s  (4-  AV.),  A.  pdntha-m  (-j-  AV.),  N.  pi.  pdnthas.  The  AV.  also  uses  the  stem 
pdnthan-,  from  which  it  forms  N.  sing,  panthd  (once),  A.  pdnthdnam  (once),  and  N.  pi. 
pdnthanas.  Though  the  stem  pdnthan -  never  occurs  in  the  RV.,  the  evidence  of  the 
Avesta  points  to  its  having  been  in  use  beside pdntha-  in  the  Indo-Iranian  period 9.  The 
A .  pdnihdm'10 11,  as  a  contraction  of  pdnthdnam ,  may  have  been  the  starting  point  of  the 
N.  sing,  pdntha-s. 

Inflexion. 


368.  The  forms  occurring  in  the  oblique  cases  are  so  rare  that  some 
endings,  such  as  those  of  the  L.  sing.,  G.  L.  du.  and  G.  pi.  are  not  represented 
at  all.  The  m.  always  takes  -j"  in  the  N.  sing.,  but  the  f.  often  drops  it,  doubt¬ 
less  owing  to  the  influence  of  the  f.  of  derivative  ^-sterns.  Excepting  the  few 
forms  occurring  in  the  D.  and  G.  sing.  ”,  the  N.  sing,  with  -s  is  the  only  case 
in  which  the  inflexion  of  the  radical  stems  can  be  distinguished  in  the  f. 12 
from  that  of  the  derivative  <?-stems  in  form I8.  The  forms  actually  occurring 
would,  if  made  from  jd-  ‘offspring’,  be  the  following: 

Sing.  N.  m.  f.  jd-s,  f.  also  jd.  A.  111.  f.  jd-m.  I.  f.  j-d.  D.  111,  f.  j-c. 
G.  111.  j-ds.  V.  m.  jd-s. 

D  u.  N.  A.  V.  m.  jd ,  jdn.  I.  jd-bhyam I4. 

PI.  N.  111.  f.  jds.  A.  f.  jds.  I.  111.  f.  jd-bhis.  D.  f.  jd-bbyas.  Ab.  111. 
jd-b/iyas.  L.  f.  jd-su. 

The  forms  actually  occurring  are  the  following: 

Sing.  N.  m .jd-s15  ‘child’,  dd-s1 6  ‘giver’,  sthd-s  ‘standing’.  —  dadhi-krd-s 1 7, 


1  From  an  extended  form  of  the  root  vr- 
‘surround’. 

2  An  extension  with  -d  of  hr-  ‘do’. 

3  An  extension  with  -a  of  hr-  ‘scatter’. 

4  The  root  mid-  ‘soften’  occurs  in  the 
modified  form  of  - mnd -  in  canna-mna- 
‘lanner’. 

5  Four  of  these  roots,  khd-,  gd-,  jd-,  sd-, 
are  collateral  forms  of  others  ending  in  a 
nasal,  khan-,  gam-,  j  an-,  san-;  cp.  Delbruck, 
Verbum,  p.  92  f.,  Lanman  442. 

6  Five  N.  sing.  m.  forms  with  -r  are  found 
in  agreement  with  n.  substantives. 

7  There  is  also  a  L.  sing,  usdne,  which  is 
formed  as  if  from  an  <?-stem. 

8  The  starting-point  of  this  may  have 
been  usdndm  as  a  contracted  A.  for  usdnasam. 

9  See  Lanman  441. 

10  The  analogy  of  pathi-  is  followed  by 
tuathi-  ‘churning-stick’,  which  once  has  the 
A.  form  mdn/hd-m. 

11  There  are  otherwise  only  the  f.  trans¬ 


ition  forms  L.  sing,  dpaydydm ,  N.  of  a  river, 
and  puro-dhdyam  (AV.). 

12  The  N.  sing,  with  -r  is  about  as  common 
as  that  without  it  in  the  RV.,  the  latter 
occurring  in  late  hymns;  in  the  AV.  the 
former  are  less  common. 

13  But  on  etymological  grounds  other  cases 
may  commonly  be  distinguished  as  belonging 
to  either  one  group  or  the  other;  thus 
A.  f.  d-gopam  ‘having  no  herdsman’  must  be 
regarded  as  a  radical  a-forrn,  because  the 
m.  is  almost  without  exception  go-pd-m,  and 
not  as  a  derivative  f.  from  go-pa-. 

J4  Contrary  to  the  rule  generally  applicable 
to  monosyllable  stems,  the  accent  remains 
on  the  radical  syllable  throughout. 

Lanman  443  thinks  ga-s  in  x.  1278  is  a 
N.  sing,  ‘singer’  (gd-  ‘sing’),  but  it  is  probably 
the  A.  pi.  of  go-  ‘cow’. 

Also  dha-s  in  TS.  II.  6.  44. 

J7  These  compounds  are  arranged  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  alphabetical  order  of  the  roots. 


:5° 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


N.  of  a  divine  horse.  —  rbhu-ksd-s  ‘lord  of  the  Rbhus’.  —  bisa-khd-s  ‘digging 
up  lotus  fibres’.  —  agre-gd-s  (VS.xxvii.  31 ;  Kh.  v.  61)  ‘going  before’,  an-d-gd-s 
‘not  coming’,  puro-gd-s  ‘leader’,  samaua-gd-s  ‘going  to  the  assembly’.  —  sdma- 
gd-s  ‘singing  chants’.  —  adri-jd-s  ‘produced  from  stones’,  apsu-jd-s  ‘born  in 
the  waters’,  ab-jd-s  ‘born  in  water’,  abhra-jd-s  (AV.)  ‘born  from  clouds’,  rta-jd-s 
‘truly  born’,  rte-jd-s  ‘produced  at  the  rite’,  go-jd-s  ‘born  from  the  cow’,  tapo-jd-s 
(VS.  xxxvn.  16)  ‘born  from  heat’,  divi-jd-s  ‘born  in  the  sky’,  deva-jd-s  ‘god- 
born’,  dvi-jd-s  ‘twice-born’,  naksatra-jd-s  (AV.)  ‘star-born’,  nab/10-jd-s  ‘produced 
from  vapour’,  nava-jd-s  ‘newly  born’,  purd-jd-s  ‘primeval’,  purva-jd-s  ‘born 
before’,  prathama-jd-s  ‘first-born’,  bahu-pra-jd-s  ‘having  numerous  progeny’, 
manusya-jd-s  ‘born  of  men’,  vane-jd-s  ‘born  in  woods’,  vdta-jd-s  (AV.)  ‘arisen 
from  wind’,  sana-jd-s  ‘born  long  ago’,  saha-jd-s  ‘born  together’,  saho-jd-s  ‘pro¬ 
duced  by  strength’,  su-pra-jd-s  ‘having  good  offspring’,  hiranya-jd-s  (AV.) 
‘sprung  from  gold’.  —  rta-jhd-s  ‘knowing  the  sacred  law’.  —  parama-jyd-s 
‘holding  supreme  power’.  —  apana-dd-s  (TS.  VS.)  ‘giving  the  downward  air’, 
atma-dd-s  ‘granting  breath’,  dyur-dd-s  (TS.  VS)  ‘granting  long  life’,  asTr-dd-s 
(VS. xviii.  56)  ‘fulfilling  a  wish’,  ojo-dd-s  ‘granting  power’,  go-dd-s  ‘giving  kine’, 
caksur-dd-s  (TS.iv.6. 15)  ‘giving  sight’,  dravino-dd-s  ‘giving  wealth’,  dhana-dd-s 
‘giving  booty’,  prana-dd-s  (VS.  TS.)  ‘life-giving’,  bala-dd-s  ‘giving  power’,  bhuri- 
dd-s  ‘giving  much’,  ?'dstra-dd-s  (VS.x.  2)  ‘giving  dominion’,  varivo-dd-s  (VS.  TS.) 
‘giving  space’,  varco-dd-s  (VS.  TS.)  ‘giving  vigour’,  vasu-dd-s  (AV.)  ‘giving 
wealth’,  vyana-dd-s  (VS.  TS.)  ‘giving  breath’,  sahasra-dd-s  ‘giving  a  thousand’, 
saho-dd-s  ‘giving  strength’,  svasti-dd-s  ‘giving  happiness’,  havir-dd-s  (AV.) 
‘giving  oblations’,  hiranya-dd-s  ‘yielding  gold’.  —  ab/ii-dhd-s  (VS.  xxn.  3) 
‘surrounding’,  kiye-dhd-s  ‘containing  much’,  cano-dhd-s  (VS.  vm.  7)  ‘gracious’, 
dhama-dhd-s  ‘founder  of  dwellings’,  dhiyam-dhd-s  ‘devout’,  nama-dhd-s  ‘name¬ 
giving’,  bhaga-dhd-s  (TS.  iv.  6.  3l)  ‘paying  what  is  due’,  ratna-dhd-s  ‘pro¬ 
curing  wealth’,  reto-dhd-s  ‘impregnating’,  vayo-dhd-s  ‘bestowing  strength’, 
varco-dhd-s  (AV.)  ‘granting  vigour’,  visvd-dha-s  (VS.  1.  2)  ‘all-preserving’,  sarva- 
dhd-s  ‘all-refreshing’.  —  adhi-pd-s  ‘ruler’,  apdna-pd-s  (VS.  xx.  34)  ‘protecting 
the  downward  breath’,  abhisasti-pd-s  ‘defending  from  imprecations’,  abhisti - 
pd-sl  ‘protecting  with  assistance’,  aprltapd-s  (VS.  vm.  57)  ‘guarding  when 
gladdened’,  dyus-pd-s  (VS.  xxii.  1)  ‘life-protector’,  rta-pd-s  ‘guarding  divine 
order’;  go-pd-s  ‘herdsman’,  d-gopa-s  ‘lacking  a  cowherd’,  devd-gopa-s  ‘having 
the  gods  for  guardians’,  su-gopd-s  ‘good  protector’,  s'ma-gopa-s  ‘keeper  of 
Soma’;  caksus-pd-s2  (VS.  11.  6)  ‘protecting  the  eyesight’,  tanu-pd-s  ‘protecting 
the  person’,  nidhi-pd-s  (AV.  VS.)  ‘guardian  of  treasure’,  paras-pd-s2  ‘protecting 
afar \  pasu-pd-s  ‘keeper  of  herds’,  prdnapd-s  (VS.  xx.  34)  ‘guardian  of  breath’, 
vrata-pd-s  ‘observing  ordinances’,  sevadZii-pCi-s  ‘guarding  treasure’,  sti-pd-s 
‘protecting  dependents’,  sva-pd-s 3  (AV.)  ‘protector  of  his  own’.  —  dn-rtu- 
pd-s  ‘not  drinking  in  time’,  rtu-pd-s  ‘drinking  at  the  right  season’,  purva-pd-s 
‘drinking  first’,  suta-pd-s  ‘drinking  the  Soma-juice’,  soma-pd-s  ‘drinking  Soma’, 
hari-pd-s  ‘drinking  the  yellow  (Soma)’.  —  antariksa-prd-s  ‘traversing  the  air’, 
kratu-prd-s  ‘granting  power’,  carsani-prd-s  ‘satisfying  men’,  rodasi-prd-s * 
‘filling  heaven  and  earth’.  —  rna-yd-s  ‘exacting  obligations’,  cva-yd-s 
‘going  quickly’,  tura-yd-s  ‘going  swiftly’,  deva-yd-s  ‘going  to  the  gods’.  — 
ap-sd-s  ‘giving  water’,  asva-sd-s  ‘giving  horses’,  dhana-sd-s  “winning  wealth’, 
vaja-sd-s  ‘winning  booty’,  sata-sd-s  ‘gaining  a  hundred’,  sahasra-sd-s  ‘gaining 
a  thousand’;  go-sd-s  ‘acquiring  cattle’,  nr-sd-s  ‘procuring  men’,  su-sd-s  ‘gaining 

1  In  abhistipdsi  (11.  202),  where  the  Pada  3  The  Tada  text  of  AV.  ill.  31  divides 

text  reads  abhisti-pa  asi.  See  Lanman  443  j  sva-pah ;  lout  the  correct  division  may  be 
(bottom).  su-apah ;  see  Whitney’s  note. 

2  On  the  Sandhi  in  this  compound  cp.  7S  c.  4  For  rodasT-pra-s. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Vowel  Stems. 


251 


easily’,  svar-sa-s  ‘winning  light’.  —  ddhara-stha-s 1  (Kh.  n.  82)  ‘subordinate’, 
rta-sthd-s  (AV.)  ‘standing  right’,  rocana-sthd-s  ‘abiding  in  light’,  supa-sthd-s 2 
(VS.  xxi.  60;  TS.  i.  2.  23)  ‘forming  a  good  lap’;  ange-sthd-s  (AV.)  ‘situated  in 
a  member  of  the  body’,  adhvare-sthd-s  ‘standing  at  the  sacrifice’,  giri-sthd-s 
‘mountain-dwelling’,  ni-sthd-s  ‘excelling’,  puru-ni-sthd-s  ‘excelling  among  many’, 
bhuvane-sthd-s 3  (AV.)  ‘being  in  the  world’,  mamhane-sthd-s  ‘liberal’,  madhyame- 
st/id-s  (AV.  VS.  TS.)  ‘standing  in  the  middle’,  rathe-sthd-s  ‘standing  on  a  car’, 
vandane-sthd-s  ‘mindful  of  praises’,  vandhure-sthd-s  ‘standing  on  the  car-seat’, 
savya-sthd-s 4  (AV.),  hari-sthd-s  ‘borne  by  bay  horses’.  —  ghrta-snd-s  ‘sprinkling 
ghee’.  —  Also  the  abnormal  forms  a-tatha-s  ‘not  saying  “yes’”,  pantha-s1  path’. 

f.  ksd-s  ‘abode’,  gnd-s  ‘divine  woman’,  vrd-s 5  (i.  1248)  ‘troop’.  —  rta-pd-s , 
rtc-jdi-s ,  kula-pd-s  (AV.)  ‘chief  of  a  family’,  go-dhd-s 6 7  ‘sinew’,  go-pd-s  (AV.) 
‘female  guardian’,  go-sd-s ,  divi-jd-s ,  divo-jd-s  ‘born  from  heaven’,  vane-jd-s, 
vayo-dhd-s  (AV.),  vasu-dd-s  (AV.),  sata-sd-s ,  samana-gd-s ,  sahasra-sd-s1 .  — 
Without  -s  in  the  Pada  but  with  hiatus  in  the  Samhita8:  ‘bowstring’; 

ni-drd  ‘sleep’,  pra-pd  ‘place  for  watering’,  srad-dhd  ‘faith’,  sva-dhd 9  ‘self¬ 
power’;  un-md  (TS.)  ‘measure  of  height’,  prati-md  (TS.)  ‘counter-measure’, 
pra-md  (TS.)  ‘fore-measure’,  vi-md  (TS.)  ‘through-measure’10 *.  —  Without  -s 
as  in  the  derivative  a-  declension:  jd  (AV.),  md  (TS.  iv.  3.  71)  ‘measure’.  — 
dpa-gd 11  (AV.)  ‘going  away’,  abhi-bhd  ‘apparition’,  a-samjhd  (AV.)  ‘discord’, 
upajd  (AV.)  ‘distant  posterity’,  go-d/id I2,  dur-gd  (AV.)  ‘hard  to  go  upon’,  deva- 
gopd ,  dyu-ksd  ‘heavenly’,  pra-jd  ‘offspring’,  prati-md  ‘image’,  pra-pd  (AV.m.  306), 
pra-md  ‘measure’,  madhu-dhd 13  ‘dispensing  sweetness’,  srad-dhd  (AV.),  sana-jd , 
svd-gopa  ‘guarding  oneself’,  sva-dhd. 

n.  With  -s  and  agreeing  with  n.  substantives:  sthd-s  ‘stationary’;  indra- 
jd-s  (AV.)  ‘descended  from  Indra’,  sata-sd-s ,  su-pra-yd-s  ‘pleasant  to  tread  on’, 
soma-jd-s 14  (AV.)  ‘Soma-born’. 

A.  vcv.jdm ,  trdm  ‘protector’,  sthdm.  —  dadhi-krdm ,  rudhi-krdm  N.  of  a  demon. 
—  tamo-gdm  ‘roaming  in  the  darkness’,  tava-gdm  ‘moving  mightily’,  svasti-gdm 
‘leading  to  prosperity’.  —  sama-gdm .  —  agra-jdm  ‘first-born’,  ab-jdm ,  nabho- 
jdm ,  pura-jdm ,  prathama-jdm ,  bharesu-j dim  ‘existing  in  battles’.  - —  dn-asva-dam 
‘not  giving  horses’,  dn-asTr-dam  ‘not  giving  a  blessing’,  a-bhiksa-ddm ‘giving 
without  being  asked’,  upa-ddm  (VS.  xxx.  9)  ‘giving  a  present’,  jani-ddm  ‘giving 
a  wife’,  dravino-ddm ,  dhana-dd/n ,  rabho-ddm  ‘bestowing  strength’,  vasu-ddm , 
saho-ddm ,  havir-ddm  (AV.).  —  ratna-dhdm  (AV.,  VS.  iv.  25  ),  reto-dhdm  (VS. 
viii.  10),  vayo-dhdm ,  varivo-dhdm  ‘granting  space’,  varco-dhdm  (VS.  iv.  11),  vipo- 
dhdm  ‘inspiring’.  —  abhisasti-pdm ,  go-pdm,  tanu-pdm ,  ni-sikta-pdm  ‘protecting  the 
infused  (semen)’,  vrata-pdm.  —  ahjas-pdm  ‘drinking  instantly’,  srta-pdm  ‘drinking 
boiled  milk’,  soma-pdm.  —  antariksa-prdm,  kaksya-prdm  ‘filling  out  the  girth’, 


1  The  Ms.  reads  adhira-stha  ninasat. 

2  That  is,  su-upa-stha-s. 

3  While  Kh.  ni.222  has  in  the  same  verse 
bhumane-sthdh  (sic). 

4  The  Pada  reads  savya-slhdh ;  see  APr.  II. 
95,  and  cp.  Whitney’s  note  on  AV.  viii.  823. 

5  N.  sing.  Grassmann  and  Lanman,  N.  pi. 
Roth  and  Sayana. 

6  The  derivation  is  uncertain. 

7  The  above  are  the  only  N.  sing.  f. 
forms  written  with  in  the  Pada  text. 

8  It  may  therefore  be  assumed  that  the 
X.  was  formed  with  -j. 

9  Cp.  RPr.  II.  29.  With  regard  to  sva-dhd , 

the  Samhita  text  is  inconsistent,  writing  it 

contracted  with  a  following  vowel  in  svadhasll 


(1.  1656)  and  svadhdmiid  (v.  341),  where  it  must 
be  pronounced  with  hiatus. 

10  All  these  four  compounds  of  md-  ‘measure’ 
occur  in  TS.  IV. 4.  II3;  see  TPr. x.  13,  IS.  13, 
104,  note  2. 

11  RR.  would  accentuate  apa-gd\  cp.  Whit¬ 
ney’s  note  on  AV.  1.  34s. 

12  Probably  go-dhas  in  x.  28 1 1 ;  cp.  Lanman 

445-  .... 

13  Also  viaryadd  ‘limit’  if  maryd-da,  but 
the  derivation  is  doubtful. 

1 4  These  forms  must  be  regarded  as  m. 
used  as  n.  Cp.  the  -as  forms  of  -as  stems  used 
as  n.  (344). 

J5  According  to  the  Pada  text  abhi-ksa-dam 
(‘destroying’). 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


carsani-pr&M)  rathaprdm  ‘filling  a  car’,  rodasiprdm  \  —  apsdm,  urvarasdm 
‘granting  fertile  land’,  ksetrasdm  ‘procuring  land’,  dh  anas  dm ,  sadasdm  ‘always 
gaining’,  sahasrasdnr,  go-sftm ,  svar-sdm.  —  rocanasthdim ,  sv-asasthdm  (VS.n.  2) 
‘offering  a  good  seat’;  giristhdm ,  nare-sthdm  ‘serving  for  a  man1 2 3  to  stand 
on’,  nisthdm ,  karma-nisthdm  ‘diligent  in  religious  acts’,  pathi-sthfwi  (AV.)  ‘being 
on  the  way’,  pathesthdim 8  ‘standing  in  the  way’,  paristhdm  ‘surrounding’, 
parvatesthdm  ‘dwelling  on  the  heights’,  barhisthdm  4  ‘standing  on  the  sacrificial 
grass’,  rathesthdm ,  rayi-sthdm  (AV.)  ‘possessed  of  wealth’,  haristhdm.  —  Also 
the  abnormal  derivative  forms  pant  ham ,  mantham  ‘churning-stick’. 

f.  hsdm,  khdm  ‘well’,  gndm ,  jam,  j'ydm ,  vrdm.  —  a-gopdm ,  antariksa- 
prdm ,  ava-sdm  ‘liberation’,  dsvasdm ,  upa-vdm  (AV.)  ‘act  of  blowing  upon’, 
urusdm  ‘granting  much’,  rta-jhdm ,  tiro-dhdm  (AV.)  ‘concealment’,  dur-dhdm 
‘disarrangement’,  dhanasdm ,  prajdm ,  prati-dhdm  (AV.)  ‘draught’,  prati- 
sthdm  ‘standpoint’,  pra-vdm  (AV.)  ‘blowing  forth’,  pra-hdm  ‘advantage’,  yaksmo- 
dhdm 5  (AV.)  ‘maker  of  disease’,  vajasdm ,  srad-d/idm ,  sabhdm 6  ‘assembly’, 
su-prajdm ,  sva-jfim  ‘self-born’,  sva-dhdm ,  svar-srfm. 

I.  f.  apa-dhd  ‘concealment’,  abhi-k/iyd  ‘splendour’,  a-sthd  ‘without  standing’ 7, 
asTr-dd  (VS.)  ‘fulfilment  of  a  wish’,  prafi-d/id ,  prati-sthd 8,  sva-dhd. 

D.  m.  de\  ktlala-pe  ‘drinking  (the  beverage  called)  kllala\  dhiyam-dhe 
‘devout’,  pasu-se  ‘bestowing  cattle’,  rayas-posa-de  (VS.  v.  1)  ‘granting  increase 
of  wealth’,  suci-pc  ‘drinking  the  clear  (Soma)’,  subham-ye  ‘flying  swiftly  along’, 
havir-de. 

f.  Asr;  srad-dke9.  —  Also  the  infinitives  pra-khyai  ‘to  see’,  vi-khyai  ‘to 
look  about’;  para-dai  ‘to  give  up’;  vayo-dhai  ‘to  strengthen’;  prati-mai IO  ‘to 
imitate’;  ava-ydi  ‘to  go  away’,  ‘to  approach’,  upa-ydi  ‘to  come  near’, 

pra-ydi  ‘to  go  forward;  ava-sdi11  ‘to  rest’12 *. 

G.  m.  krsti-prds  ‘pervading  the  human  race’,  pasu-sds 

V.  m.  rta-pa-s  (TS.  111.2.8 x),  r tup a-s,  pur 0 gas  (TS.v.  1. 1 14),  bhUri-das, 
sukra-pUtapas  ‘drinking  bright  and  purified  (Soma)’,  sucipa-s ,  srotrapas  (VS. 
xx.  34)  ‘protecting  the  ear’,  sutapas,  somapas 14. 

Du.  N.  A.  V.  m.  kaksyaprd ,  gopd,  gharmyesthd  ‘being  in  a  house’, 
chardispd  ‘protecting  a  house’,  jagatpd  ‘protecting  the  living’,  tanupd ,  tapuspd 
‘drinking  warm  beverage’,  draviiw-dd T5,  paraspd ,  pura-jd ,  puru-tra  ‘protecting 
much’,  vaja-da  ‘bestowing  vigour’,  suci-pa ,  su-gopd ,  somapd ,  stipd.  —  With 
-aw:  d-krau 16  ‘inactive’,  a-doma-dhdu  (AV.)  ‘not  causing  inconvenience’,  adhva- 
gdu  ‘travelling’,  gopdu,  gopau ,  madhu-pau  ‘drinking  Soma’,  rayi-ddu  ‘bestowing 
wealth’,  siitapaux7 . 


1  For  rodasT-prcim. 

2  The  D.  case-form  of  nr-  ‘man’  being 
retained  in  the  compound. 

3  The  L.  of  the  stem  pat/ia-  =  patJd-  being 
retained  in  the  compound. 

4  barhi -  for  barhis- :  see  62. 

5  With  the  N.  case-form  retained  in  the 
compound;  see  Whitney’s  note  on  AV. ix.  89. 

6  The  derivation  of  this  word  is  uncertain. 

7  Used  adverbially  =  ‘at  once’. 

8  Cp.  Lanman  4471-  There  are  also  the 
transition  forms  jyaya ,  prajayd. 

9  Also  the  transition  form  prajayai. 

10  The  infinitive  prati-me  is  probably  a 
locative. 

11  These  dative  infinitives  are  formed  by 

combining  the  full  root  with  the  ending 

while  in  the  ordinary  datives  the  radical  a 

is  dropped  before  the  ending. 


12  See  below,  the  Dative  Infinitive,  584. 

13  The  form  /VA-  in  jcis-pati-  (1.  1 85s) ‘lord 

of  the  family’  is  probably  a  f.  G.  of  ja- ; 
and  gnci, s  probably  G.  of  in  gnas-pdii- 

‘husband  of  a  divine  woman’.  There  are 
also  the  transition  forms  jyayds  and  pra- 
jdyds. 

14  There  are  also  in  the  f.  the  transition 
forms  gauge,  srad-dhe,  iiro-dhc  (AV.)  ‘conceal¬ 
ment’. 

*5  The  Pada  text  reads  dravino-ddu. 

16  Some  of  these  duals  in  may  be 
formed  from  radical  stems  with  shortened 
-4;  cp.  Lanman  45qI- 

x7  There  are  also  the  f.  transition  forms 
rdu-pe.  ‘drinking  what  is  sweet’,  purva-je 
‘born  before’,  sv-dsa-sthe  ‘sitting  on  a  good 
seat’. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Vowel  Stems. 


I.  Only  four  compounds  of  -pd  in  TS.  in.  2.  io1 :  kratu-pabhya m  ‘watching 
one’s  intentions’,  caksus-pabhyd m ,  vaZz-pdbZiydm  ‘protecting  speech’,  srotra- 
pdbZiydm  h 

PI.  N.  V.  m.  rbhu-ksas.  —  agni-jas  (A V.)  ‘fire-born’,  a-pra-jds  ‘childless’, 
apsu-jds  (A V.),  osadZii-jds  (AV.)  ‘born  among  herbs’,  ZzZiala-jds  (AV.)  ‘produced 
on  a  threshing-floor’,  deva-jds ,  purd-jds ,  pratZiama-jds ,  pravate-jds  ‘grown  in  an 
airy  place’,  ragZiu-jds  ‘produced  from  a  racer’,  saZza-dZiuma-jds  (AV.)  ‘produced 
from  cow-dung’,  su-pra-jds,  sva-jds.  —  rta-jnds,  rta-jnds ,  pada-jZids  ‘knowing 
the  track’.  —  asva-dds  ‘giving  horses’,  dsir-dds  (VS.  vm.  5),  go-dds,  dravino-dds , 
dZiana-dds,  vara-dds  (AV.)  ‘granting  boons’,  vastra-dds  and  vdso-dds  ‘giving 
garments’,  Ziiranya-das.  — jani-dZids 2  (x.  29s),  dZiiya/n-dZids,  ratna-dZids,  reto- 
d/ids,  vayo-dZids.  —  payo-dZids  ‘sucking  milk’.  — •  kula-pds  ‘heads  of  the  fa¬ 
mily’;  go-pds ,  hidra-gopas  ‘protected  by  Indra’,  devd-gopas ,  vdyu-gopds  ‘pro¬ 
tected  by  Wind’,  su-gopds;  tanu-pds,  pasu-pds ,  vrata-pds.  —  agr e-pas  ‘drinking 
first’,  anjas-pds ,  payas-pas  ‘drinking  milk’,  manthi-pas 3  (VS.  vn.  17)  ‘drinking 
the  stirred  Soma’,  soma-pas,  soma-pds  (AV.),  havis-pas  ‘drinking  offerings’.  — 
carma-mnas 4  ‘tanners’.  —  jma-yds  ‘going  on  the  earth’.  —  dhana-sas ,  sadd-sas, 
sahasra-sas.  —  prt/iivi-st/ias 5  ‘standing  on  the  earth’,  rathe-sthds 6,  harmye- 
sthasb  ‘dwelling  in  the  house’.  —  ghrta-snds  ‘sprinkling  ghee’.  —  Also  the 
abnormal  derivative  pdnthds 7. 

f.  gads,  vras.  —  d-gopds,  ava-sthds  ‘female  organs’,  dhi-gopds  ‘guarded  by 
the  dragon’,  ‘frames’,  rta-jnds  (AV.),  giri-jds  ‘mountain-born \  jarani-pras2, 
devd-gopas ,  deva-yas ,  pada-jhas  (AV.),  p?-a-jds ,  pratha?na-jas ,  pra-yas  ‘advance’, 
?nanusya-jas  (AV.),  vaksane-sthas  ‘being  in  Agni’(?),  vaja-das ,  susma-das 
‘bestowing  strength’,  su-gopds,  soma-pds ,  svayam-jas 8  ‘self-born’. 

A.  m.  There  is  no  certain  example:  vane-jas  (x.  797)  is  possibly  one9. 

f.  Asyw,  /<?w.  —  dn-agni-trds  ‘not  maintaining  the  sacred  fire’, 
‘following  in  succession’,  asva-das,  deva-yas ,  pari-jds  (AV.)  ‘places  of 
origin’,  pari-sthds  ‘impediments’,  pra-jds ,  manusya-jds ,  vi-sthas  ‘positions’,  sa/ia- 
gopds  ‘accompanied  by  herdsmen’,  su-gas  ‘easy  to  traverse’,  sva-dpas. 

I.  m.  agre-pdbhis.  —  f.  gnab/iis;  rtu-pabhis,  ratna-d/idbhis ,  prajdbZiis , 
srad-dZiabZiis ,  sva-dZiabZiis. 

D.  f.  pra-jdbZiyas.  —  Ab.  m.  bZiuri-da bZiyas 1  °. 

L.  f.  fzsasu ,  gnasu,  jdsu;  a-tdsu11,  pra-jdsu ,  sabZidsu. 


1  b.  Stems  in  Radical  -or. 

369.  These  consist  almost  entirely  of  stems  in  radical  d  which  has  been 
shortened  to  <?.  With  the  exception  of  ZzZid -12  ‘aperture’  they  occur  at  the  end  of 
compounds  only.  They  are:  -Awr-  ‘dwelling’,  A##'-,  -gd-  ‘going’,  -gd-  ‘singing’, 
-jd-  ‘born’,  y/#-  ‘bowstring’,  -fo- ‘stretching’,  -tra- ‘protecting’,  ‘giving’14, 
-dd-  ‘binding’,  ‘putting’,  -pd-  ‘guarding’,  -pa-  ‘drinking’,  -prd-  ‘filling’,  -mnd- 


1  In  the  L.  du.  there  also  occur  the  f. 
transition  forms  jahghayos  (AV.)  and  rz'tf- 
d hay  os. 

2  Of  doubtful  meaning. 

3  The  stem  is  manthi-pa-  according  to  BR. 

4  From  \mld- :  ‘softening  hides’. 

5  Prthivi-  —  prthivi 

6  With  the  L.  ending  retained  in  the  first 
member  of  ihe  compound. 

7  The  form  pcinthdsas  also  occurs  once. 

It  is  doubtful  whether  the  plurals  dyu-ksdsas 

and  priya-sdsas  are  to  be  regarded  as  formed 

from  d-  stems.  Such  plurals  are  probably 

made  from  a-  stems. 


8  There  is  also  the  f.  transition  form 

nava-gvds. 

9  Cp.  Lanman  45 1 4. 

10  In  the  G.  occur  the  f.  transition  forms 
pra-jhandm  (AV.)  ‘fore -knowing’,  vi-bhdndm 
‘radiant’. 

11  Probably  from  ta-  =  tan •  ‘stretch’. 

12  The  nominatives  drd-s  and  vrd-s  in  AV. 
XI.  73  (also  nyd-s ,  74)  are  of  unknown  meaning 
(see  Whitney’s  note). 

T3  Cp.  Garbe  in  KZ.  23,  476,  480. 

J4  Perhaps  also  -dr a-  ‘running’  in  krsna- 
drd-m  (AV.). 


254 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


‘thinking’,  -m/a-1  ‘softening’,  -sd-  ‘winning’,  -si ha-  ‘standing’;  also  -grd-2i  swallow¬ 
ing’,  -gva- 3  ‘going’,  -hd-**  ‘slaying’. 

These  stems  are  inflected  in  the  m.  and  n.  only.  Tins  is  the  form 
assumed  in  the  n.  by  all  radical  J-stems  (367). 

Inflexion. 

370.  The  inflexion  of  the  radical  ^-sterns  is  identical  with  that  of  the 
derivative  tf-stems  (371).  The  forms  which  occur  are  the  following: 

Sing.  N.  m.  dyu-ksd-s  ‘dwelling  in  heaven’.  —  su-khd-s  ‘having  a  good 
(axle)  hole’.  —  agre-gd-s  ‘going  in  front’,  asum-gd-s  (AV.)  ‘swift-going’,  rju-gd-s 
(AV.)  ‘going  straight  on’,  patam-gd-s 5 6  ‘going  by  flight’,  vala-gd-s  (AV.)  ‘hidden 
in  a  cave’0,  sitim-gd-s  (AV.xi.  512)  ‘white-goer’,  su-gd-s  ‘easy  to  traverse’.  —  dds'a- 
gva-s 7  ‘going  in  tens’,  ?iava-gva-s  7  ‘going  in  nines’  8.  —  a-jd-s  ‘unborn’,  adhrl-ja-s 
‘irresistible’,  eka-ja-s  (AV.)  ‘produced  alone’,  jarayu-jd-s  (AV.)  ‘viviparous’, 
ni-ja-s  (AV.)  ‘familiar’9,  prathama-jd-s  (AV.)  ‘first-born’,  samudra-jd-s  (AV.) 
‘sea-born’,  stamba-jd-s  (AV.)  ‘shaggy’  (?).  —  an-a?iu-da-s  ‘not  giving  way’,  danu- 
dd-s  ‘dripping’,  daya-dd-s  (AV.)  ‘receiving  ( a-da -)  inheritance  ( daya-)\  prana-da- s 
‘life-giving’.  —  nama-dhd-s  (AV.)  ‘name-giver’.  —  akuti-pra-s  (AV.)  ‘fulfilling 
wishes’,  kama-prd-s  (AV.)  ‘fulfilling  desire’,  carsani-prd-s  (AV.)  ‘satisfying  men’, 
prthivl-prd-s  (AV.)  ‘earth-filling’10.  —  apnah-sthd-s  ‘possessor’,  go-stha-s  (AV.) 
‘cow-pen’,  puru-nisthd-s  ‘excelling  among  many’.  —  satru-hd-s  (AV.)  ‘slaying 
enemies’,  sahasra-hd-s  (AV.)  ‘slaying  a  thousand’. 

N.  A.  n.  khdm  ‘aperture’.  —  a-doma-dam  (AV.)  ‘not  causing  inconvenience’, 
antdri-ksam  ‘air’,  krsna-drdm  (AV.)  ‘black  runner’!?)11,  tuvi-ksam  ‘destroying 
many’,  dur-gdm  ‘impassable’,  dyu-ksdm ,  prathama-jdm  (AV.  VS.),  vdta-gopam 
(AV.)  ‘guarded  by  the  wind’,  vrtra-ham  ‘slaying  foes’,  satra-ham  ‘always 
destroying’,  sadhd-stham  ‘abode’,  su-gdm  ,  su-mnam  ‘benevolent’. 

A.  m.  atithi-gvdm  (‘to  whom  guests  go’)  N.  of  a  man,  an-anu-ddm , 
arati-ham  (AV.)  ‘destroying  adversity’,  asva-pdm  (VS.  xxx.  11)  ‘groom’,  d-sva- 
gam  (AV.)  ‘homeless’,  eka-jdm ,  garbha-dhdm  (VS.  TS.)  ‘impregnator’,  grha- 
pdm  (VS.  xxx.  1 1)  ‘guardian  of  a  house’,  go-pdm  ‘herdsman’,  carma-mnam  (VS.) 
‘tanner’,  tri-st ham  ‘having  three  seats’,  ddsa-gvam ,  dava-pdm  (VS.  xxx.  19) 
‘forest-fire  guard’,  dyu-ksdm ,  patam-gdm ,  prathama-jdm  (VS.  xxxiv.  5 1),  madhu- 
pdm  ‘honey-drinker’,  vana-pdm  (VS.  xxx.  19)  ‘wood-ranger’,  vala-gdm  (AV.), 
vitta-dham  (VS.  xxx.  1 1)  ‘possessing  wealth’,  su-khdm ,  su-gdm  (AV.),  hasti-pdm 
(VS.  xxx.  11)  ‘elephant-keeper’. 

I.  m.  rathe-sthena  ‘standing  on  a  car’.  —  n.  antdri-ksena ,  rtd-jyena 
‘whose  bowstring  is  truth’,  ka?na-prena,  su-gena  (AV.),  su-mnena. 

D.  m.  atithi-gvdya ,  dyu-ksaya,  patam-gaya ,  rathe-sthdya12.  —  n.  pards- 
pdya  (VS.)  ‘protecting  from  afar’,  su-mndya.  —  Ab.  m.  rsya-ddt  (x.  39s)  ‘pit 
for  antelopes’.  —  n.  antdri-ksat I3,  dur-gdt ,  sadhd-sthat. 


1  In  the  form  oi-mna-  in  carma-mna-  ‘tanner’. 

2  An  extension  of  gr-  ‘swallow’;  cp.  -krd- 
and  vra-  among  the  radical  a-  stems. 

3  In  its  original  form  perhaps  -gva-;  a 
reduced  form  -gu-  appears  in  vanar-gu-  ‘forest¬ 
roaming’  . 

4  A  reduced  form  of  han-  ‘slay’. 

5  See  Bartholomae,  BB.  15,  34  and  cp. 
BB.  iS,  12. 

6  The  etymology  and  meaning  are  some¬ 
what  doubtful;  cp.  IS.  4,  304. 

7  These  two  compounds  as  well  as  atithi- 

gvct-  and  It  a- gva-,  are  with  more  probability 

derived  from  a  reduced  form  of  go-  ‘cotv’  by 


Bloomfield,  AJPh.  17,422  —  27;  cp.  above 
p.  153  (mid.). 

8  The  compound  puro-gava-s  ‘leader’  pos¬ 
sibly  =  *puro-gva-s ;  but  it  is  probably  a 
governing  compound;  cp.  above,  p.  1761. 

9  See  Whitney’s  note  on  AV.  111.  52. 

10  Also  pasu-sd-s  (v.  411)  if  it  is  N.  sing, 
and  not  a  G.  of  pasit-sa-. 

11  Cp.  Whitney’s  note  on  AV.  ix.  74. 

12  svajdya  (AV.)  is  analyzed  by  the  Com¬ 
mentator  as  svajdya  ‘self-born’,  but  is  ex¬ 
plained  by  Whitney  (AV.  vi.  5b2)  as  ‘con¬ 
strictor’  (from  svaj-  ‘embrace’). 

J3  See  Lanman  337. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Vowel  Stems. 


255 


G.  m.  a-jdsya,  atit/ii-gvdsya'1 .  —  n.  antdri-ksasya ,  asthi-jdsya  (AV.)  ‘pro¬ 
duced  in  the  bones’,  tanu-jasya  (AV.)  ‘produced  from  the  body’,  su-mndsya. 

L.  m.  dasa-gve ,  ndva-gve,  rcitha-samge  ‘encounter  of  war-cars’,  sam-sthd 
‘presence’,  sam-ge  ‘conflict’,  su-khc ,  svar-ge  ‘going  to  heaven’.  —  n.  antdri-kse , 
khi.  —  karanja-he  ‘pernicious  to  the  Karanja  tree’,  dur-ge ,  bhayd-sthe  ‘perilous 
situation’,  sadhd-sthe ,  su-mne.  —  V.  m.  eka-ja ,  dyu-ksa ,  patam-ga  (AV.),  soma-pa 
(AV.)  ‘drinking  Soma’. 

Du.  N.  A.  m.2  eta-gvd  ‘going  swiftly’.  —  A.  n.  sadhd-sthe. 

PI.  N.  V.  m.  djya-pds  (VS.  xxi.  40)  ‘drinking  clarified  butter’,  eta-gods, 
tanu-jds  (AV.),  tapo-jds  (AV.)  ‘produced  by  austerity’,  ddsa-gvas ,  ndva-gvas , 
patam-gds ,  vala-gds  (AV.),  su-gds.  —  Also  four  forms  with  asas :  ddsa-gvasas , 
dyu-ksdsas,  ndva-gvasas ,  priya-sdsas 3  ‘granting  desired  objects’. 

N.  A.  n.  1.  amsa-tra  ‘armour  protecting  the  shoulder’,  antdriksa ,  dur-gd, 
prathama-jd 4  (AV.),  sadhd-stha,  su-gd,  su-mnd.  —  2.  khdni.  —  antdri-ksani , 
ararin-dani 5,  dur-gdni ,  sadhd-sthani ,  su-gdni ,  su-mndni. 

A.  m.  go-pdn ,  tapo-jdn ,  dur-gdn  (AV.),  patam-gdn ,  purva-jdn  (TS.)  ‘born 
before’,  srta-pdn  ‘drinking  boiled  milk’,  saha-jdn  (TS.)  ‘born  at  the  same 
time’,  su-gdn,  soma-pdn  (AV.). 

I.  m.  1.  tuvi-grebhis  ‘swallowing  much’,  mitho-avadya-pebhis  ‘mutually 
averting  calamities’,  ratna-dhebhis  ‘preserving  wealth’,  sama-gebhis  (AV.)  ‘reciting 
chants’,  sugebhis.  —  2.  d-tais 6  ‘frames’,  ddsa-gvais,  ndva-gvais ,  dhana-sdis 
‘winning  wealth’,  ndva-gvais ,  patam-gdis ,  su-khdis.  —  n.  1.  madhu-pebhis , 
su-gebhis ,  su-mnebhis.  —  2.  su-mndis. 

D.  m.  purva-jebhyas.  —  G.  m.  dvi-jdnam  (AV.)  ‘twice-born’,  sdkam- 
jdnam  ‘being  born  together’.  —  L.  m.  dravino-desu  ‘giving  wealth’,  su-khesu.  — 
n.  dur-gesu ,  sadhd-sthesu ,  su-gesu ,  su-mtiesu. 

2  a.  Derivative  stems  in  -cr. 

Benfey,  Vollstandige  Grammatik  p.  293— 3 1 7.  —  Whitney,  Grammar  326 — 334 
(p.  112—116).  —  Lanman,  Noun-Inflection  329 — 354. 

371.  This  is  the  most  important  of  the  declensions  as  it  embraces  more 
than  one-half  of  all  nominal  stems.  It  is  also  the  most  irregular  inasmuch 
as  its  ending  diverge  from  the  normal  ones  more  than  is  elsewhere  the  case. 
This  is  the  only  declension  in  which  the  N.  A.  n.  has  an  ending  in  the  singular. 
Here  the  I.  D.  Ab.  G.  sing,  are  peculiar;  and  in  the  plural,  the  A.,  the  G., 
one  of  the  forms  of  the  I.  and  of  the  N.  A.  n.  do  not  take  the  normal 
endings.  The  final  vowel  of  the  stem  is  also  modified  before  the  endings 
with  initial  consonant  in  the  du.  and  pi.  Three  of  the  peculiar  case-endings 
of  the  sing.  (I.  Ab.  G.)  are  borrowed  from  the  pronominal  declension,  while 
in  the  pi.  two  of  the  case-endings  (G.  and  N.  A.  n.)  are  due  to  the  influence 
of  the  stems  in  -//.  This  is  the  only  declension  in  which  the  Ab.  sing.,  as  a 
result  of  taking  the  pronominal  ending,  is  distinguished  from  the  G.  As  else¬ 
where  in  the  vowel  declension,  the  N.  sing.  m.  here  adds  the  ending  -s  throughout; 
but  the  V.  sing,  shows  the  bare  stem  unmodified.  This  declension  includes 


1  svajasya  in  AV.  X.  410-  J5  is  according  to 
Whitney  ‘constrictor’,  not  sva-jasya  ‘self- 
born’;  cp.  p.  254,  note  I2. 

2  Some  of  the  m.  duals  given  under  the 
radical  u-declension  ought  possibly  to  be 
placed  here. 

3  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  any 

of  these  are  plurals  of  a-  stems,  since  the 

first  three  appear  as  d-  stems  only  and 

pfiya-sa -  does  not  otherwise  occur.  The  pi. 


pant  has  as,  occurring  once  beside  the  ordinary 
panthas  formed  from  the  anomalous  deri¬ 
vative  d-  stem pdntha-,  proves  nothing  regard¬ 
ing  radical  a-  stems. 

4  This  is  the  reading  of  the  Pada  text, 
the  Samhita  having  -jd  r-  (70  a). 

5  A  word  of  uncertain  meaning:. 

6  Two  other  forms,  aids  and  dtasu  are 
formed  from  the  f.  stem  of  this  word,  add-, 
which  is  probably  a  radical  d-  stem. 


256  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

m.  and  n.  stems  only,  as  the  corresponding  f.  follows  the  derivative  ^-declension. 
There  is  here  no  irregularity  in  the  accent,  which  remains  on  the  same 
syllable  in  every  case  except  the  V.,  where  it  of  course  shifts  to  the  first. 


Inflexion. 

372.  The  inflexion  of  the  n.  differs  from  that  of  the  m.  in  the  N.  sing, 
and  the  N.  A.  du.  and  pi.  only.  In  the  G.  L.  du.  y  is  inserted  between  the 
final  -a  of  the  stem  and  the  ending  -os.  The  forms  actually  occurring,  if 
made  from  priyd-  ‘dear’,  would  be  the  following: 

Sing.  N.  m.  priyd-s ,  n.  priyd-m.  A.  priyd-m.  I.  priyena  and  priyd . 
D.  priydya.  Ab.  priydt.  G.  priydsya .  L.  priyd.  V.  priyci. 

Du.  N.  A.  m.  priyd  and  priydu,  n.  priyd.  V.  m.  priyci  and  priyau. 
I.  D.  Ab.  priydbhyam.  G.  L.  priydyos. 

PL  N.  m.  priyds  and  priydsas ,  n.  priyd  and  priydni.  A.  m.  priydn , 
n.  priyd  and  priydni.  I.  priydis  and  priydbhis.  D.  Ab.  priydbhyas.  G.  pri- 
ydnam.  L.  priyesu.  V.  priyds  and  priydsas. 

Owing  to  the  enormous  number  of  words  belonging  to  this  declension, 
only  forms  of  commonest  occurrence  will  be  given  below  as  examples  under 
each  case. 

Sing.  N.  m.  This  case  is  formed  in  the  RV.  by  1845  0-stems  and 
occurs  more  than  10000  times.  The  most  frequent  substantive  is  indras  N. 
of  a  god,  found  more  than  500  times;  next  in  order  come  sdmas  (220)  N.  of 
a  plant,  dev  as  (203)  ‘god’,  mitrds  (132)  N.  of  a  god,  vdrunas  (94)  N.  of  a  god. 

A.  m.  After  the  N.  sing,  m.,  the  A.  sing.  m.  is  the  commonest  declensional 
form  in  the  RV.,  being  made  from  1357  stems1  and  occurring  nearly  7000 
times.  The  nouns  most  frequently  found  in  this  case  are  indram  (335),  sdmam, 
(212),  yajhdm  (183)  ‘sacrifice’,  vajam  (123)  ‘vigour’,  s  dry  am  (90)  ‘sun’, 
havam  (88)  ‘invocation’,  vrtrdm  (82)  N.  of  a  demon,  stomam  (77)  ‘praise’2 3. 

N.  A.  n.  This  is  the  only  declension  in  which  these  cases  take  an 
ending.  They  here  add  -m,  being  thus  identical  in  form  with  the  A.  sing.  mA 
They  are  very  frequently  used,  being  formed  from  about  950  stems  and 
occurring,  taken  together,  more  than  4000  times.  Examples  are:  rtdm  (70) 
‘sacred  order’,  ghrtdm  (47)  ‘clarified  butter’,  paddm  (46)  'step’,  rdtnam  (44) 
‘wealth’,  sakhydm  (43)  ‘friendship’,  drdvinam  (41)  ‘wealth’,  satydm  (40)  ‘truth’4. 

I.  m.  n.  1.  The  usual  form  of  this  case  ending  in  -ena  is  very  frequent, 
being  formed  from  more  than  300  stems  nearly  equally  divided  between  m. 
and  n.  The  commonest  forms  are:  m.  s  dry  ena  (37),  indr  ena  (34),  vdjrena 
(33)  ‘thunderbolt’,  yajnena  (13).  —  n.  ghrtena  (31)5. 

a.  The  final  vowel  appears  lengthened  in  about  twenty-five  forms: 
amrtena  (AV.)  ‘ambrosia’,  d-sivend  ‘malevolent’,  djyend  ‘melted  butter’,  rtend , 
kdvyend  ‘wisdom’,  kulisend  ‘axe’,  peivend  ‘ram’,  tavisend  ‘strong’,  daksinend 
‘right’,  ddivyend  ‘divine’,  bdkurena  ‘bagpipe’,  bhadrend  (AV.)  ‘excellent’,  mdrtyend 
‘mortal’,  mdrutend  ‘consisting  of  storm-gods’,  ravdthena  ‘roar’,  vdrunena , 
vithurena  ‘staggering’,  vi-ravena  ‘roar’,  virycnd  ‘heroic  power’,  vrjdnend  ‘might’, 
vrsabhend  ‘bull’,  sahasyena  ‘mighty’,  sdyakend  ‘missile’,  s  dry  end ,  skdmbhanend 


1  The  pronominal  forms  tain  and  yam 
occur  509  and  259  times  respectively  in 
the  RV. 

2  On  the  occasional  elision  of  the  -in  be¬ 
fore  iva  and  subsequent  contraction,  see 
Lanman  331. 

3  For  this  reason  there  is  in  some  in¬ 

stances  not  sufficient  evidence  for  deter¬ 


mining  whether  a  word  is  m.  or  n.;  cp. 
Lanman  331  (middle). 

4  On  occasional  elision  of  the  final  -in 
and  subsequent  contraction,  see  Lanman  331. 

5  The  final  vowel  is  twice  nasalized : 
gh  anen  am  ekas  (i.  334)  and  tej alien  am  ckam 
(r.  1  io5). 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Vowel  Stems. 


257 


‘support’1.  These  forms  regularly  occur  where  the  metre  at  the  end  of  a  Pada 
favours  a  long  vowel;  e.  g.  skambhanena  janitri  (m.31'2),  but  kambhanma 
skdb/uydn  (x.  hi5);  on  the  other  hand,  the  long  vowel  appears  to  be  used 
arbitrarily  at  the  beginning  of  a  Pada,  though  the  short  vowel  here  is  much 
more  frequent.  Hence  the  a  seems  to  be  a  survival  and  not  to  be  due  to 
metrical  exigencies. 


2.  There  are  also  more  than  a  dozen  forms  made  with  the  nominal 
ending  -a.  In  the  m.  there  are  no  quite  certain  examples  beyond  ya/nd; 
possibly  also  brand  ‘acting’,  ghand  ‘club’,  ddnd  ‘gift’1 2,  camasd 3  ‘cup’.  The 
n.  forms  are  kavitvd  and  kavitvand  ‘by  wisdom’,  taranitvd  ‘by  energy’, 
jnahitvd  and  ma/iitvand  ‘by  greatness’,  ratna-dheya  ‘by  distribution  of  wealth’, 
rathyd  ‘belonging  to  a  car’,  vJryd  ‘with  heroism’,  sakhyd  ‘with  friendship’, 
sarva-rathd  ‘with  the  whole  line  of  chariots’,  su-hdva  ‘with  good  invoca¬ 
tion’*.  —  This  ending  is  also  preserved  in  a  few  instrumental  adverbs: 
and  ‘hereby’,  need  ‘above’,  pa bed  ‘behind’,  sand  ‘from  of  old’5. 

D.  m.  n.  This  case,  which  has  the  abnormal  ending  -aya,  is  of  very 
frequent  occurrence,  being  formed  in  the  RV.  from  over  300  stems  in  the 
m.  and  from  nearly  150  in  the  n.  The  commonest  forms  are:  m.  indraya 
(188),  mddaya  (76)  ‘exhilaration’,  devdya  (26),  mdrtyaya  (25),  mitrdya  (23), 
vdrunlya  (23),  yajamdndya  ‘sacrificing’,  sdrydya  (11);  n.  suvitdya  (34)  ‘wel¬ 
fare’,  sakhydya  (29),  (okay a  (21)  ‘offspring’,  tdnaydya  (18)  ‘line  of  de¬ 
scendants’6 *. 


a.  The  normal  form  would  have  been  for  example  *yajndi =z  yajnd-e This  would 
in  Sandhi  have  become  *ya/ndy,  which  was  ultimately  extended  with  -a,  owing  to  the 
frequent  combination  with  a  following  a -  in  Sandhi  (e.  g.  yajndy-a  pi  for  yajndy  tipi),  or 
with  the  shortened  form  of  the  preposition  d8. 

Ab.  m.  n.  These  are  the  only  nominal  stems  in  which  the  Ab.  is 
formally  distinguished  from  the  G.  Instead  of  the  normal  ending  -as,  they 
take  the  -d  which  appears  in  the  pronominal  declension  (e.  g.  rnd-d  ‘from 
me’),  lengthening  the  -a  of  the  stem  before  it9.  This  Ab.  in  -ad  is  formed  in 
the  RV.  from  over  200  stems,  nearly  equally  divided  between  m.  and  n. 
Some  of  the  n.  forms  are  used  as  adverbs.  Forms  of  common  occurrence 
are:  m.  samudrat  (15)  ‘sea’,  updsthat  (9)  ‘lap’,  indrat  (8);  n.  antdri-ksat 10 
(15)  ‘air’;  durat  (19)  ‘from  a  distance’,  pascat  (26). 

G.  m.  n.  These  are  the  only  nominal  stems  in  which  the  G.  sing,  does 
not  end  in  -s11.  Instead  of  the  normal  ending  -as,  they  add  -sya  12  which  is 


1  In  all  these  forms  the  Pada  text  has  the 
short  final  vowel  d ;  see  RPr.  Vlll.  21  and  cp. 
Af’r.  HI.  16.  The  pronominal  forms  tend , 
yend ,  svend  also  appear,  and  always  with  the 
short  vowel  in  the  Pada  text;  on  the  other 
hand,  end  is  always  end  in  the  Pada,  while 
the  unaccented  end,  beside  ena,  has  the 
short  vowel  in  the  Pada.  See  Lanman  332 
(bottom). 

2  See  Lanman  334  (middle). 

3  Nasalized  in  camasavi  iva  (x.  254),  Pada 
camasdn.  On  these  forms  see  Lanman  335. 

4  This  form  of  the  instrumental  also  appears 
a  few  times  in  the  pronoun  tvd  beside  the 
usual  tvayd;  it  also  occurs  in  a  few  compounds, 
as  tva-datta-  and  tvd-ddta-  ‘given  by  thee’; 
cp.  Lanman  334  (middle). 

5  Perhaps  also  nica  ‘below’,  cp.  nJcais ;  but 

it  may  be  the  I.  of  nydhc-. 

0  Such  D.  forms  are  twice  nasalized  be- 

Indo-arische  Philologie.  I.  4. 


fore  vowels:  tcid-vasdyavi  esa  (u.  142)  and 
savayam  evd  (1.  1 1 3 1). 

7  The  normal  ending  -e  is  actually  used 
in  the  pronominal  declension,  e.  g.  tdsmai 
—  tdsma-e. 

8  See  Johansson,  BB.  20,  96  ff.  and  Bar- 
TIIOLOMAE,  Arische  Forschungen  2,69;  3,63. 

9  Cp.  Johansson,  BB.  16,  136  and  Bruo 
mann,  Grundriss  2,  588. 

10  This  is  really  a  radical  a •  stem;  see 
above,  370. 

In  the  G.  sing,  of  stems  in  -ar  and  -tar, 
the  final  r  seems  to  represent  original  -s ; 
see  above  358,  note  on  svdsur. 

12  The  y  is  never  to  be  read  as  i ;  possibly 
however  about  five  times  in  the  pronominal 
asyci.  The  final  -a  in  two  or  three  instances 
undergoes  protraction  of  a  purely  metrical 
character:  see  Lanman  3383 4- 


17 


258  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4  Vedic  Grammar. 

otherwise  found  in  the  pronominal  declension  only.  This  case  is  very  common, 
being  formed  in  the  RV.  from  over  500  stems  in  the  m.  and  175  in  the  n., 
occurring  altogether  over  3300  times1.  Among  the  frequent  forms2  are: 
m.  indrasya  (123),  s  dry  asya  (93),  somasya  (88),  devdsya  (60),  yajnasya  (55), 
sutdsya  (53)  ‘pressed’;  n.  rtdsya  (187),  bhuvanasya  (39)  ‘world’,  amftasya  (3s)3. 

L.  m.  n.  This  case  is  formed  with  the  normal  ending  which  combines 
with  the  final  -a  of  the  stem  to  -e.  It  is  formed  in  the  RV.  from  373  stems 
in  the  m.,  and  over  300  in  the  n.,  occurring  altogether  about  2500  times. 
Among  the  frequent  forms  are:  m.  adhvare  (68)  ‘sacrifice’,  sute  (53),  upd-sthe 
(49),  made  (48),  dame  (40)  ‘house’,  indre  (33),  yajne  (28),  jane  (26)  ‘man’, 
grhe  (23)  ‘house’;  n.  viddthe  (49)  ‘assembly’,  dgre  (43)  ‘front’,  sadane  (35) 
‘seat’,  pade  (33),  durone  (31)  ‘abode’,  madhye  ‘middle’  (29). 

V.  m.  n.  In  this  case  the  bare  stem  (always  accented  on  the  first 
syllable)  is  employed.  It  is  formed  in  the  RV.  from  about  260  stems,  occur¬ 
ring  about  2500  times  in  the  m.;  but  in  the  n.  there  is  no  undoubted 
example4.  The  AV.  however  has  four  or  five  n.  vocatives.  Among  the 
commonest  forms  are:  m.  soma  and  soma  (240),  deva  (132),  sura  (94)  ‘hero’, 
pavamana  (63)  ‘bright  Soma’,  puru-huta  (49)  ‘much  invoked’,  varuna  (45), 
mitra  (35),  yavistha  (29)  ‘youngest’,  vrsabha  (27)  ‘bull’,  ugra  (23)  ‘mighty’, 
amrta  (12)  5;  n.  antariksa 6  (AV.  vi.  1 301 6),  trdikakuda  ‘coming  from  the  three- 
peaked  (mountain)’  and  devahjana  (AV.  xix.  44s)  ‘divine  ointment’,  talpa  (AV. 
xii.  249)  ‘couch’,  visa  (AV.  iv.  63)  ‘poison’7. 

Du.  N.  A.  V.  m.  The  ending  of  these  cases  in  the  RV.  is  ordinarily 
-a,  much  less  frequently  - au 8.  The  former  is  taken  by  over  360  stems 
occurring  about  1150  times,  the  latter  by  fewer  than  90  stems  occurring  about 
170  times.  The  ending  -a  is  therefore  more  than  seven  times  as  common 
as  -au.  The  rule  is  that  -a  appears  before  consonants 9,  in  pausa  at  the  end 
of  a  Pada10,  or  within  a  Pada  in  coalescence  with  a  following  vowel;  while 
-au  11  occurs  in  the  older  parts  of  the  RV.  only  before  vowels  in  the  Sandhi 
form  of  -av,  within  a  Pada.  Examples  of  this  rule  are  td  vain  (1.  1841); 
rtavrdha  |  (1.  473b);  das  rat12  (1.  n6I0C)  for  dasra  dt;  mitragnim  (1.  143)  for 
mitra  agnim;  but  tdv 13  apardm  (1. 1841).  Hiatus,  when  the  metre  requires  two 


1  The  pronominal  genitives  asya  and  asya, 
/asya,  ydsya,  visvasya  occur  over  900  times 
in  the  RV. ;  cp.  Lanman  338. 

2  The  commonest  G.  in  -sya  is  the  pro¬ 
nominal  asya  which  (accented  or  unaccented) 
occurs  nearly  600  times  in  the  RV. 

3  The  final  vowel  is  once  nasalized  at 
the  end  of  a  Pada  in  rtdsyam  ekam  (vm.  893)  ; 
cp.  RPr.  11.  31. 

4  Cp.  Lanman  339. 

5  There  are  two  instances  of  the  final  -a 
being  nasalized:  ugram  okas  (vn.  254)  and 
puru-stutam  eho  (vm.  153-  n);  cp.  RPr. XIV.  20. 

There  is  a  purely  metrical  lengthening  of 
the  final  vowel  in  vrsabha  (vm.  4522-  38), 
sima  (VIII.  41),  and  hariyojand  (1.  61 16); 
perhaps  also  maryd  (1.  63j;  cp.  Lanman 
339- 

6  Properly  a  radical  a -  stem. 

7  By  a  syntactical  peculiarity  the  N.  indras 

oa  is  some  ten  times  coupled  with  a  vocative 

vayo,  ague  etc.  See  Lanman  340  (topi 

3  In  the  AV.  -au  is  more  than  twice  as 

common  as  in  the  RV. ;  it  is  there  some¬ 


times  a  various  reading  for  - d  of  the  RV. 
In  the  independent  Mantra  portions  of  the 
TS.  there  are  at  least  seven  forms  in  -a  and 
fourteen  in  -au.  In  the  Khilas  -d  is  nearly 

three  times  (32)  as  common  as  -au  (12). 

9  -au  occurs  23  times  before  a  consonant 
within  a  Pada;  mostly  in  passages  showing 
signs  of  lateness.  Cp.  Lanman  576. 

i°  -au  occurs  5  times  at  the  end  of  an  odd 
Pada  before  a  consonant;  and  4  times  as 
-av  at  the  end  of  an  odd  Pada  before  a 

vowel.  At  the  end  of  an  even  Pada  -au 

occurs  4  times. 

Lanman  343  enumerates  the  forms  in 
-au  which  occur  in  the  RV. 

12  At  the  end  of  an  odd  Pada  -d  is  always 
written  in  the  Samhita  contracted  with  a 
following  vowel,  but  must  always  be  read 
with  hiatus. 

13  This  is  the  normal  use  of  -au,  which  in 
70  per  cent  of  its  occurrences  is  found  as 
-av  before  a  vowel  within  a  Pada;  in  the 
AV.  the  percentage  is  only  26. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Vowel  Stems.  259 

syllables,  is  thus  removed1  by  the  use  of  -av,  except  when  u  or  u  follows2.  In 
the  latter  case  the  Samhita  text  writes  -a  u-\  e.  g.  iibhd  uplinsu  (x.  S37),  though 
the  Pada  always  has  -au  u-. 

There  are  seven  or  eight  passages  of  the  RV.  in  which  -a  is  written  with 
hiatus  before  other  vowels  ( a -  i-  but  those  passages  are  all  obscure  or 
corrupt 5. 

a.  About  a  dozen  forms,  occurring  altogether  some  20  times,  shorten  the  dual  -a 
to  a ,  mostly  owing  to  the  metre,  but  in  a  few  instances  against  the  metre.  In  the  forms 
asura ,  aditya ,  dev  a,  dhrta-vrata ,  mitra,  varuna,  indr  a  -varuna,  mitrd-varuna 6  the  Pada  text 
has  -d;  but  in  pdura  (v.  744)  and  vira  (vi.  63 IO)  the  short  vowel  appears  in  the  Pada 
also 7.  A  similar  shortening  occurs  in  the  first  member  of  the  dual  compounds  indrci- 
vdyu.  (1.  24)  and  m'ltra-rdjdnd,  (v.  62 4). 

N.  A.  n.  This  form  takes  the  normal  ending  - 7 ,  which  combines  with 
the  final  -a  of  the  stem  to  -e.  It  is  made  in  the  RV.  from  about  30  nominal 
stems.  The  vocative  does  not  occur.  Only  seven  of  these  n.  forms  are 
found  more  than  once,  srhge  ‘two  horns’  being  the  commonest  (s)8. 

a.  The  n.  ncikta -  ‘night’  is  irregular  in  forming  its  du.  N.  as  a  m.  in  the  compound 
nsasd-nakta  ‘dawn  and  night’,  in  agreement  with  which  a  f.  adjective  is  used,  owing 
doubtless  to  the  predominance  of  ‘Dawn’,  in  the  combination.  In  11.  39b  yugeva  ndbhyeva 
‘like  two  yokes,  like  two  naves’,  though  analyzed  by  the  Pada  as  yugd  iva  and  ndbhyd 
wa,  must  be  explained  as  regular  11.  forms  yuge  and  ndbhye-\-va. 

I.  D.  Ab.  Before  the  normal  ending  - bhyatfi 9  which  forms  these  cases, 
the  final  -a  of  the  stems  is  lengthened,  e.  g.  ndsatydbhyam.  In  the  RV.  this 
form  is  made  from  only  about  a  dozen  nominal  stems  in  the  m.  and  three 
in  the  n.  The  cases  can  of  course  only  be  distinguished  exegetically. 

I.  m.  kdrnabhyjm  (AV.)  ‘ears’,  ddmstrabhyam  (TS.  AV.)  ‘teeth’,  daksina- 
savydbhydm  (AV.)  ‘right  and  left’,  dasa-sakhabhylm  ‘having  ten  fingers’, 
mitra-varunabhydm I0,  yuktdbhylm  ‘yoked’,  vrihi-yavdbhyam  (AV.)  ‘rice  and 
barley’,  subhrdbhydm  ‘shining’,  surya-candramdsabhyam  (AV.) 10  ‘sun  and  moon’, 
hastabhyam  ‘hands’,  haryatdbhyJm  ‘desirable’.  —  n.  rk-sdmdbhylm  ‘hymn  and 
chant’,  sfngabhydm  (AV.). 

D.  m.  tvesabhyam  ‘violent’,  ndsatyabhyam  ‘truthful’,  nicirdbhy  im  ‘attentive’. 

Ab.  m.  dmsabhyam  ‘shoulders’,  kdrndbhylm .  —  n.  pdrsvabhyam  (AV.) 
‘sides’,  prd-padabhylm  ‘tips  of  the  feet’,  mdta-sndb/iyam  certain  internal  organs. 

G.  L.  These  cases  take  the  normal  ending  -os,  between  which  and  the 
stem  y  is  inserted.  In  the  RV.  only  eight  nominal11  forms  occur  with  the 
genitive  sense,  and  twelve  with  the  locative  sense.  One  form,  d/ivasi'dyos 
(ix.  5s3),  seems  to  be  used  as  an  Ab.  There  are  one  or  two  others  which 
anomalously  drop  the  final  -a  of  the  stem,  instead  of  inserting  y,  before  the 
ending  -os12. 


1  In  two  instances,  hiatus  is  removed  by 
nasalization:  updstham  1  ckd  (1.  356)  and  jdncLin 
dsamd  (vi.  671). 

2  There  are  40  instances  of  this  in  the 
RV. ;  see  Lanman  575. 

3  This  is  also  the  practice  of  the  Brah- 
manas;  see  Aufrecht,  AB.  427;  cp.  Sarva- 
nukramani,  ed.  Macdonell,  p.  x.  In  the 
AV.  (as  in  the  later  language)  -civ  u-  is 
regularly  written  (except  mu  ska  upavadhit, 
xx.  1362). 

4  See  Lanman  3414. 

5  Except  VII.  704  where  devd,  dsadhJsu 
(Pada  devau )  is  written,  0-  being  treated  like 
t(- ,  perhaps  owing  to  its  labial  character. 

6  See  RPr.  IV.  39,  40. 


7  The  shortening  of  the  du.  -a  at  the  end 
of  odd  Padas  before  r,  occurring  in  four 
passages  (11.  37;  vi.  682;  viu.  6611;  x.  6613) 
is  due  to  Sandhi;  see  70. 

8  These  neuter  duals  are  enumerated  by 
Lanman  343. 

9  To  be  read  -bhidm  in  two  or  three 
forms. 

10  In  this  compound  only  the  second  dual 
takes  the  proper  case-ending. 

11  There  are  also  the  pronominal  forms 

G.  L.  m.  aydsf  ubhdyos,  tdyos,  yayos;  tdyos  also 
as  G.  n. 

12  Also  the  pronominal  forms  av-os,  en-is, 
y-ds.  Cp.  Lanman  344. 

17* 


260  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


The  forms  occurring  are: 

G.  m.  indrd-varunayos ,  Tsandyos  ‘ruling’,  devdyos ,  mitrdyos ,  mitrd-vd runayos , 
yamdyos  ‘twins’,  vdrunayos ,  vaikarndyos  ‘descendants  ofVikarna’.  —  n.  pdsy-os 
(for  *pdsyd-y-os)  ‘pressing  stones’,  purdn-y-os 1  (for  *purdna-y-os)  ‘ancient’. 

L.  m.  amsayos ,  d  hay  os ,  updkayos  ‘closely  connected’,  kdrnayos  (AV.), 
jdmbhayos  (TS.  iv.  1.  101 2 3)  ‘jaws’,  tuvi-jdtayos  ‘of  powerful  nature’,  ddmstrayos 
(AV.),  naddyos  ‘roarers’,  mitrdyos ,  muskayos  ‘testicles’,  vdrunayos ,  vdhisthayos 
‘drawing  best’,  vi-vratayos  ‘refractory’,  sthurdyos  ‘strong’,  hdstayos. 

PI.  N.  V.  m.  Here  there  are  two  forms.  In  the  more  common  form 
the  normal  ending  coalesces  with  the  final  of  the  stem  to  -as,  e.  g.  devas. 
The  less  common  form  appears  to  be  made  by  adding  the  normal  ending 
-as  over  again2,  e.  g.  devds-as.  The  form  in  -as  is  about  twice  as  frequent 
in  the  RV.  as  that  in  - lisas q  the  former  being  made  from  80S  stems,  the 
latter  from  403.  In  the  original  parts  of  the  AV.  -as  is  24  times  as  frequent 
as  -asas,  the  former  occurring  1366  times,  the  latter  only  57  times4.  Both 
forms  frequently  occur  side  by  side,  the  choice  of  the  one  or  the  other  being 
often  no  doubt  determined  simply  by  the  metre;  e.  g.  brhda  vadema  viddthe 
suvirah  (11.  116)  ‘abounding  in  heroes  we  would  speak  aloud  in  the  assembly’, 
but  suvirdso  viddtham  d  vadema  (11.  1215)  ‘abounding  in  h?roes  we  would 
speak  to  the  assembly’. 

Examples  of  the  most  frequent  forms  made  with  the  two  endings  are: 
1.  devasas  (&6),  jdnasas  ( 41),  sbmdsas  (41),  sutasas  (29),  aditydsas{ 24)  ‘Adityas’, 
yaf/Vydsas  { 21)  ‘holy’,  amrtdsas  (11). —  2.  devas  and  devas  (31 1),  somds  (42), 
adityas  (39),  sutas  (27),  jands  (24),  amrtds  (22),  yajniyds  (10). 

N.  A.  n.5  Here,  as  in  the  N.  m.  there  are  two  forms,  a  shorter  and 
a  longer,  the  former  being  the  older  and  original,  as  well  as  the  more  fre¬ 
quent  one.  The  older  form  is  made  not  by  adding  the  normal  ending 

but  by  lengthening  the  final  -a  of  the  stem,  e.  g.  havyd  ‘oblations’6.  The 

later  form  ends  in  -dni  and  is  doubtless  due  to  transitions  from  the  stems 
in  -an1  which  form  the  n.  pi.  N.  A.  with  both  -a  and  -dni,  e.  g.  namd  and 
ndmani.  The  form  in  -d  is  in  the  RV.  made  from  394  stems,  that  in  -dni 
from  280,  the  proportion  of  the  occurrences  of  the  former  being  roughly 
three  to  every  two  of  the  latter.  The  proportion  in  the  AV.  is  almost  exactly 
reversed,  the  form  in  -a  being  there  made  from  102  stems,  that  in  -dni  from 
158  s.  The  two  forms  are  so  common  side  by  side  that  when  two  n.  plurals 

occur  in  the  same  Pada,  the  one  generally  ends  in  -dni  and  the  other  in  -d9; 

e.  g.  yd  te  b  him  dni  ayud/id  (ix.  6130)  ‘thy  terrible  weapons’.  This  phenomenon 


1  With  y  inserted  though  -a  is  dropped. 

2  See  Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  p.  661, 
where  several  examples  are  given  of  endings 
being  repeated  in  other  languages. 

3  The  form  in  -asas  seems  to  be  an  Indo- 
Iranian  innovation,  as  there  are  no  certain 
traces  of  it  in  other  Indo-European  languages; 
cp.  Brugmann  1.  c, 

4  In  the  original  Mantra  portions  of  the 
TS.  the  pi.  in  -as  is  very  numerous,  but  I 
have  noted  only  1 1  forms  in  -asas.  In  the 
Khilas,  forms  in  -as  are  three  times  (30)  as 
numerous  as  in  -asas  (10). 

5  There  is  no  example  of  a  V.  in  the 
RV.,  and  only  one,  cittdni  (in.  24),  in  the 
AV.  where  the  Mss.  have  cittdni. 

6  This  form  in  -a.  is  commonly  supposed 

to  have  started  from  a  N.  sing.  f.  in  -d  as 


a  collective;  this  would  account  for  the 
agreement  of  the  singular  verb  with  this  pi. 
in  Greek;  cp.  also  sarvd  id  ...  astu  (RV.  1. 
1628);  see  Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  d.  682. 

7  The  G.  ahdndm  is  an  example  of  the 
transference  of  another  case  from  an  -an 
stem. 

8  In  the  independent  Mantra  portions  of 
the  TS.  the  forms  in  -d  seem  to  outnumber 
those  in  -dni  in  about  the  same  proportion 
as  in  the  RV. :  there  are  at  least  20  forms 
of  the  former  and  14  of  the  latter.  In  the 
Khilas  the  two  forms  are  almost  equally 
divided,  as  10  examples  of  -d  and  12  of  -dni 
occur. 

9  Similarly,  the  form  in  -d  appears  beside 
n.  pi.  forms  in  -ini,  -f/ni  or  even  -dmsi, 
-inisi,  -it  nisi,  e.  g.  bhurini  bhadra  (I.  16610); 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Vowel  Stems.  261 


is  clearly  due  to  the  influence  of  metre.  The  -a  here  seems  never  to  be 
shortened  to  -d,  as  is  so  frequently  the  case  in  the  N.  A.  n.  pi.  of  -an  stems x. 
Nor  does  it  avoid  hiatus  (like  the  -a  of  the  N.  A.  du.  m.),  though  coalescence 
with  a  following  vowel  sometimes  takes  place* 1 2. 

Examples  of  the  commonest  forms  are:  1.  havyd  (44),  bhiivana  (36),  duritdi 
(31)  ‘distresses’,  sdvana  (30),  ukthd  (25)  ‘praises’.  —  2.  bhuvanani  (57),  vrtrdni 
(36)  ‘foes’,  vratdni  (34)  ‘laws’,  havydni  (25),  krtdni  (20)  ‘done’. 

A.  m.  The  ending  of  this  case  is  not  the  normal  -as,  but  -n,  before 
which  the  final  vowel  of  the  stem  is  lengthened3,  e.  g.  dsva-n.  The  form  is 
frequent,  being  made  from  more  than  250  stems  in  the  RV.  That  the  ending 
was  originally  -ns  is  shown  by  the  treatment  of  -an  in  Sandhi,  where  it 
becomes  -am  before  vowels  and  the  sibilant  itself  occasionally  survives  before 
c-  and  M. 

I,  m.  n.  In  this  case  there  are  two  forms,  the  one  adding  the  normal 
ending  -bhis  (before  which  the  final  vowel  of  the  stem  becomes  -e),  while  the 
other  ends  in  -ais  (which  does  not  appear  in  any  other  declension).  The 
form  in  -ais  is  only  slightly  commoner  in  the  RV.,  being  made  from  221 
stems,  while  that  in  -bhis  is  made  from  211.  In  the  AV.,  however,  the  former 
is  5  times  as  frequent  as  the  latter5.  The  two  forms6  often  appear  in  the 
same  Pada;  e.  g.  upamebhir  arkdis  (1.  33s)  ‘with  highest  songs’.  The  choice 
is  often  due  to  the  metre;  e.  g.  yatdm  dsvebhir  asvina  (vnr.  5”)  ‘come  with 
your  steeds,  O  Asvins’,  and  aditydir  yatam  asvina  (vm.3513)  ‘with  the  Adityas 
come,  O  Asvins’. 

In  the  RV.  the  m.  forms  are  roughly  twice  as  numerous  as  the  n. 
Examples  of  the  most  frequent  forms  are:  1.  arkdis  (43),  ukthdis  (35),  yajhdis 
(34),  devdis  (31),  dsi' ais  (30),  stoma  is  (25). —  2.  dev  ebhis  (52),  stem  ebhis  (26), 
vdjebhis  (21). 

D.  m.  n.  This  case  is  formed  with  the  normal  ending  -bhyas,  before 

which  the  final  -a  of  the  stem  appears  as  -e.  In  the  RV.  it  is  made  from 

over  40  stems  in  the  m.,  but  from  only  one  in  the  n.  In  about  half  the 

forms  occurring  the  ending  has  to  be  read  as  a  dissyllable  -bhias.  The  forms 

occurring  are :  ajdrebhyas  ‘unaging’,  amavattarebhyas  ‘mightier’,  aranebhyas 
(Kh.  v.  i2)  ‘foreign’,  arbhakcbhyas  ‘small’,  adityebhyas ,  asinebhyas  ‘aged’,  asv-apas- 
tarebhyas  ‘working  more  quickly’,  ttmebhyas  ‘helpers’,  gdrbhebhyas  ‘infants’, 
grhebhyas, jdnebhyas,  jlvebhyas  ‘living  ,jh at Jbhy as  (Kh.  in.  161)  ‘known’,  tdvakcbhyas 
‘thy’,  ddsa-kaksyebhyas  ‘having  ten  girths’,  ddsa-yoktrebhyas  ‘having  ten  traces’, 
ddsa-yojanebhyas  ‘having  ten  teams’,  devebhyas ,  pajribhyas  ‘strong’,  pdrvatebhyas 
‘mountains’,  pasprdhanebhyas  ‘striving’,  pitu-krttarebhyas  ‘procuring  more  nourish¬ 
ment’,  pisuncbhyas  ‘treacherous’,  putrebhyas  ‘sons’,  purusebhy as  ‘men’,  pdrvebhyas 
‘former’,  badhitebhyas  ‘oppressed’,  bharatebhyas  ‘descendants  of  Bharata’,  mdrtye- 


savand  puruni(\\\.  36s);  urdhvd  social  si prasthitd 
rdjdmsi  (ill.  44);  rabhasd  vapumsi  (ill.  I8). 

1  There  seems  no  sufficient  reason  to 
assume  that  in  visved  aha  (1.  92 3)  as  com¬ 
pared  with  aha  visvd  (I  I3°2)>  bha  is  formed 
from  the  transition  stem  aha-  rather  than 
from  ahan- ;  cp.  LANMAN  p.  348. 

2  On  some  probable  mistakes  made  by 
the  Pada  in  contracted  forms  see  Lanman 
348. 

3  This  lengthening  is  at  least  Indo-Iranian : 
Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  p.  6722. 

4  See  above  77;  and  cp.  Lanman  346  on 

the  Sandhi  of  -an  in  general. 


5  In  the  independent  Mantra  portions  of 
the  TS.  the  proportion  is  about  the  same 
as  in  the  AV.  The  following  four  forms  with 
-bhis  occur:  itasebhis  (1.  2.  41),  devebhis  (ill. 
I.  43J,  rudrebhis  (il.  I.II2),  su-ydmebhis  (lv.  7. 
153).  In  the  Khilas  5  forms  in  -ais  to  7  in 
-ebhis  occur.  The  latter  are :  a m iva-catanebhis 
(l.  id),  artavebhis  (lir.  l66),  ukthebhis  (v.  6’), 
rsvebhis  (ill.  17),  kdrvarebhis  (I.  51),  rdthcbhis 
(l.  II7),  sdraghcbhis  (1.  II7).  In  the  later 
language  the  form  in  -bhis  survives  in  the 
pronominal  ebhis  alone. 

6  On  the  origin  of  the  two  forms  cp. 
Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  p.  717. 


262 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


bhyas,  mdnavcbhyas  ‘men’,  mdnusebhyas  ‘men’,  mdnebhyas  ‘descendants  ofMana’, 
yajatebhyas  ‘adorable’,  yajhiyebhyas ,  rdthcbhyas  ‘chariots’,  vidustarebhyas  ‘very 
wise’,  viprebhyas  ‘seers’,  vy-dsvebhyas  ‘horseless’,  sasamdncbhyas  ‘toiling’,  suvida - 
triyeb/iyas  ‘bountiful’,  soma-rctbhastarebhyas  ‘intoxicated  with  Soma’,  somycbhyas 
‘preparers  of  Soma’,  stenebhyas  ‘thieves’.  —  n.  bhdvanebhyas  ‘beings’. 

Ab.  m.  n.  This  case  is  formed  like  the  D.  with  the  normal  ending  -bhyas 
from  nearly  two  dozen  stems  in  the  RV.  about  equally  divided  between  the 
m.  and  n.  In  more  than  half  of  these  forms  the  ending  must  be  pronounced 
as  a  dissyllable.  The  forms  occurring  are:  m.  dntebhyas  ‘ends’,  dsurebhyas 
‘divine  spirits’,  ttgrcbhyas ,  grhebhyas ,  jdnebhyas ,  jivcbhyas  ‘living  beings’, 
devcb/iyas ,  pdrvatebhyas ,  makhebhyas  ‘vigorous’,  viprebhyas ,  sfirebhyas ,  syene- 
bhyas  ‘eagles’.  —  n.  anyd-krtebhyas  ‘done  by  others’,  antrebhyas  entrails’, 
duritcbhyas ,  nakhebhyas  ‘nails’,  padebhyas ,  pdrthivebhyas  ‘terrestrial  spaces’, 
bhuvanebhyas ,  mrdhrebhyas  ‘contempt’,  vdneb/iyas  ‘forest  trees’,  harmyebhyas 


‘houses’. 

G.  m.  n.  Instead  of  the  normal  ending  -am  these  stems  almost  invariably 
add  the  ending  -?ia?n,  before  which  the  final  vowel  is  lengthened  as  in  the 
-u  and  -r  stems.  This  ending  (like  -ani  in  the  n.  pi.)  must  have  been  due 
to  the  influence  of  the  -n  stems1.  The  case  is  thus  formed  in  the  RV.  from 
over  100  stems  in  the  in.  and  over  20  in  the  n.  In  nearly  half  these  forms 
the  final  syllable  may  be  metrically  read  as  aam2.  Two-thirds  of  these  reso¬ 
lutions  are,  however,  not  necessary  as  they  occur  at  the  end  of  octosyllabic 
Padas  which  may  be  catalectic;  but  many  undoubted  resolutions  are  required 
within  the  Pada3.  Among  the  forms  of  most  frequent  occurrence  are  m. 
devanam  (148),  jdnanam  (34),  yajmydnam  (12),  adity  attain  (11),  adhvardnam 
(10).  —  n.  dhdnanam  (13). 

a.  The  organic  form  e.  g.  from  dev  a-  would  have  been  devdm  {==  deva-ani).  Not 
more  than  three  or  fouq  examples  of  this  survive  in  the  RV.,  and  only  two  of  these 
seem  undoubted:  yuthydm  asvdndm  (VIII,  56*)  ‘of  horses  belonging  to  the  herd’  and 
caratham  in  garbhas  ca  sthatdm  garbhas  carat/dm  (i.  705)  ‘offspring  of  things  that  are 
stationary,  offspring  of  things  that  move’4.  There  are  further  some  half  dozen  forms 
written  with  final  -an  or  -dh  which  seem  to  stand  for  the  G.  pi.  in  -am  :  devan  j an m a 
(i.  7G;  VI.  1 G)  ‘the  race  of  the  gods’  (Pada  dev  an) ;  devdh  jdnmand  (X.  64H)  ‘with  the 
race  of  the  gods’  (Pada  dev  an) ;  visa  a  ca  mar  tan  (tv.  2J)  ‘and  hither  to  the  dwellings  of 
mortals’  (=  martdm) j  coskuyale  visa  indra  manusydn  (vi.  4  7 1 6)  ‘India  protects  the  tribes 
of  men’. 


L.  m.  n.  This  case  adds  the  normal  ending  -su  before  which  (as  before 
-bhis  and  -bhyas)  -e  takes  the  place  of  the  final  vowel  of  the  stem  and  cere- 
bralizes  the  following  sibilant.  It  is  formed  from  some  123  stems  in  the  m. 
and  some  92  in  the  n. 5  It  is  almost  invariably6 *  to  be  read  with  hiatus, 
even  before  u-\ 

Among  the  most  frequently  occurring  forms  are:  m.  devesu  (99),  vdjesu 
(41),  yajuesu  f 3 5),  adhvaresu  (27),  mdrtyesu  (25),  sute'su  (16).  —  n.  viddthesu 
(33),  vdnesu  (20),  sdvanesu  (14),  bhuvancsu  (12),  ukthesu  (10). 


1  See  Lanman  352  c;  Brugmann,  Grund-  I 
riss  2,  p.  691. 

2  Lanman  (352,  bottom)  enumerates  the 
forms  in  which  resolution  takes  place. 

3  Lanman  3521,  gives  a  list  of  the  forms 
in  which  resolution  is  required;  cp.  Arnold, 
Vedic  Metre  143  (p.  92). 

4  Perhaps  also  himsdnam  (x.  1421)  if  G.  pi. 

of  a  participle  him s ana-,  and  sasam  if  G.  of 

sasd-  ‘ruler’  41.  2312).  vandm  (x.  46s)  is  G.  pi. 

of  van-  rather  than  vdna-.  Cp.  Lanman  353.  1 


5  The  gender  is  doubtful  in  some  in¬ 
stances. 

6  The  only  undoubted  exception  to  this 
rule  in  the  RV.  occurs  in  a  late  hymn  fx. 
1 2 18),  where  devesv  ddhi  must  be  read.  Cp. 
Lanman  354. 

7  On  the  probable  origin  of  the  ending 
-su  cp.  Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  p  700. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Vowel  Stems. 


26 


2  b.  Derivative  Stems  in  -a. 

Lanman,  Noun-Inflection  335  —  365.  —  Whitney,  Sanskrit  Grammar  p.  1 3 1  — 137. — 
Cp.  COLLITZ,  die  herkunft  der  b-deklination,  BIT  29,  p.  81  — 114. 

373.  The  derivative  J-declension  corresponds  to  the  derivative  ^-declen¬ 
sion,  for  the  m.  adjectives  of  which  it  furnishes  the  f.  stems.  It  includes  more 
feminines  than  any  other  declension.  Like  the  ^-declension  it  has  many 
irregularities  of  inflexion,  every  case  in  the  singular,  except  the  A.,  and  two 
cases  in  the  plural  showing  some  abnormal  feature.  The  N.  sing,  shares  with 
the  derivative  c-declension  the  peculiarity  of  not  adding  the  ending  -jq  the 
I.  sing,  has  an  alternative  form  borrowed  from  the  pronominal  declension; 
the  D.  Ab.  G.  L.  sing,  are  formed  under  the  influence  of  the  derivative  1- 
stems;  and  the  V.  sing,  ends  in  -e  instead  of  appearing  in  the  form  of  the 
bare  stem.  In  the  plural  the  N.  has  to  a  limited  extent  the  same  alternative 
form  in  -asas  as  the  m.  of  the  ^-declension,  and  the  G.  is  similarly  formed 
with  -nam. 

As  in  the  ^-declension,  the  accent  remains  in  the  same  position  throughout 
except  the  V.,  where  it  of  course  shifts  to  the  first  syllable. 

Inflexion. 

374.  The  forms  actually  occurring,  if  made  from  priyd-  ‘dear’,  would  be 
as  follows: 

Sing.  N.  priya.  A.  priyam.  I.  priyd  and  priyaya.  D.  priydyai.  Ab.  G. 
priydyas.  L.  priydyam.  V.  pr'ye. 

Du.  N.  A.  priye.  I.  Ab.  priyabhyam .  G.  I,,  priydyos. 

PI.  N.  priyds  and  priydsas.  V.  priyds.  A.  priyds.  I.  priyabhis.  D.  Ab. 
priydbhyas.  G.  priyandm.  L.  priydsu. 

Sing.  N.  This  case  never  adds  the  normal  ending  -sl.  It  is  formed  in 
the  RV.  from  424  stems  and  occurs  more  than  1000  times.  Examples  of  the 
most  frequent  forms  are:  yjsa  (24)  ‘maiden’,  ddksina  (24)  ‘good  milch  cow’, 
ila  (17)  ‘refreshment’,  jayd  (17)  ‘wife’,  su-bhdga  (13)  ‘beautiful’,  sunfta  (10) 
‘joyful’,  citra  (9)  ‘brilliant’. 

a.  At  the  end  of  odd  Padas  the  final  -a  of  this  N.  is  regularly  written  with  Sandhi, 
but  must  always  be  read  with  hiatus;  coalescence  with  e-  and  r-  is,  however,  twice 
avoided  by  nasalization2,  while  twice'3  the  -a  is  shortened  before  r-> 

b.  Within  a  Pada  the  -d  is  written  with  Sandhi  in  160  instances  in  the  RV.,  but 
is  pronounced  (unlike  the  -d  of  the  N.  A.  du.  m.)  with  hiatus  in  23  of  these  instances; 
while  the  nominatives  Tsd  ‘car-pole’  and  manJsd  ‘devotion’  are  written  as  well  as  pro¬ 
nounced  with  hiatus4,  the  former  once,  the  latter  four  times. 

A.  This  case,  which  is  formed  with  the  normal  ending  -m,  is  in  the  RV. 
made  from  over  200  nominal  stems  occurring  more  than  400  times.  Examples 
of  the  most  frequent  forms  are:  viamsdm  (21),  jay  am  ( 1 1 ),  dmfvam  (9) 
‘distress’,  ydsatn  (7),  yosanam  (6)  ‘maiden’. 

a.  This  case  is  often  identical  in  form  with  the  L.  sing.  f.  of  stems  in  -7;  thus 
purvyam  may  be  the  A.  of  purvya -  ‘previous’  or  L.  of  purvi-  ‘much’.  In  one  instance  at 
least  elision  of  the  -m,  followed  by  contraction,  takes  place5:  satalamavivesih  (vil.  19s;  for 


1  The  stem  gnd-  ‘woman’,  though  originally 
dissyllabic,  came  to  be  regarded  as  a  radical 
a-stem  and  accordingly  forms  its  N.  sing. 
gnci-s  (iv.  94)._ 

2  sdsadandm  1  esi (i.  1 23 IO)  and ydi>. 1  rnanjcaye 

(v.  30' 4). 

3  priya 1  r~  (1.  15 14),  rju-hdsta  V-  (v.  4 1 1  =i). 

Gp.  70. 

4  ifd  ak$o  (VIIL  529) ;  manifa  abhi  (I.  I o 1 7) ; 


mamsd  iyam  (v.  1 1 5 ;  VII.  707) ;  nianTsa  asm  at  (vil. 
341);  cp. RPr.  11.  29.  Lanman  356  suggests  that 
the  comparative  frequency  of  this  hiatus  justi¬ 
fies  the  restoration  of  the  augment  in  Padas 
short  of  a  syllable;  e.  g .prcisd  [a\vdci{yil.  58°). 

5  On  some  contractions  in  which  -m  has 
probably  been  elided  but  explained  wrongly 
by  the  Pada  as  containing  nominatives  in  -a, 
see  Lanman  356. 


264  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


satatamam  avivesik.  In  two  or  three  instances  the  metre  seems  to  require -aw  to  be  read 
as  -aam l. 


I.  There  are  two  forms  of  this  case.  In  the  one,  the  normal  ending 
-a  is  added  directly  to  the  stem  and,  by  contracting  with  its  final  -a,  produces 
a  form  identical  in  appearance  with  the  N.,  e.  g.  jihvd  ( =  jihvd- a)  ‘tongue’. 
In  the  other,  y  is  interposed  between  the  ending  -it  and  the  final  -it  of  the 
stem,  which  is  shortened,  e.  g.  jihva-y-a.  The  latter  form  is  due  to  the  in¬ 
fluence  of  the  regular  pronominal  I.  sing,  fi,  e.  g.  tdya 2.  This  form  is  already 
slightly  the  more  common  in  the  RV.3,  being  made  from  113  stems4  as 
compared  with  95  which  take  the  older  form  with  -it.  In  the  later  Samhitas 
the  I.  in  -a  is  very  rare  in  original  passages,  the  AV.  using  only  five  such 
forms  independently5.  Both  forms  are  (unlike  the  N.  pi.  m.  in  -dsas  and  -as) 
comparatively  seldom  made  from  the  same  stem,  as  jihvd  and  jihvdya.  Two 
thirds  of  the  total  number  of  95  stems  which  have  the  older  form,  end  in 
the  suffixes  -tit  and  -yd,  as  purusd-tii  ‘after  the  manner  of  men',  hiranyayd 
‘golden’.  The  choice  of  the  alternative  forms  is,  as  elsewhere,  often  deter¬ 
mined  by  the  metre0. 

Examples  of  the  commonest  forms  are:  1.  dosd  (13)  ‘evening’,  barhdna 
(13)  ‘might’,  ma/iTsd  ( 13),  mamhdna  (1 1)  ‘willingness’,  s'ravasyd  ( 7)  ‘desire  to 
praise’7.  —  Also  d  sir -day  a  (TS.  hi.  2.  S4)  ‘fulfilment  of  blessing’,  visvd-psnya 
(TS.i.  5.  33;  VS.  xii.  10)  ‘omniform’.  —  2.  dhdraya  (53)  ‘stream’,  jihvdya  (24), 
maydya  (20)  ‘craft’. 

a.  There  are  some  instrumentals  sing.  f.  formed  from  derivative  a-  stems,  which 
are  used  as  adverbs  with  shift  of  accent  to  the  ending.  Such  are :  a -da  day  a  ‘without  a 
gift’  ( a-datra-),  ttbhayd  ‘in  both  ways’  ( ubhciya -),  rtayd  ‘in  the  right  way’  (rid-) ,  daksind 
‘on  the  right’  ( ddksina -),  naktayd  ‘by  night’  (iidkla-),  madhyd  ‘in  the  middle’  ( mddhya •), 
Santana  ‘together’  ( samana -),  svapnayd  (AY.)  ‘in  dream’  (svdpna-j. 


S* 


D.  This  case  is  anomalously  formed  by  adding  -yai  to  the  stem,  e. 
jard-yai 9.  It  is  not  of  common  occurrence,  being  made  from  only  14  nominal10 
stems  in  the  RV.  The  forms  occurring  are:  a-gbtdyai  ‘lack  of  cows’,  a-vira- 
tdyai  ‘lack  of  sons’,  ukhdyai  (TS.iv.  1.93)  ‘pot’,  uttdndyai  (TS.  iv.  1.41;  Kh.  v.  164) 
‘supine’,  g/ibsdyai  N.  of  a  woman,  cardyai  ‘for  going’,  jardyai  (AV.)  ‘old  age’, 
tvd-yatityai  ‘presented  by  thee’,  ducchunayai  ‘mischievous  demon’,  putrd-kamayai 
(Kh.1v.131)  ‘desiring  sons’,  putd-kratdyai  N.  of  a  woman,  mandyai  ‘eagerness’, 
vispdlayai  N.  of  a  woman,  sivdyai  ‘auspicious’,  svetandyai  ‘dawn’,  siinrtayai 
‘joy’,  surydyai  ‘sun-goddess’. 


a.  Two  forms  have  been  preserved  in  which  the  D.  is  made  by  adding  the 
normal  ending  -e  directly  to  the  stem  with  the  -d  of  which  it  coalesces  to  -ai:  mahlydi 
(1.  1136)  ‘greatness’,  sv-apatydi 11  (1.54”)  ‘accompanied  with  fair  offspring’.  These  are 
formed  like  the  D.  infinitives  from  radical  a-stems  such  as  vi-khyai  (584). 

b.  In  one  passage  (vn.  1 1 9)  the  form  a-virate ,  for  a-viratdyai  ‘lack  of  sons’, 


1  See  Lanman  357  (top). 

2  Cp.  Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  p.  629,  7S3. 

3  The  corresponding  later  form  in  the 
Avesta  is  much  commoner  than  the  older: 
Brugmann  2,  p.  629. 

4  This  number  given  by  Lanman  357  in¬ 
cludes  some  pronominal  stems.  Brugmann’s 
statement  (2,  p.  629)  that  the  form  in  -ay a  is 
less  common  than  the  form  in  -d  in  Vedic, 
is  not  applicable  even  to  the  RV. 

5  The  forms  are  daksind,  devdtd,  dosd, 
sumnaya,  vitta-kdmyd\  only  the  last  is  peculiar 
to  the  AV. 

6  Euphony  also  has  some  influence;  thus 

hiranyayaya  does  not  occur. 


7  Lanman  358  enumerates  the  homopho- 
nous  instrumentals. 

8  These  forms  may  have  been  due  to  the 
influence  of  the  pronominal  adverb  a-y  d 

\  ‘in  this  way’  (with  adverbial  shift  of  accent, 
cp.  tdya  etc.);  see  J.  Schmidt,  Pluralbildung 
212  ff.,  and  Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  p.  629; 
otherwise  Barthoi.omae,  BB.  15,  20  f. 

9  Formed  in  the  Indo-Iranian  period,  pro¬ 
bably  under  the  influence  of  the  derivative 
stems  in  -t  originally  -yd,  i.  e.  -yai  for  -yd-e. 

10  Also  svdyai  from  the  possessive  pronoun 
svd-. 

11  Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  p.  600,  thinks 
this  form  may  be  shortened  for  sv-apatyciyai. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Vowel  Stems. 


265 


takes  the  ending  -e  direct,  but  with  elision  of  the  stem  vowel,  as  in  the  radical  a- 
declension  J. 

Ab.  This  case  is  formed  anomalously  by  adding  the  ending  -yds  to  the 
stem2.  It  is  rare,  being  made  in  the  RV.  from  only  seven  stems,  the  AV. 
having  three  additional  examples.  The  forms  occurring  are:  urdhvayas  (AV.) 
‘upright’,  kandyds  ‘maiden’,  jihvdyas ,  daks  in  ay  as,  dur-evay  is  ‘ill-disposed’, 
dur-handyas  ‘mischief’,  dairy  ay  as  ‘divine’,  dhruvdyls  (AV.)  ‘firm’,  nidlyds  ‘dis¬ 
grace’,  vy-adhvdyas  (AV.)3  ‘lying  half-way’. 

G.  This  case  is  formed  in  the  same  way  as  the  Ab.,  but  is  much  more 
frequent,  being  made  from  26  stems  in  the  RV.  The  forms  occurring  are: 
dghnyayas  and  aghnydyds  ‘cow  (not  to  be  killed)’,  i lay  as,  ukhdyds,  usnydyds 
‘ruddy  cow’,  nrmydyds  ‘night’,  kandyds ,  kdslhdyds  ‘course’,  jihvdyas ,  dak  si  nay  as, 
darsatayls  ‘conspicuous’,  dflrvdyls  ‘Durva  grass’,  d/iisandyas  ‘offering’, 
dhisamdndyds 4  ‘longing’,  pajrayds  ‘vigorous’,  pari-takmyayds  ‘wandering’, 
mdhindyds  ‘mighty’,  rasdyds  a  mythical  river,  vaydyas  ‘branch’,  vispaldyds , 
sasvattamdyds  ‘most  recent’,  siphdyds  N.  of  a  river,  suedyds  ‘pure’,  sabar-dughdyas 
‘yielding  nectar’,  sehdndyas 5  ‘victorious’,  surdyls  ‘intoxicating  liquor’,  surydyds. 

L.  This  case  is  formed  by  adding  the  anomalous  ending  -yam  to  the 
stem,  e.  g.  bhadrCi-ydin.  It  is  not  common,  being  formed  from  only  16  or 
1 7  stems  in  the  RV.  The  forms  occurring  are:  dpaydyam 6  N.  of  a  river, 
dmdydm  ‘raw’,  uttdndydm  ‘outstretched’,  usriydydm ,  (d)-galaydm  ‘come’,  grivdydm 
‘neck’,  jurndydm  ‘ancient’,  navdydm  ‘new’,  pari-takmydydm ,  bhadrctyam  ‘bene¬ 
ficent’,  yamundyam  N.  of  a  river,  varatrdydm  ‘thong’,  vasaydm  (Kh.n.  105)  ‘cow’, 
simsapdydm  N.  of  a  tree,  sirinaydm  ‘night’,  sabhdydm  (TS.  1.  8.  31)  ‘assembly’, 
surdydm ,  su-somdydm1  N.  of  a  river,  hariyiiptydydm  N.  of  a  locality. 

V.  This  case  has  the  abnormal  ending  -e8  and  is  in  the  RV.  formed  from 
over  50  stems;  e.  g.  asve.  The  original  form  must  have  been  the  bare  stem 
Avith  the  final  vowel  shortened;  e.  g.  * dsva ,  but  of  this  there  is  no  certain 
survival.  The  form  amba  which  occurs  in  the  RV.  three  times  (unaccented) 
may  originally  have  been  an  exclamation,  and  it  can  have  this  sense  alone 
in  one  of  the  three  passages  of  the  RV.  (x.  972),  where  it  is  used  with  a 
plural.  In  the  two  other  passages  it  may  very  Avell  mean  ‘O  mother’  (11.41 16 ; 
x.  867).  The  VS.  (xxm.  18)  and  the  TS.  (vn.  4.  191)  have  the  V.  dmbe  as 
from  a  stem  amba  ‘mother’9. 

The  forms  occurring  are:  aghnydsye 10  (Kh.  iv.  526, 32)  ‘cow-faced’,  cighnye, 
apve  N.  of  a  disease,  a  marly  e  ‘immortal’,  dmbike  (TS.  VS.)  ‘mother’,  ambitame 
‘most  motherly’,  asve  ‘mare’,  asva-sunrte  ‘rich  in  horses’,  aditya-varne 11  (Kh. 
11.  66)  ‘sun-coloured’,  drjlklye  N.  of  a  river,  ile  goddess  of  devotion,  istake 
(TS.  iv.  2.  92)  ‘brick’,  ugra-putre  ‘having  mighty  sons’,  nttare  ‘mightier’, 
nttdna-parne  ‘having  extended  leaves’,  uru-vraje  ‘extending  afar’,  unnye , 
rsve  ‘exalted’,  kadha-priye  ‘ever  pleased’,  kdne  ‘one-eyed’,  kdma-dughe  (TS. 
iv.  2.  96)  ‘cow  of  plenty’,  krtye  (Kh.  iv.  525)  ‘magic’,  ghdra-rupe  (Kh.  iv.  526) 
‘of  awful  form’,  gahge  ‘Ganges’,  ghore  ‘awful’,  citre ,  cilrd-maghe  ‘having 
brilliant  gifts’,  jdye,  durve  (TS.  iv.  2.  92),  deva-jute  ‘impelled  by  the  gods’ 


1  This  forms  a  transition  to  the  consonant 
declension  like  dev  a  tale  beside  dev  a  tat  aye ; 
cp.  Lanman  3592. 

2  Like  the  I),  it  is  due  to  the  influence 
of  the  stems  in  derivative  -7,  to  the  fuller 
form  of  which,  -yd-,  the  normal  ending  -as 
was  added. 

3  Also  the  pronominal  svdyas  ‘own’. 

4  Participle,  perhaps  desiderative,  of  dhT- 
‘  think’. 


5  Perfect  participle  middle  of  sah-  ‘conquer’. 

6  A  transition  form  from  the  radical  d- 
declension,  see  p.249,  note  II. 

7  Also  the  pronominal  form  svdydm. 

8  The  origin  of  this  ending  is  uncertain; 
cp.  Brugmann  2,  541. 

9  This  is  a  common  stem  in  post*Vedic 
Sanskrit. 

10  The  ed.  has  aghnydsye. 

11  The  ed.  has  aditya-varne. 


1 1 


266  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


devi-tame 1  ‘most  divine’,  dhisane  ‘goddess  of  devotion’,  nadl-tame  ‘best 
of  rivers’,  pathye  ‘path’  (as  goddess),  pasty e  ‘goddess  of  the  house’,  putra- 
kame ,  puru-priye  ‘much  beloved’,  prthu-jaghane  ‘broad-hipped’,  prthu-stuke 
‘having  broad  braids  of  hair’,  priye  (TS.  vn.  1 .  6s),  brahma-samsite  ‘sharpened 
by  prayer’,  marud-vrdhe  N.  of  a  river,  yamune ,  rake  N.  of  a  goddess, 
vapustame  (Kh.  iv.  7')  ‘most  beautiful’,  vdra-rupe  (Kh.  iv.  5s6)  ‘of  excellent 
form’,  vi-kate  ‘monstrous’,  vivasvad-vate  (TS.  iv.  4.  121 2 3 4)  ‘desired  by  Vivasvat’, 
visva-rupe  (TS.  iv.  2.  52)  ‘omniform’,  visva-vare  ‘possessed  of  all  goods’, 
saravye  ‘arrow’,  sitike  ‘cool’,  surge  (Kh.  v.  158)  N.  of  a  goddess,  subhre 
‘shining’,  sa-da?ive  ‘associated  with  demons’,  sararne  N.  of  a  goddess,  site 
‘furrow’,  su-jdte  ‘well-born’,  su-putre  ‘having  good  sons’,  su-bhage ,  su-labhike 
‘easy  to  win’,  su-snuse  ‘having  fair  daughters-in-law’,  su-nrte ,  surya-varne  (Kh. 
iv.  77)  ‘sun-coloured’,  surye ,  stoma-tray astrimse  (TS.  iv.  4.  124),  hdriklike 
(Kh.  v.  151)  ‘yellowish’,  hiranya-parne  (Kh.  iv.  77)  ‘gold-winged’,  hladike  ‘re¬ 
freshing’. 

Du.  N.  A.  V.  These  cases  are  identical  in  form,  having  final  -e  which 
doubtless  contains  the  same  dual  ending  -T  as  N.  A.  V.  du.  of  the  a-  declen¬ 
sion2.  They  are  of  frequent  occurrence,  being  made  from  over  130  stems 
in  the  RV.  The  ending  -e  is  Pragrhya,  being  distinguished  by  the  Pada  text 
with  an  appended  iti  from  the  e  of  the  Y.  sing,  f.;  e.  g.  V.  du.  f.  subhre  iti , 
but  V.  sing.  f.  subhre. 

Examples  of  the  most  frequent  forms  are:  ubhe  (66)  ‘both’,  su-meke 3  (8) 
‘well-established’,  devd-putre  (7)  ‘having  gods  as  sons’,  vi-rupe  (7)  ‘of  different 
forms’,  s'lpre  (5)  ‘cheeks’.  The  compound  sitasite  ‘black  and  white’  occurs  in 
a  Khila  (p.  1 7  1 5). 

I.  Ab.  These  cases,  made  with  the  ending  - bhyam ,  are  identical  in  form 
with  the  I.  D.  Ab.  m.  n.  of  the  a-  declension.  They  are  represented  by  only 
two  forms  in  the  RV. :  slprabhyam  (x.'  1055 *)  which  seems  to  be  I.4,  and 
ndsikabhya/n  (x.  1631)  ‘nostrils’,  Ab.  No  form  with  a  D.  sense  occurs. 

G.  L.  Both  these  cases  add,  with  interposing  -y-,  the  normal  ending 
-os  to  the  final  -a  of  the  stem,  which  is  shortened.  They  are  thus  identical 
in  form  with  the  G.  L.  du.  m.  n.  of  the  a-  declension.  There  are  only  four 
nominal  forms  in  the  RV.  and  AV.:  in  the  G.  sense  jdhghayos  (A V.)  ‘legs’, 
yamdyos  ‘twins’;  and  in  the  L.  sense  uttandyos ,  svadhdyos  ‘homestead’5. 

PI.  N.  V.  The  regular  form  ends  in  -as  and  is  very  common,  being 
formed  from  nearly  260  stems  in  the  RV.  Examples  of  the  commonest  forms 
are:  bhadrds  (19),  dhfiras  (16),  manlsds  (10) 6. 

There  is,  however,  a  second  form  in  -cscts  which  occurs  nearly  20 
times  in  the  RV.  Considering  the  rarity  of  this  form  here,  while  it  is  the 
commoner  as  N.  pi.  m.  in  the  a-  declension,  the  probability  is  that  its  intro¬ 
duction  was  due  to  those  very  numerous  masculines.  The  forms  occurring 
are:  d-tatidrasas  ‘indefatigable’,  a-mftasas  (AV.)  ‘immortal’,  dur-mitrdsas  ‘un¬ 
friendly’,  pasprdhandsas  ‘vying’7,  parthivasas 8  ‘terrestrial’,  pavakdsas  ‘pure’, 
bhejanasas 9  ‘having  obtained’,  vanvandsas 10  (SV.)  ‘having  obtained’,  vasdsas, 


1  Superlative  of  devt-,  the  final  being 
shortened  as  in  the  simple  vocative  devi. 

2  Cp.  Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  286  (p.  643). 

3  Cp.  Windisch  in  Festgruss  an  O.  v.  Boht- 
L1NGK  1 14  f. 

4  The  pronominal  form  tabhydm  (x.  8815) 
has  a  locative  meaning. 

5  There  are  also  the  pronominal  forms 

aybs  and  yayos.  In  ill.  542  the  Pada  text 

reads  dyds  probably  for  ay 6s. 


6  In  two  or  three  passages  the  Pada  text 
seems  to  confuse  forms  in  -as  with  others  in 
-d;  see  Lanman  362. 

7  Perfect  participle  middle  of  \sprdh-. 

8  Cp.  Lanman  362. 

9  Perfect  participle  middle  of  bhaj -  ‘share’. 

10  The  variant  of  the  SV.  for  bhejdndsas 
of  the  RV. 


VI.  Declensions.  Nouns. 


Vowel  Stems 


267 


vasrasas 


roaring , 


vidanasas 1  ‘being  found’,  vrd/iasas  ‘helping’,  d-susandsas1 2 
‘stimulating’,  s'ilghandsas 3  ‘swift’,  sdmmitdsas  ( A V.)  ‘corresponding’,  smdyamandsas 
‘smiling’,  hdvamlnlsas  ‘calling’4. 

A.  This  case  is  formed  with  the  normal  ending  -as  which  coalesces  with 
the  final  of  the  stem  to  -as,  e  g.  sunrtas.  It  is  very  frequent,  being  made 
from  more  than  160  stems  in  the  RV.  Examples  of  the  commonest  forms 
are:  mlyds  (22),  prtanas  (13)  ‘battles’,  usrds  (12)  ‘dawns’,  dhdras  (11), 
usriyds  (io)5 *.  Two  instances  occur  of  forms  in  -dsas  being  wrongly  used 
as  A.  pi.  f. :  samvidandsas  (x.  3014)  ‘united’  and  aram-gamdsas  (AV.  xni.  2^) 
‘ready  to  help’. 

I.  This  case  is  always  formed  by  adding  the  ending  -bhis  directly  to  the 
stem,  e.  g.  sunftd-bhis.  It  is  made  from  over  80  stems  in  the  RV.  Examples 
of  the  most  frequent  forms  are:  mdydbhis  (13I,  citrdbhis  (8),  d hi  rabbis  (7), 
hjtrabhis  (7)  ‘libations’,  ilabhis  (6).  The  form  drdghisthdbhis  (nr.  6 2 t7)  ‘for 
longest  times’0  is  used  adverbially. 

D.  Ab.  These  cases  are  formed  with  the  same  ending  -bkyas  (sometimes 
to  be  read  as  two  syllables)  added  directly  to  the  stem.  In  the  RV.  only 
4  datives  and  11  ablatives  occur  from  nominal  stems7.  The  forms  occurring 
are:  D.  aghnydbhyas ,  usrlyabhyas ,  ducchunabhyas ,  devdtabhyas  (TS.  iv.  2.  9°) 
‘deities’,  vrtdbhyas  ‘movements’.  —  Ab.  adharabhyas  ‘lower’,  dsabhyas  ‘regions’, 
uttarabhyas,  usnihabhyas  ‘nape  of  the  neck’,  kikasabhyas  ‘cartilages  of  the 
breast-bone’,  gudabhyas  ‘intestines’,  grlvdbhyas ,  damsdnabhyas  ‘wondrous 
powers’,  dhisanabhyas  ‘Soma  bowls’,  vahsdnab/iyas  ‘bellies’,  syavy'abhyas 
‘darkness’. 

G.  This  case  being  made  with  the  abnormal  ending  -ndm  is  identical 
in  form  with  the  G.  pi.  m.  of  the  a-  declension.  It  is  formed  in  the  RV.  from 
22  stems.  There  is  no  certain  example  here  of  forms  with  the  normal  ending 
-am  which  is  found  in  a  few  genitives  of  the  a-  declension  (372).  There  are 


only  a  couple  of  instances  in  which  the  resolution  of  the  final  syllable  as 
-aam  seems  required  by  the  metre8 *.  The  G.  of  kanya-  ‘girl’  always  appears 
in  the  contracted  form  of  kaninam 9  (occurring  five  times)  in  the  RV. 10 

The  forms  actually  occurring  are:  dksaranam  ‘speech’,  dghnyanam , 
a-nivesandndm  ‘affording  no  place  of  rest’,  d-bhayanam  ‘free  from  danger’, 
asma-vrajanam  ‘whose  pen  is  a  rock’,  asanam  (TS.  iv.  4.  1 2 3),  urvdranam 
‘arable  fields’,  usrdnam ,  usriyanam ,  kdsthanam ,  krtydnam  (Kh.  iv.  ^°),ji/imchiam 
‘transverse’,  divytinam  ‘heavenly’,  di/ghanam  ‘milch  kine’,  devatanam  (Kh.11.41), 
deva-sencinam,  ‘hosts  of  the  gods’,  dhisanclnam ,  ndvanam,  navylnam  ‘navigable 
rivers’,  pastyhnatti  ‘abodes’,  manlsdnam ,  rd  my  a  nam  'nights’,  sdmanatn  ‘years’, 
sunftanam  ‘songs  of  joy’,  stiyanam  ‘still  waters’. 

L.  This  case  is  formed  by  adding  the  ending  -su  directly  to  the  stem. 
The  final  -u  though  always  combined  with  a  following  vowel  both  at  the  end 
of  an  internal  Pada  or  within  a  Pada,  is  invariably  to  be  read  with  hiatus 


1  Participle  middle,  with  passive  sense,  of 
vid-  ‘find’. 

2  Participle  middle  of  \svas-. 

3  This  word  (AV.)  is  of  uncertain  deri¬ 
vation. 

4  There  are  besides  two  or  three  doubtful 
instances  which  may  be  m. ;  see  Lanman  362. 

5  In  several  instances  -as  is  most  probably 

to  be  read  where  the  Pada  text  has  -7,  see 

I.anman  363.  In  a  few  forms  the  resolution 

of  -as  as  -aas  or  -ads  seems  necessary; 

Lanman  1.  c. 


6  Cp.  aparibhyas  ‘for  future  times’. 

7  There  are  also  the  pronominal  forms 
dbhyas  and  dbhyas,  tdbhyas ,  ydbhyas. 

8  dhananam  in  vili.  5912  and  pftandndm 
in  VIII.  591.  In  sunftanam  (1.  3”)  the  metre 
seems  to  require  the  shortening  of  the  final 
of  the  stem:  sunf/dnam;  Lanman  364. 

9  This  is  a  form  of  some  importance  as 
showing  how  the  suffix  -1  arose  from  -yd-. 

10  It  also  occurs  once  in  Kh.  1.  57. 


268 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Strache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


in  the  RV.;  e.  g.  svdsu  urvarasu  (x.  503)  for  svdsurvardsu \  This  case  is 
formed  from  over  50  nominal  stems  in  the  RV.  The  forms  occurring 
are:  aghdsu  ‘evil’,  amftasu ,  dvarasu  ‘later’,  dmdsu,  drtand.su  ‘uncultivated’, 
ildsu,  upardsu  ‘neighbouring’,  urvarasu ,  usriydsu ,  urmydsii ,  kanydsu , 
kdsthdsu ,  kr  svdsu  ‘black’,  grivdsu  (TS.  iv.  2.  53),  cittd-garb/iasu  ‘visibly 
pregnant’,  citrdsu ,  jagmdndsu 2  ‘having  gone’,  jdtdsu  ‘born’,  tugryd.su  ‘des¬ 
cended  from  Tugra’,  duryasu  ‘abodes’,  devdtasu  (TS.  1.  6.  43),  dhisnyasu  ‘fire¬ 
places’,  dhruvdsu  ‘unchangeable’,  ndvasu ,  pathydsu ,  pddyasu  ‘footsteps’, 
pastydsu ,  pdhca-janydsu  ‘relating  to  the  five  tribes’,  puru-pcsdsu  ‘multiform’, 
pftrvdsu  ‘earlier’,  prtanasu ,  pradhanyasu  ‘forming  the  spoil’,  priydsu ,  madydsu 
‘fond  of  exhilaration’,  madhyamdsu  ‘middlemost’,  manusydsu  ‘human’,  mandrasu 
(TS.iv.  1.82),  mdrtyasu  ‘mortal’,  mahindsu  ‘mighty’,  yajhiydsu  ‘devout’,  (prd-)- 
yatdsu  ‘presented’,  yosandsu ,  rdmydsu ,  ropandka.su  a  kind  of  bird,  vaksanasu 
‘bellies’,  vrddhdsu  ‘great’,  rrdhasandsu 3  ‘growing’,  s'aydsu  ‘resting-places’, 
suskdsu  ‘dry’,  sydvdsu  ‘nights’,  srutdsu  ‘famous’,  sdnayasu  ‘old’,  saptd-sivasu 
‘blessing  the  seven  (worlds)’,  sirdsu  ‘streams’,  su-vrjdnasu  ‘dwelling  in  fair 
regions’,  hdvyasu  ‘to  be  invoked’. 


3.  a.  Stems  in  radical  -/. 

Lanman,  Noun-Inilection  365 — 4co.  —  Whitney,  Sanskrit  Grammar  348 — 359. 

375.  This  declension  consists  primarily  of  fewer  than  50  m.  and  f.  nouns 
derived  from  9  roots.  Only  four  of  these  words  appear  as  monosyllables, 
the  rest  being  compounds.  The  analogy  of  this  primary  group  (A)  is  closely 
followed  both  in  inflexion  and  accentuation  by  a  second  group  of  about  80 
polysyllabic  stems  which,  though  formed  with  derivative  -f,  are  for  the  sake 
of  clearness  best  treated  as  a  division  (B)  of  this  declension.  The  normal 
endings  as  they  appear  in  the  inflexion  of  consonant  stems  are  taken  throughout 
this  declension.  The  G.  pi.,  however,  with  the  exception  of  a  single  form 
occurring  only  once  ( d/iiydm ),  takes  the  ending  -?idm ;  and  the  N.  sing,  always 
adds  -j\  Accentuation  on  the  final  syllable  of  the  stem  is  characteristic  of 
this  declension;  and  except  in  monosyllabic  stems  the  acute  remains  on  that 
syllable  throughout4.  Before  vowel  endings  the  -1  is  split  to  -iy  in  the  mono¬ 
syllabic  nouns;  e.  g.  dhiy-am ;  this  is  also  the  case  in  compounds  formed 
with  these  nouns,  except  -d/u  when  it  is  accented,  e.  g.  jana-sriyam ,  ndnd- 
dhiyas ,  but  a- d hi  am ;  in  compounds  formed  with  roots  it  is  split  only  when 
two  consonants  precede;  e.  g.  yajh a -priyam ,  but  yajna-n.iam\  in  the  secon¬ 
dary  group  it  is  split  in  samudrt-  and  partly  in  cakri -,  e.  g.  samudriyas  and 
cakriyau ,  but  cakrias.  Otherwise  the  I  is  always  written  as  y ,  but  is  in  the 
RV.  invariably5  to  be  pronounced  as  a  vowel;  e.  g.  nadyam  pronounced 
nadiam  6. 

A.  The  stems  belonging  to  the  primary  group  are:  1.  the  monosyllabic 
feminines  dht-  ‘thought’,  bill-  ‘fear’,  srf-  ‘glory’;  and  the  m.  vi-  ‘receiver’  (which 
occurs  only  once  in  the  N.  sing.).  —  2.  Compounds  (mostly  Bahuvrlhis) 
formed  with  the  first  three:  a-dhl-  f.  ‘care’,  itthd-dhi-  ‘right  devout’,  dlrghadhl- 


1  Cp.  the  L.  pi.  of  the  ^-declension. 

2  Perfect  participle  middle  of  gam-  ‘go’. 

Participle  middle  from  vrdh-  ‘grow’. 

4  There  are  one  or  two  exceptions  to  this 
rule  in  compound  words  in  the  A  group, 
and  a  few  others,  in  the  AV.,  in  the  B 
group. 

5  There  are  only  two  exceptions  in  the 

RV. :  A.  sing,  staryam  (vu.  688)  in  a  late 


verse  (cp.  Lanman  3791)  and  N.  pi.  nadyas 
(vil.  504).  The  AV.  has  six  such  forms: 

asvataryas,  nadyas ,  naptyas ,  nadyas ,  p/ppa/yds, 
vrksa- sarpy as. 

6  The  resolved  forms  are  therefore  always 
given  below,  spelt  with  i  in  this  declension. 
This  will  not  lead  to  any  confusion  with  the 
written  forms  of  the  Samhita  text  in  which 
the  i  of  the  stem  always  appears  as  iy  ox y. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Vowel  Stems. 


269 


1  ‘longing 


‘having  a  far-reaching  mind’  ( a-d/r -),  dur-a-dh '-  ‘malevolent’,  durd-adhl 
for  the  distance’,  sv-ddht-  ‘attentive’,  du-dhl- 2  ‘malevolent’,  tuina-dhl-  ‘of  various 
intent’,  visvdto-dhl-  ‘all-attending’,  su-dht-  ‘devout’;  avadya-bhi -  f.  ‘fear  of  blame’; 
agni-srl -  ‘fire-bright’,  adhvara-irl-  ‘adorning  the  sacrifice’,  ksatra-sri-  ‘blessing 
dominion’,  ghrta-ird  ‘glittering  with  ghee’,  jana-sri-  ‘blessing  men’,  dariata-srt- 
‘of  beauteous  splendour’,  mdrya-srl-  ‘adorned  like  a  wooer’,  yajha-sri-  ‘beauti¬ 
fying  the  sacrifice’,  sic-sri-  ‘glorious’,  hari-irt-  ‘of  golden  glory’.  —  3.  Com¬ 
pounds3  formed  with  the  roots  kri-  ‘buy’,  nl-  ‘lead’,  prl -  ‘love’,  ml-  ‘diminish’, 
vT-  ‘move’ and ‘cover’,  si-  ‘lie’,  in-  ‘mix’:  pra-krt-y AV.)  ‘purchasable’,  sadyah- 
krf-  (AV.)  ‘bought  on  the  same  day’;  agre-ni-  (VS.)  ‘leading’,  rta-nl-  ‘leading 
the  rite’,  grdma-nf-  ‘leading  the  community’,  pada-nf-  (AV.)  ‘following  the  steps 
of  another’,  pra-ni-  f.  ‘furtherance’,  pra-neni -4  ‘powerfully  furthering’,  mana-ni- 
‘spirit-leading’,  yajua-nt-  ‘leading  the  sacrifice’,  vasa-nf-  m.  ‘commander’,  vrata- 
ni-  ‘carrying  out  the  ordinance’,  sadha-nl-  ‘accompanying’,  seni-nl-  m.  ‘leader 
of  an  army’,  skamb/ia-nt-  (VS.)  ‘furnishing  a  prop’;  abhi-pri-  ‘gladdening’,  kadha- 
pri-  ‘gladdening  whom?’,  pari-prt-  ‘dear’,  brahma-prt-  ‘prayer-loving’,  yajha-pr'- 
‘sacrifice-loving’;  manyu-mt-  ‘rage-obstructing’,  vdta-pra-ml-  ‘surpassing  the  wind’; 
takva-vt-  m.  ‘(swiftly  darting)  bird’,  deva-vl-  and  deva-vl-  ‘god-refreshing’,  pada- 
vt-  m.  ‘leader’,  parna-vi-  ‘moving  with  wings’,  pratl-vi-s  ‘gladly  accepting’, 
hiranya-vi-  ‘gold-bringing’;  pra-vi-  (VS.)  ‘wound  round’;  jihma-sl-  ‘lying  pro¬ 
strate’,  patsu-tas-si- 6  ‘lying  at  the  feet’,  madhyama-st-  ‘lying  in  the  midst’,  syona-st - 
‘lying  on  a  soft  couch’;  abhi-irt- 7  ‘admixture’,  gana-srt -1  ‘mixing  in  troops’. 

B.  This  secondary  group  comprises  upwards  of  80  polysyllabic  stems, 
accented  on  the  final  vowel,  which  are  all  substantives  except  about  half  a 
dozen.  It  includes  fewer  than  a  dozen  masculines.  Of  the  remainder,  which 
are  feminine,  more  than  half  are  names  of  female  beings;  about  30  are  the 
f.  form  of  m.  stems  that  are  not  accented  on  the  final  vowel,  as  purust- 
‘woman’  beside  puriisa-  ‘man’.  There  are  also  some  f.  adjectives  corresponding 
to  m.  in  -ya,  as  svart-  beside  svaryd-  ‘resounding’.  This  derivative  group 
closely  follows  the  analogy  of  the  third  division  of  the  radical  group  (compounds 
ending  in  roots  with  final  accented  -I);  it  joined  the  radical  declension  doubt¬ 
less  owing  to  the  accentuation  of  the  final  vowel. 

The  m.  stems  are:  ^/-‘serpent’,  i/pavf-i\ S.)8  ‘encouraging’,  daksl- 9  ‘flaming’; 
prdvf- 8  ‘attentive’,  dus-pravi-  ‘unfriendly’,  su-prdvt-  ‘very  attentive’; yayl- 10  ‘going’; 
rat/it-  ‘charioteer’,  d-rathi-  ‘not  a  charioteer’;  sahdsra-starl -  ‘having  a  thousand 
barren  cows’,  hiranya-vdsT-  ‘wielding  a  golden  axe’. 

The  f.  stems  are:  atharf-  ‘flame’,  atharvf-  ‘priestess’  (m.  dtharvan-), 
d-dunnahgall-  ‘not  unlucky’,  apart-  pi.  ‘future  days’  (m.  dpara -),  apast-  (VS.) 
‘industrious’  (m.  apdsya -),  ambt-  ‘mother’,  arayt-  ‘demoness’  (m.  dray  a-),  arunf- 
‘dawn’,  asvatarl-  (AV.)  ‘she-mule’,  asta-karni-  ‘cow  with  notched  ear’,  a-paihl- 
‘impediment’,  end  ‘doe’  (m.  eta-),  out-  ‘breast’,  kalydnf-  ‘fair  woman’  (m.  kalydna -), 
kavast-  ‘creaking’  (m.  hands  a-),  kilasi-  ‘spotted  deer’  (m.  hi/dsa-),  kumarl- 
(AV.)  ‘girl’,  hud-  (AV.)  ‘fetter’,  krsnt-  ‘night’,  ksont-  ‘flood’,  kharl-  ‘measure’, 
gandharvi-  ‘female  Gandharva’,  ganrl-  ‘buffalo  cow’,  cakri-  ‘wheel’,  tandri- 


1  For  dur e-ad  hi 

2  From  dus-dhi-. 

3  Mostly  Tatpurusas,  generally  with  accu¬ 
sative  sense  ;  some  Karmadharayas. 

4  An  intensive  formation  from  nT- 
‘lead’. 

5  ‘Coming  towards’,  prati ,  with  lengthened 
final  vowel. 

6  From  patsu-tas ,  an  adverb  anomalously 


formed  by  adding  the  suffix  -/as  to  the 
1..  pi.  of  pad-  ‘foot’. 

7  Formed  directly  from  the  root  srt-  — 
‘mix’,  and  not  from  the  substantive  sri-. 

8  From  upa  and  pra-pav-  ‘favour’. 

9  To  be  assumed  as  the  stem  of  the  V. 
daks i,  Pad  a  text  dhaksi. 

10  The  final  vowel  is  here  perhaps  radical 
in  origin. 


270  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Yedic  Grammar. 

(AV.)  ‘weariness’  (m.  tdndra -),  tapani-  ‘heat’  (m.  tdpana-),  tila-pinjl- 1  (AV.) 
N.  of  a  plant  (m.  tila-plnja -),  tiksna-srngi-  (AV.)  ‘sharp-horned’  (m.  tlZzsnd- 
sr/iga -),  dlitl-  ‘messenger’,  dehl-  ‘dam’,  nadl-  ‘stream’,  naptf-  ‘daughter’  (m.  naptr-), 
uadi-  ‘pipe’,  ndndl-  ‘joy’,  nisligrf-  N.  of  Indra’s  mother,  palall-1  (AV.)  ‘stalk’, 
pippalt-  (AV.),  ‘berry’  (m.  plppala- ),  purust-  ‘woman’  (m.  purusa -),  prapZiarvt- 
‘voluptuous  girl’,  mandukt-  ‘female  frog’  (m.  mandfika -),  mayurf-  ‘peahen’  (m. 
jnayftra-),  mahi-nadl-  ‘great  stream’,  ma/iisi-  (TS.)  ‘buffalo  cow’,  mest-  ‘ewe’,  yaml- 
‘  Yarn!’,  yayt-2  ‘quick’,  yatudhani-  ‘sorceress’ (m .yatudZidna-),  ratZii-  ‘female  chario¬ 
teer’  (m.  ratZia-  ‘car’),  laksmz-  ‘mark’,  lalainT-  ‘speckled  mare’  (m.  la/dma-),  vaksf- 
‘flame’,  vi-kesi-  (AV.)  ‘shaggy  hog’,  vibdli-  N.  of  a  river,  vi-Zipti-  (AV.)  ‘cow’, 
vi-lidJii-  (AV.)  ‘female  monster’,  visva-rupf-  ‘brindled  cow’  (m.  visvd-rupa -), 
vrkt-  ‘she-wolf’  (m.  vfka -),  vrksa-sarpi-  (AV.)  ‘tree-serpent’,  vest-  ‘needle’, 
vyasta-kesi-  (AV.)  ‘shaggy  hog’,  sakati-  ‘cart’  (. sdkata -),  sabali-  (TS.)  ‘cow  of 
plenty’  (m.  sabdlaj,  sakthf-  ‘thigh’  (n.  sdktZii -),  sasarpari-  ‘trumpet’,  saZiasra- 
parni-  (AV.)  N.  of  a  plant  (m.  saZidsra-parna -),  simZif-  ‘lioness’,  su-maZigalz- 3 * 
‘lucky  woman’  (m.  su-mcingdla -),  surmz-  ‘pipe’,  wvz/-  ‘sickle’,  V^r/-  ‘barren 
cow’,  spZiigZ-  ‘hip’,  Ziasti?ii-><  (AV.)  ‘female  elephant’,  Ziiranya-ZzeH-  ‘gold-haired’ 
(AV.)  (m.  Ziiranya-kesa-'). 

a.  There  are  further  a  few  f.  adjectives  in  -1  from  m.  stems  in  - ya :  dpl- 
Svatery’  (m.  dpya -),  samudri- 5  ‘belonging  to  the  sea’  (in.  samudriya-),  svari- 
‘resounding’  (m.  svarya-). 

a.  There  are  a  few  transition  forms  from  the  /-stems:  karkaryas 6  (AV.)  from 
karkari-  ‘lute’  ( Ziarkari -);  N.  sing.  7  (VS.  VI.  36)  from  art-  ‘faithful’  beside  the  usual  a;-/-; 
and  the  stems  s  aid  hi-,  srnt-  also  occur  beside  yayi-,  saki/ii-,  spin-  respectively.  The 

only  certain  transition  from  the  derivative  1-  declension  to  the  radical  I-  declension  is 
represented  by  sirt-  ‘woman’,  originally  a  dissyllable8,  from  which  occur  the  forms 
A.  sing,  stnyam,  N.  A.  pi.  striyas ,  I.  strlbhu.  Other  transition  forms  are  probably  prsanias 
G.  sing.  N.  pi,,  yahvias  A.  pi,,  sup arnias 9  N.  A.  pi. 

Inflexion. 

376.  The  forms  actually  occurring  if  made  from  dZii-  ‘thought’,  yajna- 
sri -  m.  f.  ‘adorning  the  sacrifice’,  send-nl-  m.  ‘leader  of  an  army’,  ratZii-  rn.  f. 
‘charioteer’  respectively,  would  be  the  following: 

A.  1.  sing.  N.  dZifs.  A.  dZiiyam.  I.  dZiiyd.  D.  dZiiye.  G.  dZiiyds.  — 
PI.  N.  dZi/yas.  A.  dZiiyas.  I.  dZilbZiis.  G.  dZimdm 10.  L.  dZilsii. 

2.  sing.  N.  yajha-sris .  A.  yajha-sriyam.  I.  yajna-sriyd.  D.  yajha-sriyc. 
G.  yajna-sriyas.  —  Du.  N.  A.  yajna-sriyd  and  yajua-sr/yau  (AV.).  —  PI. 
N.  yajna-sriyas.  A.  yajna-sriyas.  I.  yajna-srtbZiis. 

3.  sing.  N.  send-nfs.  A.  send-nlam.  D.  sena-nle.  G.  send-nlas.  —  Du. 
N.  A.  send-nld.  G.  send-nlos.  —  PL  N.  send-nlas.  A.  send-nlas.  D.  smd- 
nibZiyas.  G.  send-ntndm. 

B.  Sing.  N.  ratZifs.  A.  ratZilam.  I.  ratZila.  D.  ratZile.  G.  ratZilas. 
V.  ratZii.  —  Du.  N.  A.  ratZild .  I.  f.  ratZiibZiydm.  G.  f.  ratZilos.  L.  ratZilos.  — 
PI.  N.  ratZilas.  A.  ratZilas.  I.  ratZifbZiis.  D.  f.  ratZiibZiyas.  G.  ratZitndm. 
L.  f.  ratZitsu. 


1  In  these  words  the  accent  is  shifted 
to  a  vowel  ending  in  weak  cases. 

2  The  final  vowel  in  this  word  is  perhaps 
radical  in  origin  (from  yd-  ‘go’). 

3  The  V.  pi.  su-Ziastias  (ix.46*),  presupposes 

a  stem  su-hastl *,  but  as  the  form  is  a  m., 

the  reading  ought  perhaps  to  be  emended 

to  suhastias  with  BR. 

•i  haslinl-  (ix.  317)  means  ‘having  a  hand’. 


5  Grassmann  regards  this  as  a  f.  of  an 
adjective  samud)  a-. 

6  See  Whitney  on  AV.  iv.  37s. 

7  See  Lanman  3 7 1 3. 

8  In  I.  1227  starts  seems  to  be  the  equi¬ 
valent  of  stri.  See  pw.  s.  v. 

9  Cp.  Lanman  372s. 

10  The  form  dhinam  occurs  7  times  in 
the  RV.,  dhiydm  only  once. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Vowel  Stems. 


271 


The  forms  actually  occurring  are  the  following: 

Sing.  N.  A.  1.  m.  vis.  —  f.  d/ifs,  bhis ,  sris.  — -  2.  m.  itthdd/iTs ,  ksatra- 
sris,  ghrta-sris ,  darsata-sris ,  dura-adhTs,  mdrya-srls ,  visvato-dhls ,  sv-adhis.  — 
f.  abhi-sris.  —  3.  m.  agre-nls  (VS.  vi.  2 )J,  grama-nts ,  takva-vis ,  deva-vis  and 
deva-vis ,  patsu-tas-sis ,  pada-nis  (AV.),  pada-vis ,  pari-vis  (VS.  vi.  6),  parna-vis , 
pra-kris  (AV.),  pra-nenis ,  viadhyama-sis ,  manyu-mis ,  yajna-nis,  yajha-pris  (VS. 
xxvii.  31),  vasa-nis ,  sadyah-kris,  sena-nis,  skambZia-nls  (VS.  1.  19),  syona-sis. — 
f.  pra-kris  (AV.),  vrata-nis.  —  B.  m.  d-ratZils x,  prdvis ,  suprdvis ,  rat  Ids1  2 
sahasra-staris ,  hiranya-vasZs.  —  f.  d-dur-mahgalls ,  arunis,  kalyanis ,  krsnfs , 
k so /i is 3,  gandharvis ,  gauris,  jatris 4  (AV.),  tandris  (AV.),  naptis,  uadis, 

m  a  his  is  $  (TS.  1.  2.  122),  yamis,  yatudhanis  (AV.),  rat  his,  laksmis,  lalands, 
visva-rupis  (TS.i.  5.6’),  u/V/l,  sakatis,  sabalis  (TS.iv.  3.  n 5),  sasarparis ,  simhis 
(TS.  1.  2.  122),  su-mahgalisb ,  star  is  7. 

Acc.  A.  1.  f.  d/dyam,  bhiyam,  sriyam.  —  2.  m.  dur-ad/dam,  sv- ad  Id  am, 
adhvara-sriyam,  ksatra-sriyam ,  ghrta-sriyam ,  jana-sriyam ,  yajha-sriyam,  su- 
sriyam,  hari-sriyam 8.  —  f.  abhi-sriyam.  —  3.  m.  gatha-niam,  grdma-niam 
(VS.  xxx.  20),  yajha-niam ;  deua-via?n ,  pratz-viam-,  abhi-priyam ,  ghrta-priyani 
(AV.),  brah m a-priy am.  —  f.  deua-viam 9.  —  B.  m.  ratldam,  su-praviam.  — 
f.  atharviam ,  arayiam,  kumdriam  (AV.),  kudiam  (AV.),  gauriam,  nadiam, 
nap  dam,  nandiain,  prapharviam ,  yamiam,  laksmiam  (AV.),  laldmiam  (AV.), 
vibdliatn,  viliptiam  (AV.),  vilzdhiam  (AV.),  visva-rHpiam,  vrkiam,  simhiam, 
surmiam,  stariam  IO,  sphiglam,  svariam. 

I.  A.  1.  f.  dhiya,  bhiyd ,  sriyd.  —  2.  m.  du-dhia.  —  f.  avadya-bhiyd  “, 
a-dhid 12  (AV.).  —  B.  m.  rathid.  —  f.  tila-pinjid 12  (AV.),  paldlid 12  (AV.), 
mandiikid,  vesta,  sahasra-parnid  1 2  (AV.),  surinid,  sphigid. —  The  form  tapani 
may  be  a  contraction  for  tapanid I3. 

D.  A.  1.  f.  dhiys,  sriyd.  —  2.  m.  itthd-dhiye,  dur-ad/de,  du-dhie.  — 
f.  d-d  hie.  —  3.  m.  gana-sriye  (VS.  xxn.  30),  yajfia-priye  \  jihma-sie ,  send-nie 
(VS.  xvi.  17).  —  B.  m.  rathie,  su-prdvie M.  —  f.  nandic,  mesie,  vrkie. 

G.15  A.  1.  f.  dhiyds.  —  2.  m.  du-dfdas,  su-dhias.  —  n.  sv-adldasl6.  — 
3.  m.  gana-sriyas ;  gdthd-nias,  manyu-miaslh  —  B.  m.  ah! as,  su-prdvias.  — 
f.  atharias,  dpias l8,  uadi  as,  nisti-grias,  prsanias ,  mesias ,  srnias. 

L.  f.  gauri  (ix.  12^  and  sarasi  (vn.  1032)  may  be  locatives  containing 
the  normal  ending 


1  There  is  also  the  transition  form  w 
(VS.  vi.  36). ; 

2  On  rathlva  occurring  once  or  twice  for 
rat/ur  iva,  cp.  Lanman  375  (bottom). 

3  The  N.  sing,  once  (1.  1805)  appears 
without  the  as  ksoni.  This  word  has 
other  forms  also  according  to  the  deri¬ 
vative  7-  declension;  cp.  Lanman  372 
(bottom). 

4  The  reading  of  the  Mss.  in  AV.  xx.  482 
is  jatris \  the  edition  has  janis. 

5  This  is  a  transition  from  the  derivative 
7-  declension  for  the  mahifi  of  the  RV. 

6  The  AV.  has  su-mangali  three  times; 
cp.  Lanman  377  (top). 

7  There  are  also  the  transition  forms  araiTs 
(vi.  45),  sakvaris  (TS.  iv.  4.  41),  tfTWr  (AV.  VI. 
592);  vartanis  (i.  1409)  is  a  purely  metrical 
lengthening;  cp.  Lanman  377A 

8  This  form  is  also  once  (Val.  11.  10)  used 

in  agreement  with  a  neuter  substantive  1 

{got ram). 


9  In  agreement  with  tvcicam  (ix.  745). 

10  This  form  is  once  (vu.688)  pronounced 
staryarn,  being  one  of  the  two  only  examples 
in  the  RV.  of  the  7  in  this  declension  being 
pronounced  as  3'  before  a  vowel. 

11  Accented  as  if  -bhiyd  were  used  indepen¬ 
dently  ;  the  form  occurs  in  a  late  hymn 
(x.  1073). 

12  Irregular  accentuation  of  the  ending. 

13  Otherwise  it  may  be  an  I.  of  the  deri¬ 
vative  7-declension. 

14  Cp.  Lanman  3823 4. 

15  There  is  no  example  of  an  ablative. 

16  This  seems  to  be  the  only  actual  n. 
form  of  this  declension  in  the  RV. 

17  The  form  ahi-ghnyds  (AV.)  is  a  transition 
form  with  shift  of  accent  from  the  deri¬ 
vative  7-declension. 

18  The  form  arunis  (1.  12 13)  may  be  con- 
I  traded  for  arunias. 


272  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

V.  B.  m.  daZzsi1.  —  f.  ardyi ,  mahe-nadi 2,  yami,  laksmi  (AV.). 

Du.  N.  A.  A.  2.  f.  abZ/i-srlyd ,  gZ/rta-srlyd. —  3.  m.  mana-nta,  sadZ/a-nld ; 
sendnTgrdmanyhu  (VS.  xv.  15).  —  f.  abZii-sriyau  (AV.).  —  B.  m.  ratZild.  — 
f.  cakriya ,  nadla ,  naptld ,  yam/ a,  sa/ztZild ,  srnla;  caZzrlyau  (SV,),  nddyau  (AV.), 
sakthiau  (AV.) 3. 

I.  B.  f.  ksonfbhyam.  —  G.  A.  3.  m. yajna-nlos.  —  B.  f.  onlos*,  caZzrlos.  — 
L.  B.  f.  on! os,  naptios. 

PI.  N.  V.  A.  1.  f.  dZilyas,  srlyas 5.  —  2.  m.  dlrgZiddZiiyas,  duradZilas, 
dudZiias ,  nand-dZiiyas,  su-dZ/lyas,  sv-dd Zitas-,  agni-srlyas,  adZivara-srlyas,  su- 
srlyas.  —  f.  adZilas ,  vyddZiias 6  (AV.).  —  3.  m.  grdma-nlas  (AV.),  deva-vias , 
pada-vias ,  sadfia-nlas;  abZii-pr!yas,  ZzadZia-prlyas,  gana-srlyas,  pari-prlyas.  — 
f.  abZii-srlyas ,  d-prlyas  (AV.),  pra-nlas ,  vdta-pramiyas.  —  B.  m.  aJ/ias,  apatZilas, 
rdtZ/ias ,  su-Ziastias7 .  —  f.  apasias  (VS.  x.  7),  ardy'as  (AV.),  artmias,  enias , 
kalydnias ,  kavasias  (VS.  xx.  40,  60),  gaurias,  tlZzsna-sriigias,  nad/as ,  ndd'ias 
(AV.),  mayurias ,  yatu-dZidnias  (AV.),  ratZuas ,  laZzsmtas  (AV.),  vaZzsias ,  vi-Zzes’/as 
(AV.),  vyasta-Jzes'ias  (AV.),  samudriyas ,  saZ/asra-parn !as{  AV.),  star/as.  —  With 
T  pronounced  as  /:  once  nadyas  (vii.  504)  and  6  forms  in  the  AV., 
asvataryas,  nadyas,  naptyas,  nadyas,  pippalyas,  vrZzsa-sarpyas . 

Acc.  A.  1.  f.  d/iiyas,  bZiiyas  (AV.),  bZiiyds  (TS.  iv.  1.7 3  =  VS.  xxvii.  7), 
sr/yas.  —  2.  m.  duradZuas ,  dudZi/as,  su- srlyas 8.  —  f.  adZi/as  (AV.).  —  3.  m. 
sadfia-n/as.  —  B.  m.  aZilas,  dusprdvias,  ratZiias.  —  f.  ardy'as  (AV.),  asta-Zzarn/as , 
Zzilas'/as,  ZzZidrias,  dcZi/as,  nad/as,  napt'/as,  mesias,  yam/as,  yatu-dZidnias, 
samudriyas,  sambadZia-tandrlas  (AV.)  ‘affliction  and  exhaustion’,  starlas9. 

I.  A.  1.  f.  dZubZils,  sribhls io.  —  2.  m.  sv-ddZifbZiis.  —  3.  m.  gana-sribZi/s'1'1. 
—  B.  m.  Zilranya-vdslbZiis.  —  f.  Jzalyanfbhis,  ZzsonfbZiis,  nad/bZ/is,  naptlbZiis. 

D.12  A.  3.  m .  rta-nlbZ/y as",  sva-nlbZiyas 11  (VS.xvi.  27),  send-nlbZiyas TT  (VS. 
xvi.  26).  —  B.  f.  aparibfiyas,  nadlbZiyas  (VS.  xxx.  8). 

G.  A.  i.  f.  dZilndm  and  dZiiydm,  srlndm.  —  3.  f.  Jiiranya-vfndm.  — 
B.  m.  aZifndm,  nadinam  ‘invokers’,  ratZilndrn 13.  —  f.  arunfndm,  krimtndm  (AV.), 
nad  'niam,  purusfndm,  svarhidm. 

L.  A.  1.  f.  dfilsu.  —  B.  f.  aparfsu,  arunisu,  nadfsu u. 

3.  b.  Stems  in  derivative  -A 

LanMan,  Noun-Inflection  365 — 400.  —  Whitney,  Sanskrit  Grammar  362 — 366. 

377.  1.  This  declension  embraces  a  very  considerable  number  of  stems 
which  are  formed  by  means  of  the  suffix  -T  (originally  -_yn)  and,  except  seven 
masculines,  are  restricted  to  the  f.  gender.  It  largely  supplies  the  f.  form  ot 
words  requiring  inflexion  in  more  than  one  gender.  Feminine  stems  are  thus 
made  from  nouns  in  -tf,  e.  g.  devi-  (m.  dead-);  from  adjectives  in  -u;  e.  g. 
prtZiv-i -  (m.  prtZi ■//-);  from  present  participles  in  -ant ;  e.  g.  mad  ant-i- 


1  Pada  dhaksi ;  cp.  RFr.  iv.  41. 

2  t  reated  as  a  compound  in  the  Tada 
( v III.  74T5)  though  make  is  V. 

3  The  AV.  shows  no  example  of  -z'a.  It 
lias  three  transition  forms  andiau , phalgimyau , 
aksyau. 

4  Cp.  APr.  in.  61. 

5  Also  the  transition  form  striyas. 

6  This  would  be  vya-dhiyas  in  the  RV. 
where  in  compounds  ending  in  -d/u-  the  1 
if  unaccented  is  split. 

7  See  above,  375  P>  a  a,  note  3. 

s  Also  the  transition  form  to  the  deriva¬ 


tive  F-declension  deva-sris (TS.  iv.  6.  32  =  VS. 
XVII.  56)  ‘worshipping  the  gods’. 

9  Also  the  transition  form  stnyas;  on 
yahvias  and  suparnias  see  375  a  a. 

10  Also  the  transition  form  strib/iis  (accented 
as  a  monosyllabic  stem). 

11  Metrical  shortening;  see  Lanman  37a3. 

12  There  is  no  example  of  an  Ab.  m.  or  f. 
Cl  The  accent  of  the  G.  at  as  mam  ‘beggars’ 

would  seem  to  require  a  stem  alas/-  and 
not  atas/-. 

J4  There  is  also  the  transition  form  slrlsi’i 
accented  as  a  monosyllable. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Vowel  Stems. 


273 


(m.  mddant-),  -ant,  e.  g.  adat-i-  (m.  addnt-),  or  -at,  e. g. piprat-T-  (m. p'prat-); 
from  perfect  participles  in  - vams ,  e.  g.  jagmus-T-  (m.  jaganvdms-) ;  from 
comparatives  in  -yams,  e.  g.  naviyas-T-  (m.  naviyams -);  from  words  in  -tar 
(- tr ),  e.  g.  avitr-i-  (m.  avitar-)’,  from  adjectives  in  -mant,  e.  g.  dhenu-mat-T- 
(m.  dhenu-mant-),  and  -vant,  e.  g.  dma-vat-i -  (m.  ama-vant-) ;  from  nouns  in 
-an,  e.  g.  sam-rdjn-i-  (m.  rdjan-),  -van,  e.  g.  rtd-var-T-  (m.  rtd-van-);  from 
adjectives1  in  -in,  e.  g.  arkin-T-  (m .arkin-);  from  compounds  ending  in  -anc, 

e.  g.  arvdc-T-  (m.  arvdnc -),  in  -V/V,  e.  g.  su-dfs-i-,  in  -pad,  e.  g.  a-pdd-T-,  and 
in  -han,  e.  g.  d-pati-ghn-T-. 

2.  There  is  besides  a  large  group  of  miscellaneous  f.  stems  of  an 
independent  character,  having  no  corresponding  m.2,  e.  g.  sdc-T-  ‘might’. 

3.  The  seven  m.  stems3 4,  of  which  five  are  proper  names,  are:  Tirascf- , 
Nairn-,  Prthi-,  Mdtall-,  SJbharT-;  rdstrT-  ‘ruler’,  sirt-  ‘weaver’. 

a.  The  stems  of  this  declension  (in  contrast  with  those  of  the  B  group  of  the 
radical  i-  declension)  do  not  normally  accent  the  suffix.  The  exceptions  to  this  rule 
are  of  a  definite  character. 

1.  When  in  the  first  f.  group  there  is  a  corresponding  m.  accented  on  a  final  syllable 
which  is  liable  to  be  reduced  in  such  a  way  as  to  be  incapable  of  bearing  the  accent, 
the  acute  is  thrown  forward  on  the  -f;  e.  g.  m.  urti-,  f.  urv-i-\  m.  netdr-,  f.  netr-T- ; 
m.  ad-ant -,  f.  ad-at-i- ;  m .  praty- anc-,  f.  pratic-i- ;  m.  -hart-,  i.-ghn-i-.  When  the  m.  ends  in 
-a,  the  accent  also  in  several  stems  remains  on  the  corresponding  -1;  thus  m.  devd -, 

f.  devT- ;  papa-  ‘evil’,  f.  pdpi-  4 ;  m .  puro-gavd-  ‘leader’,  f.  puro-gavt- ;  m.  ramd-  ‘night’, 
f.  rami-;  m.  vamrd-  ‘ant’,  f.  vamri-.  More  usually,  however,  the  accent  of  such  feminines 
is  thrown  back  on  the  first  syllable5;  thus  m.  ayasd-  ‘made  of  iron’,  f.  dyasl-;  m.  arusd- 
•red’,  f.  drusi-;  m.  gdndharvd-  ‘belonging  to  the  Gandharvas’,  f.  gdndharvl m.  tavisd- 
‘strong’,  f.  tdvisi-  ‘strength’;  m.  parusd-  ‘reed’,  f.  pdrusni-  ‘reedy’,  N.  of  a  river;  m.  palitd- 
‘grey’,  f.  pdliknT- ;  m.  mahisa- 6  ‘buffalo’,  f.  mdhisT m.  rohita-  ‘ruddy’,  f.  rohinT-  ‘ruddy 
cow’,  m.  saw -gay  d •  ‘procuring  prosperity  for  the  household’,  f.  sam-gdyi- ;  m.  sydvd-  ‘brown’, 
f.  syavi-;  m.  syetd-  ‘white’,  f.  syeni-  ‘white  cow’. 

2.  Again,  the  miscellaneous  group  of  feminines  hardly  ever  accents  the  final  -1  of  the 
stem  except  when  it  is  a  proper  name,  a  shift  of  accent  having  here  probably  taken 
place  to  indicate  a  change  of  meaning;  thus  aranydni-  ‘Forest-goddess’,  arundhati-  ‘  (AV.) 
N.  of  a  plant  and  a  star,  indrdin-  ‘Indra’s  wife’,  rodast-  N.  of  the  Asvins’  wife,  vadhri- 
matt-  N.  of  a  mythical  female,  varunant-  ‘Varuna’s  wife’,  savast-  N.  of  Indra’s  mother, 
simvdlt-  N.  of  a  goddess;  and  the  river  names  adjust-,  asiknl -8  (but  dsikni-  ‘black’  and 
‘night’),  go-tnat-T-  (but  go-mat-T-  ‘rich  in  cows’),  sutudrf-. 


Inflexion. 

378.  The  inflexion  of  the  derivative  1-  stems  stands  in  marked  contrast 
with  that  of  the  radical  T-  stems  in  three  respects:  (1)  no  -s  is  added  in 
the  N.  sing,  masculine  or  feminine;  (2)  the  endings  diverge  considerably 
from  the  normal  ones,  the  Sing.  A.  taking  -rn,  the  D.  -ai,  the  Ab.  G.  -as, 
the  L.  -am,  the  du.  N.  A.  -1,  the  pi.  N.  A.  -s;  (3)  stems  accented  on  the 
final  vowel  shift  the  acute  to  the  ending  in  the  weak  cases  of  the  sing., 
in  the  G.  L.  du.,  and  the  G.  pi. 


1  Adjectives  ending  in  -a  do  not  form 
their  f.  in  -1  unless  they  are  accented  on  the 
final  syllable,  when  the  accent  almost  always 
shifts  to  tire  first  syllable ;  e.  g.  arusT-  from 
arusa-;  but  papa-  has  pdpt-  beside  papa-. 

2  A  list  of  these  is  given  by  Grassmann, 
Worterbuch  1722 — 23. 

3  Cp.  Zubaty,  zu  den  altindischen  mann- 
lichen  J-stammen,  Sitzungsberichte  d.  Bohm. 
Ges,  d.  Wiss.  1897,  xix  (treats  also  of  the 
radical  z-stems  used  in  the  masc.). 

4  Beside  papa-.  The  great  majority  of 

Indo-anschc  Philolotbe.  L  4. 


adjectives  and  all  participles  ending  in  -a 
form  their  f.  with  -a. 

5  This  is  the  converse  of  the  accentuation 
in  the  B  group  of  the  radical  -t  declension, 
where  the  m.  in  unaccented  -a  throws  the 
acute  on  the  final  -i  of  (he  f. 

6  Similarly  vanity-  ‘protector’,  f.  vdnilr-i-. 

7  Originally  a  present  participle  * d-rundhat-i- 
‘not  hindering’. 

8  dsikni -  also  occurs  once  as  the  N.  of 

the  river. 


18 


274 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


The  forms  actually  occurring,  if  made  from  devi-  ‘goddess’,  would  be 

as  follows: 

Sing.  N.  devi.  A.  devim.  I,  dev  yd.  D.  devydi.  Ab.  devyds.  G.  devyds. 
L.  devydm.  V.  devi. 

Du.  N.  A.  devi,  V.  devl.  D.  Ab.  devibZiydm.  G.  L.  devyds. 

PI.  N.  devis.  A.  devis.  I.  devibhis.  D.  devibZiyas.  Ab.  devtbhyas. 

G.  devmdm.  L.  devisu.  Y.  devis. 

Forms  actually  occurring  are  the  following: 

Sing.  N.  The  m.  forms  are:  nami ,  pit  hi,  mdtali ,  rdstri,  sdbZiari.  The 
f.  forms  are  very  common,  being  made  from  nearly  300  stems  in  the  RV. 
Among  the  most  frequent  are:  prtZiivi  ‘earth’  (57),  devi  (48),  sdrasvati  (43) 
N.  of  a  goddess,  maZii  ‘great’  (35),  uccZidfiti  ‘shining’  (16),  yati  ‘going’  (14), 
jdnitri  ‘mother’  (10),  brZiati  ‘great’  (10),  gZirtdci  ‘filled  with  ghee’  (9), 
magZibni  ‘bountiful’  (9),  stri1  ‘woman’  (3)2. 

A.  m.  ndmim.  —  The  f.  is  formed  from  over  100  stems  in  the  RV. 
Among  the  commonest  forms  are:  prthivim  (62),  maZiim 3  (35),  devim  (18), 
tdvisim  (13),  urvim  (9)  ‘wide’,  pipyusim 4  (9)  ‘swelling’5. 

I.  This  case  is  formed  with  the  normal  ending  -a.  The  only  m.  form  is 
ndmya.  But  there  are  about  40  f.  forms  in  the  RV.  In  more  than  two-thirds 
of  these  the  suffix  is  pronounced  as  a  vowel0  -id  (in  oxytones  -id),  in  the  rest 
as  a  semivowel  -yd  (in  oxytones  -yd).  The  stem  sdmi-  ‘labour’  has,  beside 
saniya,  the  contracted  form  sdmi,  which  also  appears  in  the  compound  su-sdmi 
‘with  great  care’.  At  the  end  of  a  Pada  and  before  vowels7  this  I.  sdmi  is 
shortened  to  s'dmi 8.  The  forms  occurring  are:  1.  dnvyd  ‘subtile’,  asvabhidhdnya 
(A V.)  ‘halter’,  asvdvatyd  ‘furnished  with  horses’,  asiknyd 9  (AV.),  kundrndcya 
‘house  lizard’,  kumbhyd  (TS.m.  2. 84)  ‘jar’,  gatu-matya  ‘spacious’,  gdyatryd  (TS. 
11.  2.4s)  a  metre,  ghrtdcyd ,  citdntya  ‘observing’,  citdyantyd  ‘appearing’,  jdgatyd 
(TS.  11.  21.48),  a  metre,  tmdnyd  ‘by  oneself,  ddvidyutatya  ‘glittering’,  devdcya 
‘directed  towards  the  gods’,  ddivya  (AV.)  ‘divine’,  ndvyasyd  ‘new’,  patnyd  ‘wife’, 
mddhu-matya  ‘accompanied  by  sweetness’,  roZiinyd,  vdsvyd  ‘good’,  vdjavatya 
‘rich  in  treasure’,  vdsya  (AV.)  ‘knife’,  visvd-bZiesajyd  (AV.)  ‘all-healing’,  visvdcya 
‘universal’,  visvyd  ‘everywhere’  (adv.),  sacyd  ‘might’,  sdmya,  sarmayantyd  ‘pro¬ 
tecting’,  simyd  ‘work’,  satrdcyd  ‘attentive’,  samicyd  (Kh.  in.  105)  a  goddess, 
sdrasvatyd  (AV.),  sdma-vatya  ‘accompanied  with  Soma’,  stdbhantya  ‘praising’, 
hdrinyd  ‘yellow’,  hiranyayd10  ‘golden’.  —  Oxytones  with  shift  of  accent: 
annadyd  (AV.)  ‘proper  food’,  asiknyd ,  devyd,  pur  any  d  ‘ancient’,  prthivyd , 
ma/iyd ,  samdnya  ‘similar’,  sddZiaranyd 11  ‘common’,  sucyd  ‘needle’,  sautrdmanyd 
(AV.)  a  kind  of  Indra  sacrifice.  The  TS.  and  VS.  also  have  urvyd  as  an 
adverb  ‘afar’,  which  in  the  RV.  appears  only  in  the  modified  form  urviyd. 

D.  The  ending  looks  like  - ai ,  e.  g.  devy-di ;  but  it  is  doubtless  in 
origin  the  normal  ending  -e  fused  with  the  suffix  -yd,  i.  e.  -yai  —  -yd-e12.  Only 
13  forms  (all  f.)  occur  in  the  RV.  These  are,  besides  a  few  others  from  the  later 


1  Cp.  Wiedemann,  BB.  27,  211,  footnote.  | 

2  In  tire  AV.  there  are  also  the  transition  : 
forms  a- chirm ahg all,  su-mahgali,  nadt.  In  RV. 

1. 1805  ksoni  has  perhaps  dropped  its  -.rowing 
to  the  following  s -. 

3  Perhaps  to  be  read  uncontracted  as 
mahiam  in  X.  505 ;  vamm  (11.  118)  is  also  to 
be  read  as  vdniam. 

4  Perfect  participle  of  pi -  ‘swell’. 

5  There  is  also  the  transition  form  nadtm 
(AV.). 

6  The  vocalic  pronunciation  seems  to  be  the 

commoner  in  the  AV.  also;  cp.  Lanman  381. 


7  This  also  occurs  in  the  compound 
urvi-ulih  (vi.  242),  if  urvi-  =  the  adv.  instr. 
urvyd. 

8  The  compound  su-sami  also  occurs  once 
in  the  TS.  VS.  as  well  as  the  RV. 

9  Probably  an  error  for  asiknyas;  see 
Whitney  on  AV.  v.  138. 

10  For  hiranydyya. 

Cp.  Lanman  368  (top). 

i2  An  indication  of  this  origin  is  perhaps 
to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  of  the  13  stems 
in  the  RV.  taking  this  dative  only  one, 
- patnyai ,  has  the  vocalic  pronunciation  -iai 


VI.  Declension. 


Nouns.  Vowel  Stems.  275 


Samhitas:  1.  arvdcyai  (VS.xxii.  24)  ‘hitherward’,  dvacyai  (VS.xxu.  24)  ‘downward’, 
d-vyatyai  ‘not  desiring’,  iyatyai  ‘so  great’,  udlcyai  (VS.xxu.  24)  ‘northern’,  jdgatyai 
(VS. xxiv.  12),  jarydi  (TS.m.  2.2* 1 2)  ‘mistress’,  jilryantyai  ‘aging’,  jydyasyai  ‘elder’, 
dhenumatyai  ‘yielding  milk’,  parjdnya-patnyai1  ‘having  Parjanya  for  a  husband’, 
pasumdtyai  ‘consisting  of  cattle’,  praticyai  (VS.xxu.  24)  ‘western’,  prdcyai  (VS. 
xxii.  24)  ‘eastern’,  yaso-bhaginyai  (VS.  11.  20)  ‘rich  in  glory’,  rdtryai  (VS.xxiv.  25) 
‘night’,  vdjavatyai,  vis-pdt?iyai,  saha-patnyai1  (AV.)  ‘united  with  the  husband’. — 
2.  Oxytones:  indranyai  (VS.xxxvm. 3),  urvydi  (VS.xxii. 2 7),  kalyanyai 2  (AV.) 
‘good’,  gdyatryai  (VS.xm.54),  devydi ,  prthivydi ,  brhatydi ,  mahydi,  rajasandydi 
(VS.  xix.  16)  ‘Soma  stand’,  simvdlydi ,  striydi 3  (AV.),  Ziiranya-kesydii 4 5  (AV.) 
‘gold-haired’. 

Ab.  The  ending  looks  like  -<w,  e.  g.  prthivy-ds\  but  it  is  doubtless 
the  normal  ending  -<23-  fused  with  the  suffix  -_>a7,  i.  e.  -jvw  =  -y3-ass.  Only 
five  forms  occur  in  the  RV.,  besides  a  few  others  in  the  later  Samhitas: 
avadyavatyas  (AV.)  ‘disgraceful’,  urvdsyas  N.  of  a  nymph,  jdgatyas  (VS. 
xiii.  56),  jzvantyds 5  ‘living’,  dur-admcinyds  (VS.  11.  20)  ‘bad  food’,  pdtantyas 
‘flying’,  prthivyds ,  brhatyds  (AV.),  mahyds 6. 

G.  The  ending  is  the  same  as  in  the  Ab.  and  of  similar  origin, 
m.  tirascyds 7,  prthyds ,  sobharyds. —  f.  The  forms  occurring  in  the  RV. 8  are: 

1.  amsu-mdtyds 9  N.  of  a  river,  amhu-bhedyas  (VS.xxm.28)  ‘having  a  narrow  slit’, 
usinardnyas  N.  of  a  people,  urjdyantyds  ‘vigorous’,  osadhyas  (VS.  1.25)  ‘plant’, 
tdvisyds ,  ddmimatyas  ‘rich  in  drops’,  mams-pdcanyas  ‘flesh-cooking’,  rdtryas, 
vivasvatyas  ‘shining’,  sdmyds ,  sdsucatyas  ‘shining’,  sAsyaniyds  ‘about  to  bear’.  — 

2.  urvyds  ‘earth’,  devyds,  prthivyds ,  mahatyds  ‘great’,  yatyds,  yatyds  ‘going’, 
vadhrimatyas  N.  of  a  woman,  striyds10. 

L.  This  case  seems  to  be  formed  with  the  ending  - dm ,  e.  g.  devy-dm ; 
but  it  may  be  due  to  the  fusion  of  a  particle  '‘-am11  with  the  suffix It 
is  formed  from  1 5  stems  in  the  RV.,  where  the  pronunciation  -idm  is  con¬ 
siderably  less  than  half  as  common12  as  -yam.  Forms  occurring  are: 
1.  asiknydm ,  uc  chanty  dm ,  iidicyam  (TS.  11.  4.  141),  jdgatydm  (VS.  xxxvm. 
18),  jahndvyavi  ‘race  of  Jahnu’,  drsddvatyam  N.  of  a  river,  ndrydm  (Kh. 
iv.  133)  ‘woman’,  pdrusnydm  N.  of  a  river,  prdcydm  (TS.11.4. 141),  yazydvatydm 
‘rich  in  streams’,  rdtryam,  varandvatydm  (AV.)  N.  of  a  river,  vasdvydm 
‘treasury’,  sdcydm ,  sdrasvatyam  N.  of  a  river,  soma-kray anydm  (VS.  vm.  54) 
‘serving  as  the  price  of  Soma’.  —  2.  ar  any  any  dm ,  astrydm  ‘fire-place’,  asandydm 
(AV.)  ‘stool’,  gavinydm  (Kh.1v.133)  ‘groin’,  gdyatrydm  (VS.  AV.),  catvdrimsydm 
‘fortieth’,  jyesthaghnydm  (AV.)  N.  of  an  asterism,  day  dm,  naracydm  (AV.)  N. 
of  a  river,  prthivydm ,  siriydm  (AV.) I3. 


^and  here  the  z  is  preceded  by  two  con¬ 
sonants). 

1  To  be  pronounced  -iai. 

2  This  is  an  emendation  for  the  reading 
kalyanyai  of  the  edition;  cp.  Lanman  3832. 

3  With  split  T  as  in  the  radical  T-  stems. 

4  There  are  also  the  transition  forms 
bhiyai,  sriydi  (VS.  XIX.  94),  hriyai  (VS.  XIV.  35) 
from  the  radical  t-  declension,  and  from  the 
i-  declension  deva-hutyai,  tnryai ,  nirrtyai, 
pustycii,  bhujydi,  bhrtydi,  srutyai. 

5  -yds  is  read  -ids  4  times  out  of  25  in 
the  RV.:  prthivids  3  times  and  jivantids  once, 
always  for  metrical  reasons,  cp.  Lanman  384 
(top). 

6  There  are  also  the  transition  forms  from 

the  /-declension,  nabhyds ,  bhdmyds ,  hetyas ;  and 

from  the  AV.  a-bhutyds ,  a-ratyas,  d-saslyds, 


dhutyds,  krsyds,  deva-hetyas ,  rdtryas,  sTrsaktyas; 
probably  also  yatyds  (vi.  1213),  Pad  a  yotiyd. 

7  Pronounced  tirascids.  But  cp.  Roth, 
ZDMG.  48,  1 15  (bottom). 

8  This  case  is  formed  from  more  stems 
in  the  AV.  than  in  the  RV. ;  cp.  Lanman  355. 

9  In  about  15  per  cent  of  the  following 
genitives  the  ending  is  pronounced  -ids. 

10  There  are  also  half  a  dozen  transition 
forms  from  the  i-  declension  in  the  RV. : 
anumdtyds ,  drdtyds,  nirrlyds,  prsnyds,  bhdmyds 
(once  with  crasis  in  bhumyopdri  X.  753', 
yuvatyds ;  there  are  many  others  in  the  AV. ; 
as  jamyas  (also  Kh.  v.  5 19);  see  Lanman  3S52. 

11  Cp.  Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  265  (p.  619). 

12  It  is  much  less  common  than  this  is 
in  the  AV. 

13  There  are  also  two  transition  forms 

18* 


276  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

V.  This  case  is  formed,  by  shortening  the  final,  from  38  stems  (all  f.)  in  the 
RV.  Examples  are:  devi  (23),  sarasvati  (16),  prthivi  (n),  maghoni  (9),  vibhdvari 
‘radiant’  (8),  mahi  (6).  From  the  TS.:  dmbali  (vn.  4. 191)  ‘mother’,  kdmpila- 
vasini  (vn.  4. 191;  VS.)  ‘living  in  Kamplla’,  darvi  (1.8.41)  ‘ladle’,  patni  (iv.  4.  12+), 
manduki  (iv.  6.  i2;  VS.)  ‘frog’,  deva-yajani  (VS.)  ‘whereon  gods  are  adored’. 

Du.  N.  A.  V.  This  form  in  the  RV.  ends  in  -I  exclusively,  being  made 
probably  with  the  ending  -i  (like  the  f.  du.  of  the  derivative  -d  stems),  which 
coalesces  with  the  -1  of  the  stem  T.  There  is  only  one  m.  form,  the  V.  madhvi 
‘fond  of  sweetness’,  an  epithet  of  the  Asvins.  The  f.  is  very  frequent,  being 
made  from  76  stems  in  the  RV.  and  from  over  20  in  the  VS.  The  commonest 
forms  in  the  RV.  are:  rJdasI (8 7)  ‘the  two  worlds’,  dydva-prthivi  (65)  ‘heaven 
and  earth’,  mahi  ( 27),  urvi  (20),  prthivi  (20),  devi  { 13),  samici  (11)  ‘united’, 
brhati  (10),  yahvi  (6)  ‘active’,  aksi  (6)  ‘eyes’,  prthvi  (5).  From  the  TS.:  N. 
chdndasvatl  ‘desiring’  and  siirya-patni  (iv.  3.111)  ‘having  the  sun  as  husband’, 
V.  urvi ,  rodasi ,  patni  (iv.  7.  156). 

a.  The  -T  is  twice  metrically  shortened  in  prthivi  (11.  31 5;  ill.  544)  and  in  mahi 
(iv.  569;  x.  931). 

b.  In  the  AV.  three  stems  of  this  declension  form  transition  duals 2  according 
to  the  radical  1-  declension:  aksyait ,  andyau,  phalgunyau 0  ;  in  other  texts:  gavinyauy TS. ill. 
3.  101)  ‘the  groins’,  patnyau  (VS.  xxxi.  22),  rebhatyau  and  su-parnyau  (Kh.  I.  37). 

I.  aksibhydm  (AV.),  kumbhibhydtn  (VS.  xix.  27),  jostflbhyam  (VS.  xxi.  51) 
‘cherishing’,  mddhucibhyam  (VS.)  ‘sweetness-loving’,  mddhvibhydm  (VS.). 

D.  rddaslbhyam.  —  Ab.  aksibhydm ,  dydvaprthivibhydm  (VS.  xxxvn.  18). 

G.  aksyos 4  (AV.;  TS.  in.  2. 55),  drtniyos  (TS.  iv.  5.  23)  ‘ends  of  the  bow’, 
drtnyos  (VS.xvi.  9),  divas-prthivyos 5,  ninyos 6  ‘secret’, pari-nrtantyos  (AV.)  ‘dancing 
round’,  rddasyos1.  —  L.  aksyos  (AV.),  ardnyos ,  drjunyos,  dydvdprthivyos  (VS. 
xx.  10),  pdtantyos ,  rddasyos ,  samlcyds. 

PI.  N.  V.  The  ending  seems  to  be  simply  -s,  but  it  is  doubtless  the 
normal  ending  -as,  which  originally  coalesced  with  the  suffix  -yd  to  -yds,  the 
latter  then  contracting  to  -Is.  In  the  m.  the  only  example  is  siris.  But  the 
f.  is  very  frequent,  being  formed  trom  166  stems  in  the  RV.,  and  occurring 
in  the  independent  parts  of  the  TS.  at  least  25  and  of  the  VS.  at  least  40 
times.  The  commonest  forms  are:  devis  (43),  purvis  (36)  ‘many’,  osadhis  (27), 
vdms  (12)  ‘songs’,  pdtnis  (11),  mahis  (11),  bhdtis  (8)  ‘shining’,  yakvis  (7), 
devay antis  (6)  ‘serving  the  gods’,  vdsvTs 8  (6).  In  the  Khilas  occur  the  7  forms 
a-laksmis  (11. 6°),  dnis  (iv.  85),  devis  (in.  io2),  pdvamdnis  (111.  io1)  N.  of  certain 
hymns,  bahvis  (11.  84  etc.)  ‘many’,  svastydyanis  (in.  io1),  hiranydyis  (v.  1511). 

a.  Transitions  from  this  to  the  radical  I-  declension  are  almost  unknown  to  the 
RV. :  striyas  is  the  only  certain  example,  and  prsanyas  and  suparnyas  are  probably  such ; 
the  tendency  to  use  such  transition  forms  is  only  incipient  even  in  the  AV.  9,  where 
urvyas  10(once)  and  i-udatyas  (once)  occur IJ.  In  the  Khilas  also,  occur  the  three  forms ghytacyas 


from  the  radical  I-  declension:  sriyam  (AV.) 
and  dutyavi ;  five  from  the  i-  declension : 
puramdhyam ,  bhumyam ,  bhrlydm ,  yuvat - 
yam,  sdmgatyam ;  besides  at  least  10  addi¬ 
tional  ones  from  the  AV. :  avydm ,  dkutyam, 
ciitydm,  deva-hutydm ,  nabhyam  (  +  VS.  xxiv.  1), 
prstyam ,  bhutyam ,  yonyam  (-J-VS.),  vedydm, 
samityam. 

1  Cp.  Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  287  (p.  644). 

2  There  are  also  the  transition  forms  from 
the  radical  I-  declension  ksoni  and  once  nadi. 

3  This  form  in  -yau  becomes  universal  in 
the  post-Vedic  language. 

4  The  Mss.  in  AV.  v.  4*0  read  aJis6s\  see 
Whitney’s  note. 


5  With  the  first  member  of  the  Dvandva 
inflected  in  the  sing.  G. 

6  Either  the  G.  of  nim-  (m.  ninya -)  or 
shortened  for  ninydyos. 

7  Once  (vi.  24^)  used  in  the  sense  of  an 
Ab. 

8  eka-patnls  (AV.  X.  8^9)  ‘having  one  hus¬ 
band’  is  N.  pi.  fi,  not  N.  sing.  m. 

9  There  seem  to  be  no  such  transitions 
in  the  TS. ;  but  there  are  at  least  3  to  the  i- 
declension:  dsadhayas  (iv.  1.  41),  revatayas 
(iv.  2.  1 1 x),  patnayas  (v.  2.  II2). 

i°  Beside  urvis  which  occurs  9  times. 

And  yet  this  form  is  the  only  one  in 
the  post-Vedic  language. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Vowel  Stems.  277 

(il.  8*),  bahvyas  (in.  li1 2),  pdvamdnyas  (ill.  10^).  The  VS.  has  about  10  such  forms:  devyas 
(xxxvii.  4)  beside  devis, patnyas  (xxm.  36)  beside painls  (vi.  34),  phalavatyas  (xxn.  22),  bahvyas 
(xix.  44)  beside  bahvis,  mahandmnyas  (xxm.  35),  maitravarunyas  (xxiv.  2),  maitryas  (xxiv.  8), 
vatsataryas  (xxiv.  5),  V.  vamryas  (xxxvii.  4),  vaisvadevyds  (xxiv.  5),  sdrasvalyas  (xxiv.  4). 

b.  There  are  no  transitions  from  the  radical  1-  declension  to  this  one  in  the  RV., 
and  in  the  AV.  only  nadts  (beside  nadyas )  and  laksmts  (beside  laksmyas ).  But  the  transi¬ 
tions  from  the  i-  declension  are  numerous:  ahgulls  (AV.),  avdriis,  dj arils ,  hits,  rstfs  (AV.), 
dhamdnls  (AV.),  naktls ,  nabhls  (AV.),  nirrtls ,  niskrtls,  parsnts  (AV.),  puramdhis ,  prstis  (AV.), 
bhiimls ,  visva-krstls ,  s  reals T,  sayoriis. 

A.  This  case  is  identical  in  form  with  the  N.,  and  its  origin  is  doubtless 
similar.  It  is  very  frequent,  being  made  from  more  than  100  stems  in  the 
RV.  The  commonest  forms  are:  purvis  (40),  osadhis  (24),  mahis  (18), 
brhatis  (12),  ddsis  (9)  ‘demonesses’,  pdtriis  (7),  pf satis  (7) 2  ‘dappled  mares’. 

I.  This  case  is  fairly  frequent,  being  made  from  32  stems  in  the  RV. 
The  commonest  forms  are:  saclbhis  (36),  tavisibhis  (13),  s'dmlbhis  (8), 
osadhlbhis  (6),  prsatlbhis 3  (5).  The  TS.  has  also  slmlbhis  (v.2.121),  sucibhis 
(v.  2. 1 11-2);  the  VS.  arunibhis  (xii.  74),  jdgatlbhis  (1.  21),  sthalibhis  (xix.  27) 
‘cooking-pots’. 

D.  This  case  is  rare,  being  formed  from  only  three  stems  in  the  RV. 
and  a  few  others  in  the  later  Samhitas:  avyddhirilbhyas  (VS.  xvi.  24)  ‘assailing 
bands”,  dsadhlbhyas ,  kesimbhyas  (AV.)  ‘hairy’,  gandharva-patnibhyas  (VS. 
AV.)  ‘having  Gandharvas  for  spouses’,  ghosmibhyas  (AV.)  ‘noisy’,  tdvisibhyas 4, 
tisthantlbhyas  (VS.  xxii.  25)  ‘standing’,  trmhatlbhyas  (VS.  xvi.  24)  ‘piercing’, 
mdnuslbhyas  (TS.  iv.  1.  43;  VS.  xi.  45)  ‘human’,  vrsanydntibhyas  ‘desiring  a 
male’,  sasvatfbhyas 5  (AV.)  ‘everlasting’,  sravantlbhyas  (VS.  xxii.  25)  ‘flowing’, 
hradunlbhyas  (VS.?xxn.  26)  ‘hail’. 

Ab.  Only  three  forms  of  this  case  occur  in  the  RV. :  dsadhlbhyas , 
padvdtlbhyas'd possessed 'of  feet’,  brhatibhyas. 

G.  This  case,  which  as  is  usual  in  the  vowel  declension  takes  the  ending 
- nam ,  is  found  in  only  one  m.  form,  sdbharlnam ;  but  it  is  fairly  common 
in  the  f.,  being  formed  from  34  stems  in  the  RV.  The  oxytones  which 
number  only  six6 7,  throw  the  accent  (as  in  the  z-declension)  on  the  ending: 
bahvlndm ,  bhahjatlndm  ‘breaking’,  bhdtlndm ,  bhuhjatmdm  ‘gladdening’,  mahindm 1 , 
yatlndm.  This  rule  does  not,  however,  hold  in  the  SV.  and  VS.,  which  have 
mahindm  (VS.  1.  70;  iv.  3);  nor  in  the  AV.  where  the  forms  ndrdsamstndm 
‘eulogies’  and  rdthajiteyindm  ‘chariot-conquering’  occur.  Of  the  remaining 
28  genitives  in  the  RV. 8  the  commonest  are:  sdsvatmam  (10),  osadhlnam 9 
(9),  mdnusTnam  (8),  saclnam  (4),  lyuslndm 10  (3)  ‘having  departed’.  From  the 
VS.:  avyad/uriinam  (xvi.  21). 

L.  This  case  is  fairly  common,  being  formed  from  30  stems  (all  f.)  in  the 
RV.  The  most  frequent  forms  are:  osadhlsu  (20),  mdnuslsu  (8),  ndhuslsu  ‘neigh¬ 
bouring’,  jagatlsu  ( 2)  ‘females’,  tdvislsu  (2),  yahvtsu  (2),  rohimsu 1 1  (2).  The  rest 
occur  only  once  (each12.  From  Khila  111.  1517:  suddha-dantisu  ‘white-toothed’. 


1  This  form  should  perhaps  be  read  as 
srenayas  in  v.  597. 

2  Also  the  transitions  from  the  radical  1- 
declenslon  arums  and  ydtudhanis  (AV.). 

3  The  stems  forming  this  case  in  the  RV. 
are  enumerated  by  Lanman  396. 

4  na?d-  ‘woman’,  by  shortening  its  final 
vowel,  forms  its  D.  according  to  the  i- 
declension  :  naribhyas. 

5  Irregularly  accented  on  the  final  of  the 
stem,  otherwise,  sdsvatl-. 

6  Or  7  including  strl •  :  strlnam. 

7  On  the  exceptions  mahindm  (X.  1341)* 

yatlndm  (1.  1586),  devayatlndm  (i.  3^r)»  see 

Lanman  398  (bottom). 


8  The  G.  navyaslndm  is  once  used  in 
agreement  with  the  m.  marutdm. 

9  kantnam,  with  contracted  -yd-,  is  the 
only  G.  pi.  of  kanya-  in  the  RV.,  kanydndm 
occurs  once  in  the  AV.;  see  Lanman  399 
(top). 

r°  Perfect  participle  of  2-  ‘go’. 

There  is  also  the  transfer  form  from 
the  i-  declension  svdhakrtlsu,  in  which  the 
long  vowel  is  perhaps  metrical.  On  the 
other  hand  strlsii  (accent)  is  a  transfer  to 
the  radical  T-declension. 

I2  Lanman  enumerates  the  stems,  399 
(bottom). 


278  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


4.  a.  Radical  stems  in  -/. 

37g.  No  nominal  /-stems  are  derived  from  roots  originally  ending  in  -/, 
as  these  (some  six  or  seven)  have  all  joined  the  consonant  declension  by 
adding  a  determinative  -t1.  There  are,  however,  about  a  dozen  stems  in 
which  /  is  probably  radical  in  a  secondary  sense,  as  representing  a  reduced 
form  of  roots  ending  in  -d2.  These  are  with  one  or  two  exceptions  m.  com¬ 
pounds  formed  with  -dhi  =  dhd-  ‘put’:  api-dhi-  ‘covering’,  a-dhi-  ‘pledge’, 
utsa-dhi-  ‘receptacle  of  a  spring’,  u  da- dhi-  ‘receptacle  of  water’,  upa-dhi-  ‘part 
of  the  wheel  between  nave  and  felly’,  garbha-dhi-  ‘nest’,  ni-dhi-  ‘treasury’, 
pari-dhi-  ‘fence’,  prati-dhi-  ‘cross-piece  of  car-pole’,  pra-dhi-  ‘felly’,  seva-dhi- 
‘treasure’,  sd-dhi-  ‘abode’;  perhaps  also  osa-dhi-  f.  as  a  shortened  form  of 
osa-dhl-  ‘plant’.  Besides  these  there  is  prati-sthi-  f.  ‘resistance’,  from  sthd- 
‘stand’,  and  probably  the  reduplicated  stem  yayi-  ‘speeding’,  in  which  the  -/ 
is  secondarily  reduced  through  the  older  form  yayi -  from  the  -d  of  the  root 
yd-  ‘go’.  These  few  stems  have  nothing  distinctive  in  their  inflexion,  which 
follows  that  of  the  derivative  i-stems  in  every  particular. 

The  forms  which  occur  from  these  words  are  the  following: 

Sing.  N.  d-dhi-s ,  osa-dhi-s ,  fiidhi-s,  pari-dhi-s,  prati-sthi-s,  yayi-s,  sd-d/ii-s. — 
A.  utsa-dhi-m ,  uda-dfii-m ,  osa-dhi-m ,  garbha-dhi-m ,  iii-dhi-ni ,  pari-dhi-m ,  pra- 
dhi-m ,  yayi-m ,  seva-dhi-m.  —  I.  yayind.  —  Ab.  uda-dhcs.  —  Du.  N.  upa- 
dhi,  pra-dhi.  —  Pi.  N.  dsa-dhayas,  ni-dhdyas ,  pari-dhdyas ,  prati-dhdyas ,  pra- 
dhdyas.  —  A.  api  dhin ,  uda-dhin ,  ni-dhtn ,  pari-dhin ,  pra-dhln.  —  I.  ni- 
dhibhis.  —  G.  ni-dhlndm.  —  L.  Jii-dhisu. 


4.  b.  Derivative  stems  in  -/. 

Lanman,  Noun  Inflection  365 — 400.  —  Whitney,  Grammar  335  — 340,  343.  —  Cp. 
Reichelt,  Die  abgeleitelen  i-  und  «-slamme,  BB.  25,  238 — 252. 

380.  T  his  declension  embraces  a  large  number  of  m.  and  f.  stems. 
There  are  comparatively  few  neuter  stems;  and,  except  the  N.  A.  sing,  and 
ph,  neuter  forms  are  rare,  not  occurring  at  all  in  several  cases.  The  regular 
inflexion  is  practically  the  same  in  all  genders,  except  that  the  N.  A.  sing, 
and  pi.  n.  differ  from  the  m.  and  fl,  and  the  A.  pi.  m.  and  f.  differ  from  each 
other.  There  are  several  peculiarities  here  as  regards  the  formation  of  the 
stem,  the  endings,  and  accentuation.  The  final  vowel  of  the  stems  shows 
Guna  in  three  of  the  weak  cases  of  the  singular  (D.  Ab.  G.)  as  well  as  in 
the  V.  sing,  and  the  N.  pi.  m.  f.,  while  it  is  abnormally  strengthened  in  the 
L.  sing.  The  normal  ending  -as  of  the  Ab.  G.  sing,  is  reduced  to  -s,  while 
that  of  the  L.  sing,  is  lost.  Oxytone  stems,  when  the  vowel  is  changed  to 
y,  throw  the  accent  on  a  following  vowel  not  as  Svarita  but  as  Udatta;  and 
even  on  the  -ndm  of  the  G.  pi.,  though  the  stem  vowel  in  that  case  does 
not  lose  its  syllabic  value. 

a.  The  only  word  which  distinguishes  strong  forms  is  sakhi-  ‘friend’,  which  takes 
Vrddhi  in  its  strong  stem  sakhdy-.  These  strong  forms  are  frequent:  Sing.  N.  sakha 3, 
A.  sakhdyavi.  Du.  N.  A.  sdkhayd  *  and  sdkhayau.  PI.  N.  sakhdyas.  This  word  has  two 
further  irregularities,  the  simple  stem  sakhi-  adding  -e  in  the  D.  sdkhy-e,  and  the  abnormal 
ending  -ur  in  the  Ab.  G.  sakhy-ur.  The  other  forms  occurring  are  regular:  Sing.  I. 
sakhyd ,  V.  sdkhe.  PI.  A.  sakhin ,  I.  sakhibhis,  D.  Ab.  sakhibhyas,  G.  sakhTndm.  Eight  com¬ 
pounds  in  the  RV. 5  are  inflected  in  the  same  way  (also  soma- sakha,  VS.  iv.  20);  but  of 
four  others,  which  have  joined  the  a -  declension,  there  occur  the  forms  A.  dravayat- 
sakha-m  (x.  3910),  N.  yavayat-sakha-s  (x.  26  5),  A .patayatpsakha-m)  and  mandayat-sakha-m  (1.  47). 


1  See  above,  stems  in  derivative  -t  (307). 

2  Cp.  Lindner  56  and  Lanman  453. 

3  See  J.  Schmidt,  KZ.  29,  526,  note  L 


4  sdkhayd  occurs  6  times  (also  VS.  xxvm.  7), 
sdkhayau  only  once. 

5  See  Lanman  400 3. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Vowel  Stems.  279 


b.  1.  The  stem  pati-,  when  it  means  ‘husband’  and  is  uncompounded,  shows 
irregular  inflexion  in  the  Sing.  D.  and  G.  (like  sakhi-)  and  the  L. :  D.  petty e,  G.  patyur q 
L.  pdtyau.  When  it  means  ‘lord’2  or  is  compounded,  it  is  regular:  D.  pataye,  bfhaspataye, 
G.  pates,  prajd-pales  (TS.),  L.  go-pat au.  —  2.  The  stem  jani-  ‘wife’  also  takes  the  abnormal 
ending  -7 ir  in  the  G.  sing.:  janyur l.  This  stem  has  the  further  irregularity  of  forming 
its  N.  sing,  jam  according  to  the  derivative  1 ■  declension.  —  3.  The  stem  an'-  ‘devout’ 
is  irregular  in  forming  several  cases  like  the  radical  i-  stems  (except  in  accentuation) : 
Sing.  A.  ary  am  (beside  arinj),  G.  ary  as  \  PI.  N.  A.  m.  f.  ary  as.  The  VS.  has  also  the 
N.  sing,  arts  beside  the  arts  of  the  RV. 

c.  Twenty-seven  stems  in  the  RV.  show  forms  according  to  the  derivative  i-  declen¬ 
sion  in  the  D.  Ab.  G.  L.  sing.  f.  4,  perhaps  from  a  desire  to  add  a  distinctively  f.  ending 
in  a  declension  which  does  not  distinguish  genders  in  these  cases.  There  is  a  steady 
increase  of  such  forms  in  the  later  Samhitas;  thus  while  the  RV.  has  only  7  datives  in  -at 
from  7-  stems,  the  VS.  has  about  40. 

d.  In  the  RV.  4  or  5  stems  show  the  influence  of  the  n-  declension  in  the 
incipient  use  of  the  ending  -iti  in  the  N.  A.  n.  du.,  and  (t]-ni  in  N.  A.  n.  pi.;  and  in  the 
I.  sing.,  stems  taking  the  ending  -nd  are  already  5  times  as  numerous  as  those  adding 
the  normal  -a. 


Inflexion. 


381.  The  N.  sing.  m.  f.  always  takes  - s 5,  the  A.  simply  -m.  The  D.  Ab. 
G.  V.  gunate  the  suffix,  to  which  the  Ab.  G.  add  only  -s  instead  of  -as.  The 
L.  sing,  has  an  altogether  abnormal  form  ending  in  -a  or  -an.  The  N.  pi.  m.  f. 
gunates  the  -i,  to  which  the  normal  ending  -as  is  added.  The  A.  pi.  in  the 
m.  adds  -n,  in  the  f.  - s ,  before  which  the  vowel  is  lengthened.  The  G.  pi. 
always  takes  -nam,  lengthening  the  preceding  vowel.  The  frequent  adjective 
suci-  ‘bright’  may  be  used  to  illustrate  the  forms  actually  occurring  in  the 
three  genders: 


Sing.  N.  m.  f.  siicis,  n.  suci.  A.  m.  f.  sucim ,  n. 

f. 


m. 


t  r  • 

SUCI. 

succs. 


I.  m. 


sucya ,  s iicma , 


f.  sucya ,  siict,  suci.  D.  m.  f.  n.  siicaye.  Ab. 

L.  m.  f.  n.  hied,  siicau.  V.  m.  f.  slice. 

Du.  N.  A.  V.  m.  f.  n.  siicu  I.  m.  f.  n.  sucibhyam. 
m.  f.  sucibhyam.  G.  m.  f.  siicyos.  L.  m.  f.  n.  siicyos. 


G.  m.  f.  n.  hices. 


Ab. 


D.  m.  sucibhyatn. 


PL  N.  111.  f.  siicayas.  N.  A.  n. 


/  r  _ 

SllCl , 


SUCI, 


sucim. 


A.  m. 


Slicitl , 


r  f  r  - 

I.  SUCIS. 


G.  m,  f.  siic mam. 


I.  m.  f.  siicibhis.  D.  m.  f.  siicibhyas.  Ab.  m.  f.  n.  sucibhyas. 

L.  m.  f.  n.  siicisu. 

Forms  actually  occurring  are  the  following: 

Sing.  N.  m.  This  form  is  very  frequent,  being  made  from  nearly  250 
stems  in  the  RV.  The  commonest  examples  are:  agnis  (389)  ‘fire’,  kavis  (90) 
‘sage’,  hdris  (58)  ‘tawny’,  brhas-pdtis  (52)  ‘Lord  of  Prayer’,  hicis  (38)  ‘bright’, 
fsis  (32)  ‘seer’,  brdhmanas-pdiis  (23)  ‘Lord  of  Prayer’,  dtithis  (20)  ‘guest’0. 


a.  The  stem  vi-  ‘bird’,  besides  the  regular  N.  vi-s,  which  occurs  6  times,  has  the 
anomalously  gunated  form  ve-s1 ,  which  occurs  5  times  in  the  RV. 

b.  The  pronominal  forms  nd-ki-s  (50)  and  md-ki-s  (13)  ‘no  one’  are  old  nominatives 
which  have  become  indeclinable. 


N.  f.  This  form  is  frequent,  being  made  from  136  stems  in  the  RV. 
The  commonest  examples  are:  dditis  (78)  ‘freedom’,  su-matls  (22)  ‘bene¬ 
volence’,  ratis  (22)  ‘gift’,  ndbhis  (19)  ‘navel’,  mails  (18)  ‘thought’,  yuvatis  (18) 
‘maiden’,  bhUmis  (12)  ‘earth’,  prd-tnaiis  (11)  ‘providence’8. 


1  This  ending  is  probably  due  to  the 
analogy  of  the  words  of  relationship,  pitur 
etc.;  cp.  KZ.  25,  289  and  242  b 

2  The  VS.,  however,  has  pdtye  visvasya 
bhumanas  ‘lord  of  the  whole  world’. 

3  Cp.  BB.  25,242 ;  Oldenberg,  ZDMG.  54, 
49—78. 

4  Cp.  Reichelt,  BB.  25,  234 — 238,  and 
J.  Schmidt,  KZ.  27,  382. 


5  Except  the  irregular  m.  sakhd  and  the 
{.jam  {janis  in  AV.  xx.  482  is  an  emendation). 

6  There  is  also  the  transition  form  from 
the  radical  I-  declension  vesa-sri-s  ‘beautifully 
adorned’  (TS.). 

7  Cp.  Reichelt,  BB.  25,  250. 

8  Also  the  transition  forms  from  the  i- 
declension  aranydnis ,  dsadhis ,  naptis  (AV.), 
ratris  (AV.,  VS.  xxxvn.  2l). 


280 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Yedic  Grammar. 


N.  A.  n.  This  form  has  no  ending1.  It  is  made  from  37  stems  in  the 
RV.  The  commonest  examples  are:  mahi  (84)  ‘great’,  b/itiri  (47)  ‘much’,  sv-asti 
(35)  ‘welfare’,  hdrdi  (9)  ‘heart’2.  From  other  Samhitas:  dn-abhisasti  (VS.v. 5) 
‘blameless’,  a-menl  (VS. xxxvm.  14)  ‘not  casting’,  ast/ii  ( AV.,  VS.) ‘bone’,  a-sthUri 
(VS.  11.  27)  ‘not  single-horsed’,  atma-sani  (VS.  xix.  48)  ‘life-winning’,  eka-nemi 
(AV.)  ‘having  one  felly’,  krivi  (VS.x.  20)  ‘active’  (?),  ksatra-vdni  (VS.i.  17)  ‘devoted 
to  warriors’,  gdyatra-vartani  (TS.m.  1.  io1 4;  VS.xi. 8)  ‘moving  in  Gayatrl  measures’, 
dddhi  (AV.,  VS.,  Kh.m.  162)  ‘sour  milk’,  pasu-sdni  (VS.x1x.48)  ‘cattle-winning’, 
prsni  (AV.)  ‘dappled’,  brahma-vani  (VS.i.  1 7)  ‘devoted  to  Brahmans’,  loka-sdni 
(VS.  xix.  48)  ‘causing  space’,  vddhri  (AV.)  ‘emasculated’,  vdri 3  (VS.  xxi.  61) 
‘choiceworthy’,  sajata-vani  (VS.  1.  17)  ‘conciliating  relations’. 

A.  m.  This  form  is  very  frequent,  being  made  from  205  stems  in  the 
RV.  and  occurring  more  then  1200  times.  The  commonest  examples  are:  agnim 
(269),  rayim  (180)  ‘wealth’,  ydnirn  (61)  ‘receptacle’,  pdtim  (49)  ‘lord’  or  ‘hus¬ 
band’,  dhim  (40)  ‘serpent’,  adrim  (30)  ‘rock’,  kavim  (28),  atithim  (25), 
brhaspdtim  (25),  hdrim  (24),  urmim  (23)  ‘wave’,  puramdhim  (8)  ‘bountiful’, 
yayim  (2)  ‘(speeding)  cloud’,  arim 4  (2)  ‘devout’5. 

f.  This  is  a  frequent  form,  being  made  from  156  stems  in  the  RV.  and 
occurring  more  than  600  times.  It  is  thus  about  half  as  common  as  the  m. 
The  examples  occurring  oftenest  are:  su-matim  (41),  su-stutim  (35)  ‘excellent 
praise’,  vrstlm  (26)  ‘rain’,  matim  (22),  rdthn  (20),  bhfimim  (19),  puramdhim  (5), 
rayim  (4)6. 

I.  m.  This  case  is  formed  in  two  ways.  1.  Five  stems  in  the  RV.  add 
the  normal  ending  d,  before  which  the  -i  is  generally  pronounced  as  y, 
but  half  a  dozen  times  as  a  vowel:  pdtyd  ‘husband’,  sakhyd,  urmyd pavyd 
‘felly’,  ray  yd 8.  —  2.  Owing  to  the  influence  of  the  //-declension  25  stems  in  the 
RV.  add  -na  instead  of  the  normal  -a:  agnind ,  afighrina  (VS.  11.  8)  ‘foot’, 
ddrina ,  as/nd  ‘sword’,  dhind ,  urmind ,  kavind,  kdsind  ‘fist’,  kiki-dwina  ‘blue  jay’, 
jamadagnina  N.  of  a  seer,  devdpina  N.  of  a  man,  dhdshia  ‘draught’,  panina 
‘niggard’,  patina  ‘lord’,  pdprina  ‘delivering’,  paridhina  (VS.xvm.  63;  TS.v.  7.  72) 
‘fence’,  pdnind  (VS.i.  1 6)  ‘hand’,  pfsnina  (Kh.  111. 1 57),  brhas-patind ,  manind  ‘gem’, 
yayind ,  ray  hid ,  rasmind  ‘rein’,  7’ddhrina,  vavrina  ‘vesture’,  vastind  (V  S.  xxv.  7 ) 
‘bladder’,  vrsa-ndbhind  ‘having  strong  naves’,  vrsnind  ‘strong’,  siicina ,  sdsnind 
‘bountiful’. 

f.  This  case  is  formed  in  two  ways.  1.  About  30  stems  in  the  RV. 
add  the  normal  ending  -a,  before  which  the  -i  is  pronounced  as  a  vowel 
in  about  three-fourths  of  the  occurrences  of  this  form,  and  as  y  in  the  rest9. 
The  forms  occurring  are  (a)  oxytones:  asityd  ‘eighty’,  utyd  ‘aid’,  klrtyd 10 
(AV.)  ‘fame’,  panktyd  (VS.  xxm.  33)  a  metre,  pityd  ‘draught’,  pnstyd  (AV.  TS.) 
‘prosperity’,  matyd ,  mithatyd  ‘emulation’,  vasatyd  ‘abode’,  vrstyd,  sanyd  (VS. 
v.  7;  TS.  iv.  2.  i2)  ‘gain’,  su- klrtyd  ‘praise’,  su-matyd ,  su-stutyd ,  svastyd  (VS. 


1  The  only  i-  stem  taking  -m  is  the  pro¬ 
nominal  ki-m,  probably  owing  to  the  false 
analogy  of  ka-m. 

2  Lanman  377  enumerates  the  forms. 

3  The  Pada  text  reads  vdri.  According 
to  BR.  vary  d  here  stands  for  vdryam  a. 

4  Also  aryam  formed  like  a  radical  T- 
stem  (though  differently  accented). 

5  There  are  also  the  transitions  from  the  i- 
declension  pfthir?i  and  sdbharim. 

6  Also  the  transfers  from  the  >  declension 

aranydnim,  otnm,  dsadhim ,  ratrirn  (AV.), 

snihilim  (SV.)l 


7  Pronounced  urmia,  sometimes  also  pcitid , 
sakhid. 

8  ghfmva  (11.  336)  possibly  stands  for 
ghfni-iva  (Pada  - i-iva ),  ghrm  then  possibly 
being  a  contracted  I.  iox ghrnyd ;  cp.  Lanman 
379  (middle). 

9  On  the  other  hand  -yd  is  pronounced 
5  times  as  often  as  -id  in  the  AV. ;  see 
Lanman  380. 

*°  All  the  Mss.  but  one  read  kirtya  or 
kirtya ;  see  Whitney’s  note  on  x.  627. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Vowel  Stems. 


281 


viii.  15;  TS.  1.  4.  441);  (b)  otherwise  accented:  abhi-sastya  (AV.)  ‘curse’, 
dratya  (AV.) ‘malignity’,  avartya  ‘distress’,  asanya  ‘thunderbolt’,  dkutya  ‘purpose’, 
dbhuiyj  ‘ability’,  istya  ‘sacrifice’,  jdlpya  ‘whispering’,  tfptya  (AV.)  ‘satisfaction’, 
tinsya  ‘brilliance’,  devd-Ziutya  ‘invocation  of  the  gods’,  d/irdjya  ‘impulse’; 
ndbhya  (VS.  xxv.  9),  pdrsnya  ‘heel’,  puramdhya,  pasty  a  (TS.  hi.  1.  51),  prd- 
matya ,  bhdtya  (AV.)  ‘growth’,  bhdmya ,  rdmhya  ‘speed’,  rdjya  ‘direction’, 
rucya  (AV.)  ‘lustre’,  vfcya  ‘seduction’,  sd/ety a,  (VS.  xi.  2;  TS.  iv.  1.  53)  ‘power’, 
sii-bhutya  (AV.)  ‘welfare’,  srnya  ‘sickle’,  svddhitya  (AV.)  ‘knife’,  hdrsya 
‘excitement’. 

2.  A  contracted  form  in  -71  is  made  by  35  stems  in  the  RV.  and 
occurs  more  than  twice  as  often  as  the  uncontracted  -ya.  The  forms  occurring 
are:  d-citti  ‘thoughtlessness’,  d-prabhutt  ‘little  effort’,  a-vyathi  ‘sure-footedness’, 
dhuti  ‘oblation’,  uti,  rju-mti  ‘right  guidance’,  cittl  ‘understanding’,  justl 
‘favour’,  did  hit!  ‘devotion’,  du- stilt t  and  du-stuti  ‘faulty  hymn’,  dhltl 2  ‘thought’, 
nl-sitT  ‘kindling’,  pdri-vistT  ‘attendance’,  purd-jitT  ‘previous  acquisition’,  prd- 
mti  ‘guidance’,  pra-bhuti  ‘violence’,  pra-yatl  ‘offering’,  prd-yuti  ‘absence’,  matt, 
variant  ‘felly’,  visit  ‘effort’,  vtti  ‘enjoyment’,  vrstt,  sa/ctf  and  sakti,  srusti 3 
‘willingness’,  sa-hutT  ‘joint  invocation’,  su-dttz  ‘bright  radiance’,  su-niti  ‘good 
guidance’,  su-matt,  su-mitt  ‘being  well  fixed’,  su-sastt  (Kh.11.  io2)  ‘good  recitation’, 
su-siuti,  hdsta-cyutl  ‘quick  motion  of  the  hand’.  Also  sn-paptanf  (1.  1 8 2 5) 4 
‘with  swift  flight’  (in  Pada  with  V) ;  perhaps  also  the  two  forms  heti  (v  1.  1 8 10) 
‘missile’  and  -isfi  (1.  1804)  ‘desire’,  which  occurring  before  r-  are  given  by 
the  Pada  as  hetih 5  and  -istih. 

a.  This  form  is  further  shortened  to  -1  in  about  a  dozen  words6  in 
the  RV.,  occurring  altogether  some  25  times:  isdni  ‘setting  in  motion’,  upa-sruti 
‘giving  ear  to’,  updbhrti  ‘bringing  near’,  tri-vistl  ‘thrice’  (=  adv.),  ni-tikti 
‘haste’,  prd-yukti  ‘impulse’,  vasat-krti  ‘exclamation  vasat’,  sadhd-stuti  ‘joint 
praise’,  sn-vrktl  ‘excellent  praise’,  su-sastl  ‘good  praise’,  sv-asti ,  havis-krti  ‘pre¬ 
paration  of  the  oblation’.  Perhaps  also  d-smrti  (AV.vn.  1061)  ‘through  forget¬ 
fulness’. 

b.  A  few  forms  follow  the  analogy  of  the  m.  in  adding  -na :  dhashia 
‘abode’,  ndbhina ,  prdtina  (VS.  xv.  6)  ‘advance’. 

n.  There  is  no  certain  instance  of  a  neuter  I.:  sucina  (11. 38s)  is  perhaps 
an  example,  but  it  may  be  taken  as  a  masculine. 

D.  m.  The  stem  regularly  takes  Guna  before  adding  the  normal  ending 
-e\  e.  g.  fsay-e.  This  is  a  form  of  frequent  occurrence,  being  made  from  44 
stems  in  the  RV.  The  commonest  examples  are:  agndye  (48),  dtraye  (1 2)  N.  of 
a  seer,  sandye  (12),  ghrsvaye  (6)  ‘gladdening’,  dabhitaye  (5)  N.  of  a  man7. 
From  the  VS.:  brdhmaye  ‘holy’,  bhuvantdye  (xvi.  19)  ‘earth-extender’ (?),  vrsti- 
vdnaye  (xxxvm.  6)  ‘rain-winning’,  sandhdye  (xxx.  9)  ‘agreement’. 

a.  The  only  two  stems  not  taking  Guna  are  pati-  ‘husband’  and  sakhi which 
make  patye  and  scikhye 8.  When  compounded  pati-  ‘lord’  forms  its  D.  regularly  as 
-pa/aye;  e.  g.  bfhas-pataye C),  praja-pataye  (VS.  XI.  66)  ‘Lord  of  Creatures’,  amhasas-pataye 


1  This  form  is,  except  in  two  instances, 
written  with  y  before  a ,  but  is  to  be  read 
with  hiatus;  it  coalesces  in  the  written  text 
with  i  or  J,  but  is  not  always  to  be  so  pro¬ 
nounced. 

2  This  is  the  only  contracted  form  occur¬ 
ring  in  the  independent  parts  of  the  AV. 

3  The  form  sadhri  (n.  132)  is  probably  an 
adverb  ‘to  the  same  goal’  from  sadhri- 
(Lindner  p.  1 1 2),  or  it  might  be  an  inst.  f. 
of  sadhri-  (Lanman  3803). 

4  See  RPr.  vii.  15. 


5  Cp.  Lanman  3804. 

6  These  occur  eight  times  at  the  end  of 
a  line  or  stanza,  four  times  at  the  end  of 
an  internal  Pada  before  vowels,  two  or  three 
times  within  a  Pada  before  vowels. 

7  The  stems  which  form  this  dative  are 
enumerated  by  Lanman  382. 

8  These  words  are  never  pronounced  as 
patie  and  sakhie. 

9  This  is  the  only  compound  in  the  RV. 
formed  with  the  D.  of  pati-. 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


282 


(VS.  yji.  30)  ‘Lord  of  distress’,  bhuvana-pataye  (VS.  II.  2)  ‘Lord  of  the  world’,  bhhva-pataye 
(VS.  11.  6)  ‘Lord  of  the  atmosphere’,  vacas-pataye  (VS.VII.  i)  ‘Lord  of  speech’,  sainvesa-pataye 
VS.  11.20)  ‘Lord  of  rest’;  also  in  the  expressions  ksetrasya  pataye  (A  V)  ‘Lord  of  the  Field’  and 
( bhutdsya  pcitaye  (AV.)  ‘Lord  of  the  world’,  which  are  virtually  compounds1;  similarly  disam 
pataye  (VS.  xvi.  17)2;  but  pdtye  3  visvasya  bhumanas  (VS.  xvn.  78)  ‘Lord  of  all  the  earth’. 

f.  This  form  is  made  like  the  m.;  e.  g.  istdy-e.  It  is  very  frequent,  being 
formed  from  50  stems  and  occurring  over  500  times  in  the  RV.  The 
commonest  examples  are:  utdye  (88),  pltaye  (67),  soma-pTtaye  (49)  'draught  of 
Soma’,  vdja-sataye  (34)  ‘winning  of  booty’,  sataye  (34)  'acquisition’,  v  it  dye  (3 1), 
devd-vltaye  (22)  ‘feast  for  the  gods’,  istdye  (20)  ‘impulse’4. 

a.  The  form  hti  is  frequently  used  as  a  dative,  similarly  dn-ittt  ‘no  help’  once  and 
vlti  twice,  svasti  occasionally  has  this  value  at  the  end  of  a  Pada  and  when  it  alter¬ 
nates  with  svaslaye  in  v.  5112.  J3,  but  it  may  be  intended  for  an  adverb5. 

b.  In  the  RV.  seven  stems  in  -i  (all  but  2  of  which  occur  in  Manda’a  x),  follow 
the  analogy  of  derivative  t-  stems  and  take  the  ending  -ri :  turyai  ‘victory’,  deva- 
hiiiyai  ‘invocation  of  the  gods’,  nirrtyai  ‘dissolution’,  puslyai ,  bhujydi  ‘favour’,  bhrtydi 
‘support’,  srutyai  ‘blessing’.  The  AV.  forms  such  datives  from  at  least  11  stems;  the 
TS.  has  a-samartyai  (ill.  3.  82)  ‘non-injury’,  dur-istyai  (in.  2.  83)  ‘failure  in  sacrifice’, 
sdktyai  (lV.  I.  1 1) ;  the  VS.  has  nearly  40:  a-ksityai  (vi.  28)  ‘imperishableness’,  adityai 
(1.  30)  ‘Aditi’,  ami-maty ai  (xxiv.  32)  ‘assent’,  a-bhittyai  (xi.  64)  ‘not  bursting’,  abhi-sastyai 
(11.  5',  d-bhutyai  (XXX.  17)  ‘wretchedness’,  d-raddhyai  (XXX.  9)  ‘mischance’,  d-ristyai  (ll.  3) 
‘safety’,  dva-riyai  (xxx.  12)  ‘distress’,  d-hantyai  (xvi.  18)  ‘non-killing’,  akiityai  (iv.  7), 
artyai  (xxx.9. 17)  ‘trouble’,  utkrdntyai  (xv.  9)  ‘upstriding’,  etyai  (xxvil.  45)  ‘arrival’,  krsydi 
(ix.  22)  ‘tillage’,  dur-istyai  (11.  20),  dhrdjyai  (vi.  18),  ndbhyai  (xxxix.  2),  nishrtyai  (xxx.  9) 
‘atonement’,  pahktyai  (xill.  58),  prdti-sthityai  (xv.  10)  ‘firm  footing’,  pra-silyai 6  (11.  20 
‘attack’,  prayas-cittyai  (xxxix.  12)  ‘expiation’,  pretyai  (xxvil.  45),  bhutyai  (XII.  65),  bhumya 
(xxiv.  26),  matydi  (xxiv.  39),  mahydi  (XXII.  20),  rayydi  (ix.  22),  viviktyai  (xxx.  13)  ‘separa¬ 
tion’,  z'fsfyai  (xvill.  28),  vedyai  (xix.  16)  ‘altar’,  vyustyai  (XXll.  34)  ‘dawn’,  vyrddhyai 
(xxx.  17)  ‘failure’,  santyai  (in.  43)  ‘quiet’,  su-ksityai  (xxxvil.  10)  ‘secure  dwelling’,  hetydi 
(xvi.  18)  ‘missile’. 


n.  The  only  form  which  seems  to  occur  is  siicaye. 

Ab.  m.  The  stem  takes  Guna,  to  which  -i-  only,  instead  of  -as,  is  added; 
e.  g.  ddres.  It  is  not  common,  being  formed  from  only  8  or  9  stems  in  the 
RV.:  agues  (TS.  iv.  2.  104;  Kh.  iv.  65),  dhes,  udadhes  Svater-receptacle’,  girds 
‘mountain’,  ghrnes  ‘heat’,  tirasci-rajes  (AV.)  ‘striped  across’,  parna-dhcs  (AV.) 
‘feather-holder’,  prajdpates  (TS.  iv.  1.  n4),  pluses  (AV.)  ‘intestine’,  ydnes , 
vrsd-kapes  ‘man-ape’,  satd-m-utes  7  'granting  a  hundred  aids’,  sam-rtes 
‘conflict’. 

f.  This  form  is  made  in  the  same  way  as  in  the  m.  from  1 1  stems  in 
the  RV. :  ddites ,  apites  ‘entering  (iti-)  into  ( api)\  ab/d-sastes ,  abhi-hrutes 
‘injury’,  d mates  ‘indigence’,  drates ,  dhutes  (AV.),  dhases  ‘abode’,  dhurtes  ‘injury’, 
nrtes 8  (AV.),  pdri-sutes  ‘oppression’,  bhttmes  (AV.),  vasates ,  srutes  ‘course’. 

a.  The  RV.  has  three  forms  according  to  the  derivative  T-  declension:  ndbhyds 
(x.  90M),  bkumyds  (l.  804),  hetyds  (x.  S7  r9).  Besides  these  the  AV.  has:  abhutyas,  a-ratyas, 
a-saslyas  ‘imprecation’,  dhutyas ,  krsyas ,  dev  a- hetyds  ‘divine  weapon’,  sTrsaktyds  ‘headache’; 
probably  also  ydnyds  in  yonyeva  (vi.  1214)  for  yduyd  iva. 


G.  m.  The  regular  form  of  this  case  is  identical  with  that  of  the  Ab., 
but  is  much  more  frequent,  being  made  from  42  stems  in  the  RV.  The 
commonest  examples  are:  agues  (5  5),  ves  (14),  ddres  (10),  pa;jds(8),  brhas-pdtes(6)} 
sure's  (5)  ‘patron’,  dtres  (4),  kavds  (4),  dhases  (4)  ‘draught’,  bh fires  (4);  pates  ‘lord’ 


1  Equivalent  to  ksetra-pati-  (K.)  and  bhuta- 
pdti-  (AV.). 

2  And  a  number  of  other  epithets  in  VS. 
xvi.  17  —  23. 

3  pdtye  otherwise  means  ‘husband’. 

4  Lanman  382  enumerates  the  stems  which 
take  this  dative. 

5  Cp.  Lanman  383  (top). 


6  Used  in  the  sense  of  the  ablative  with 
pdhi  ‘protect  from’. 

7  Cp.  Richter,  IF.  9,  5. 

8  This  form  nrtes  is  probably  an  error 
for  drtes  ‘skin’;  see  Whitney’s  note  on  AV. 
vi.  183. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Vowel  Stems 


283 


occurs  once.  Elsewhere  are  found:  jamdd- agues  (VS.  nr.  62;  Kh.  v.  36), 
p  raj  spates  (TS.  in.  1.  41;  Kh.  in.  15 13),  yay/s1  (Kh.  1.  io2 3). 

a.  The  two  stems  ari-  and  dvi-  ‘sheep’  do  not  take  Guna,  and  add  the  normal 
ending  -as:  a/yds2  which  occurs  nearly  40  times,  and  dvyas  which  occurs  nearly  20  times. 
The  stem  pdti when  meaning  ‘husband’,  and  sdkhi-  do  not  take  Guna  either,  but  add 
the  anomalous  ending  -ur :  patyur,  sdkhyur 5. 

f.  This  case,  identical  in  form  with  the  m.,  is  made  from  1 1  stems  in 
the  RV.:  ddites,  abhi-sastes,  d mates,  iste's ,  krste's  ‘tillage’,  devd-vltes ,  nirrtes , 
pastes ,  prsnes ,  vrstes ,  vratdtes  ‘creeper’.  This  form  is  also  made  by  at  least 
8  stems  in  the  AV. 

a.  Six  stems  in  the  RV.  form  genitives  according  to  the  derivative  T-  declension, 
occurring  17  times  altogether:  dnu-matyds ,  aratyas,  nirrtyds,  prsnyas ,  bhumyds,  yuvatyds. 
In  the  AV.  such  forpis  are  made  from  at  least  16  stems  and  occur  over 
50  times:  jdmyas  ‘akin’  etc.  One  of  these,  ddityds,  occurs  also  in  the  TS.  (1.  6.  51)  and 
VS.  (1.  n).' 

n.  The  only  example  is  bhttres ,  which  occurs  16  times. 

L.  This  case  in  all  genders  ends  very  anomalously  in  -a  or  - au ■  The 
latter  ending  occurs  more  than  twice  as  often  as  the  former  in  the  RV. 
(272  times  to  126),  while  in  the  N.  A.  dual  -a  is  nearly  7  times  as  frequent 
as  -au  (1145  times  to  171)4.  The  general  conditions  under  which  the 
parallel  L.  forms  -d  and  -au  occur5 6 7  are  the  same  as  apply  to  the  dual 
-a  and  -au:  -a  appears  before  consonants,  -ait  (as  -dv)  before  vowels,  e.  g. 
1 dr  yond  vasatdv  iva  (ix.  62T5)  ‘a  bird  in  the  receptacle  as  in  a  nest’.  But 
while  the  dual  -d  is  the  regular  form  at  the  end  of  a  Pada,  the  L.  -au  is 
almost  exclusively  found  in  that  position6.  As  in  the  dual  N.  A.  and  the 
perfect  sing.  1  and  3,  the  5-form  is  doubtless  the  earlier.  It  is  most  pro¬ 
bably  derived  from  a  locative  form  with  Guna  (like  the  D.  Ab.  G.  V.  sing.), 
e.  g.  *agndy-i,  which  dropped  the  ending  (like  some  other  locatives),  *agn  iy 
then  losing  its  y7  before  consonants  and  lengthening  its  -a:  agnd.  The  later 
form  agnau  must  have  been  due  to  the  influence  of  the  u-  stems,  the  inflexion 
of  which  is  closely  parallel  to  that  of  the  i-  stems,  through  the  Sandhi  form 
-d  which  is  common  to  both8. 

m.  1.  The  -d  form  is  made  from  7  stems  and  occurs  40  times  in 
the  RV. :  agnd,  ajd  ‘contest’,  urmd ,  kuksd  ‘belly’,  ghrnd ,  yond,  su-rabhd 9 
‘fragrant’.  The  AV.  TS.  VS.  have  no  -d  form  in  independent  passages,  but  Kh. 
hi.  1 5  has  agnd. 

2.  The  form  in  -au  is  taken  by  27  stems  in  the  RV. :  agnau,  ddrau, 
aratdu'10  ‘manager’,  aratndu  ‘elbow’,  djau ,  andu  ‘pin  of  the  axle’,  urmdu , 
gdbhastau  ‘hand’,  girdu,  go-patau  ‘lord’,  jirdtu 1 1  ‘stream’,  trksau  N.  of  a  prince, 
dhvasdnau  ‘sprinkler’,  ndmucau  N,  of  a  demon,  nipdtith.au  N.  of  a  man, 
panau ,  prt-sutau  ‘hostile  attack’,  medhydtithau  N.  of  a  seer,  yajna-patau 
‘lord  of  sacrifice’,  yonau,  rathavitau  N.  of  a  man,  vdnas-patau 12  ‘lord  of 


1  Emendation  for  yayais. 

2  Once  or  twice  to  be  pronounced  arias. 

3  Cp.  Wackernagel,  KZ.  25,  289  f. 

4  Cp.  Lanman  514. 

5  See  Lanman  385  ff. ;  and  cp.  for  the 
dual  340  ff.  and  574 — 576. 

6  The  I,,  -d  appears  only  5  times  at  the 
end  of  a  Pada,  and  then  only  in  the  two 
forms  dev  a  tala  and  sarvatdtd. 

7  Cp.  the  N.  sakhd  for  *sdkkay.  The  old 
L.  may  be  preserved  in  feminines  like 
as^ndy-i-  ‘she  who  is  beside  Agni’;  cp.  IF. 
13,  3* 


8  Cp.  Meringer,  BB.  16,  224. 

9  Lanman  3S82,  suggests  the  possibility 
of  restoring  djdyi  in  I.  I1210  and  ydnayi  in 
x.  466.  The  n.  L.  a-prata  is  used  adverbially 
=  ‘without  recompense’  (vili.  32l6);  cp.  Bar- 
THOLOMAE,  IF.  9,  255  f. 

BR.  would  read  aratndu. 
jin-  may  be  f.  as  there  is  nothing  to 
show  the  gender  of  the  word. 

T2  The  form  vdnaspatau  occurs  in  Kh.  II. 
io5  also. 


284  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

the  forest’,  salmaldu  ‘silk-cotton  tree’,  sdnitau  ‘attainment’,  sdmvaranau  ‘des¬ 
cendant  of  Samvarana’,  syfima-rasmau  N.  of  a  man,  svddhitau.  The  AV. 
also  forms  the  L.  in  -au  from  at  least  16  stems;  among  them  appears 
the  uncompoiinded  patau  (AV.  111.  181 2 3)  ‘husband’1  as  a  variant  for  jane 
in  the  corresponding  passage  of  the  RV.  (x.  1454).  The  TS.  has  dhau 
(v.  6.  i2  =  AV.  hi.  131). 

f.  1.  The  form  in  -a  is  made  from  21  stems  in  the  RV.:  avdna  ‘river¬ 
bed’,  aja ,  iidita  ‘sunrise’,  ksetra-sata  ‘acquisition  of  land’,  go-sdtd  ‘winning  of 
cows’,  toka-satd  ‘attainment  of  offspring’,  devd-tata  ‘worship  of  the  gods’, 
dyumna-sdtd  ‘obtainment  of  strength’,  ndbhd ,  nf-satd  ‘capture  of  men’,  nemd- 
dhitd  ‘conflict’,  pTtd,  pra-bhrtd  ‘offering’,  medha-sata  ‘receiving  the  oblation’, 
ydma-hutd  ‘invocation  by  prayer’,  sUra-satd  ‘battle’,  sam-rtd,  sarvd-tata 
‘perfect  prosperity’,  said2,  srntd ,  svar-sdtd  ‘attainment  of  heaven’.  The  AV. 
has  ndbhd  (vii.  621);  and  the  SV.  reads  samtdtd  ‘beneficent’,  as  a  variant 
for  sdintati  of  RV.  vm.  187.  The  TS.  and  VS.  have  no  independent  L.  f.  in  -a. 

2.  The  form  in  -au  is  more  than  twice  as  frequent,  being  made  from 
49  stems  in  the  RV.  The  commonest  examples  are  satdu  (17),  vdja-satau  (16), 
vyustau  (16)  ‘flush  of  dawn’,  abhlstau  (10)  ‘help’,  su-matdu  (14),  gdvistau  (7) 
‘fight’,  istdu  (6),  ratdu  (5),  purvd-hutau 3  (5)  ‘first  invocation’.  The  AV.  makes 
this  form  from  7  stems  in  independent  passages.  The  TS.  has  uditau  (1. 8. 123), 
purvd-cittau  (iv.  2.102)  ‘first  thought’;  the  VS.  ratha-nabhdu  (xxxiv.  5)  ‘chariot 
nave’,  rdtrau  (xxm.  4)  ‘night’;  and  Kh.  1.  114  inra-satau. 

a.  There  are  5  locatives  f.  formed  according  to  the  derivative  t-  declension  with 
the  ending  -am:  puramdhyam ,  bhiimyam,  bhrtydm ,  yuvatyam ,  sam-gatyam  ‘assembly’. 
The  AV.  has  9  more:  avyam,  a  kilty  ban,  cittyam,  deva-hutyam,  prstyam  ‘rib’,  b  hut  yam, 
y ony dm,  vedydm  (+  VS.  XXVIII.  12),  samitydm  ‘assembly’.  The  VS.  has  sanydm 
(vm.  54)- 

b.  The  locative  vedl 4  occurring  twice  (vi.  I10;  11.  34)  is  the  only  one  formed  from 
an  i-  stem  with  the  normal  ending  -i  (==  vedi-i).  The  form  praniti  may  also  possibly  be 
a  L.  in  III.  5  l7. 

L.  n.  The  only  form  in  -d  is  a-pratd  (vm.  32 l6)  ‘without  recompense’ 
(used  adverbially),  and  the  only  one  in  -au  is  saptd-rasmau  (AV.  ix.  515) 
‘seven-rayed’. 

V.  This  case  regularly  gunates  the  final  vowel  in  the  m.  and  f.  It  is 
very  frequent  in  the  m.,  being  formed  from  72  stems  and  occurring  over 
1100  times  in  the  RV.  In  the  f.  it  is  not  common,  being  formed  from  only 
1 1  stems  and  occurring  only  2  7  times  in  the  RV. 

m.  The  commonest  examples  are:  ague5  (j 99),  pate  (35),  brhas-pate6  (3 2), 
have  (26),  brahmanas-pate  (17),  vanas-pate  (14),  dghrne  (13)  ‘glowing’,  sat- 
pate  (13)  ‘lord  of  the  seat’,  sakhe  (11)7.  In  Kh.  1.  5 7  the  anomalously 
formed  compound  bhuvanas-patez  ‘lord  of  the  world’  occurs;  in  the  VS. 
anghdre  (iv.  27)  a  guardian  of  Soma,  dfte  (xxxvi.  18)  ‘bag’,  drdpe  (xvr.  47) 
‘causing  to  run’,  bambhare  (iv.  27).  a  guardian  deity  of  Soma,  bhuvas-pate  (iv. 
34)  ‘lord  of  the  earth’,  sdtesudhe  (xvi.  13)  ‘hundred-quivered’,  sapte  (xxix.2) 
‘steed’. 

a.  The  V.  sobhare  is  a  transfer  from  the  l •  declension ;  and  the  compounds 
pdvaka-soce.  bhadra-soce,  sukra-soce  are  transfers  from  the  -is  declension,  doubtless  meant 
to  avoid  the  unusual  form  -sods  in  the  V. 


1  The  RV.  has  only  the  form  pdtyau 
‘husband’. 

2  For  this  form  in  VI.  461  the  SV.  and 
VS.  have  the  variant  satau. 

3  This  form  occurs  also  in  AV.  v.  IE 

4  Cp.  RPr.  1  28;  11.  35. 

5  Written  with  Pluti  VS.  vm.  10 :  agnail. 


6  Once  (ix.  So1)  with  double  accent  bfhas- 

pate. 

7  In  mahe-mate  ‘O  great-souled’  (Indra),  the 
first  member  is  anomalously  gunated  as  well 
as  the  second  ;  cp.  mahe-nadi  ‘O  great  stream’. 

8  Formed  like  vanas-pate. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Vowel  Stems.  285 

f.  The  forms  occurring  in  the  RV.  are:  adite,  anumate ,  asu-mte  ‘spirit- world’, 
is.te,  upa-mate 1  ‘granting  (of  wealth)’,  rjlte  ‘radiant’,  bhume ,  mate,  yuv ate,  satyatate1 
‘truth’,  sv-ahgure  ‘fair-fingered’.  The  AV.  has  darve 2  ‘spoon’;  the  VS.  svad/iite. 

a.  There  is  also  the  transfer  osadhe  from  the  T-  declension. 

Du.  N.  A.  V.  This  form  ends  in  -F3  and  can  be  used  in  all  genders 
alike.  The  m.  is  very  frequent,  being  made  from  72  stems  in  the  RV.  The 
commonest  examples  are:  indragni  (78)  ‘Indra  and  Agni’,  harT  (7 8),  pdti  (33), 
subhas-pdtl  (21)  ‘lords  of  light’.  Elsewhere  also  occur:  sa-tdtl  (TS.m.  2.  22)  ‘conti¬ 
nuous’;  bhiiri-radml  (Kh.  iv.  22s)  ‘many-rayed’;  visva-vdparT  ( Kh.ir.  22s)  ‘extend¬ 
ing  (?)  everywhere’.  The  final  vowel  is  shortened  in  saksdni  (x.  321)  ‘united’. 

f.  The  forms  occurring  in  the  RV.  are:  itd-utl  ‘extending  from  hence’, 
uti,  rjltT,  jam l,  ddrvT,  dydva-bhfiml  ‘heaven  and  earth’,  dharaydt-havl ‘protecting 
the  wise’,  piiraindht,  bhuji  ‘patrons’,  yuvati,  vasu-dhiti  ‘treasuries’,  duel,  sd-yoni 
‘of  the  same  origin’,  su-prdturti  ‘very  victorious’,  srutL 

n.  The  only  two  regular  forms  are  duel 4  and  tigma-hetl  (AV.)  ‘having  a 
keen  thrust’;  also  tnahi  (with  shortened  final)5.  There  are  besides  one  or 
two  secondary  forms  with  -m  made  under  the  influence  of  the  n-  declension: 
dksini  (AV.)  ‘eyes’  and  perhaps  hdrinl  (ix.  70  7)  from  hari 6. 

l.  m.  in dragfi ibhya m ,  ddmpatibhyam^ AV.)  ‘husband  and  wife’,  hdribhyam. — ■ 
f.  vartanibhyavi ,  drdnibhyam  (VS.xxv.  6)  ‘hips’.  —  n.  sdkthibhydm  ‘thighs’. 

D.  m.  indragnibhyam ,  indra-brhaspdtibhyam  (VS.vn.  23)  ‘Indra  and  JBrhas- 
pati’,  hdribhyam1. 

Ab.  m.  kuksibhyam  (AV.  VS.)  pdnibhya?n  (AV.).  —  f.  pdrsnibhyam , 
drdnibhyam.  —  G.  m.  indragnyos ,  hdryos.  —  f.  yuvatyds. 

L.  m.  kuksyds ,  gdib  hasty  os lS,  hdryos.  —  f.  jdmyos ;  gavlnyos  (AV.)  ‘groins’, 
pdrsnyos  (AV.).  —  n.  sdkthyos  (VS.  xxiv.  1). 

PL  N.  V.  This  form  gunates  the  final  vowel  of  the  stem,  adding  the 
normal  ending  -as  in  the  m.  and  f.;  e.  g.  agnay-as ,  utdy-as.  It  is  of  very 
frequent  occurrence,  but  is  nearly  twice  as  common  in  the  m.  as  the  f. 

m.  This  form  is  made  from  109  stems  in  the  RV.  and  occurs  523 
times.  The  commonest  examples  are:  kavdyas  (45),  vdyas  (38),  surdyas  (36), 
hdrayas  (31),  agnayas  (27),  d  dr  ay  as  (26),  r  say  as  (26),  sucayas  (18),  pat  ay  as 
(16),  rasmayas  (16),  vahnayas  (15)  ‘conveyers’.  In  the  VS.  also  occur:  ajavdyas 
‘goats  and  sheep’  (in.  43),  vrsa-pdnayas  (xxix.  44)  ‘strong-hoofed’,  vrthdyas 
(xviil  12)  ‘rice-plants’. 

a.  The  stem  an'-,  being  the  only  i-  stem  that  does  not  take  Guna,  forms  its 
N.  pi.  like  the  B  group  of  the  radical  T-  stems  (except  the  accent):  ary-as,  which  occurs 
16  times  in  the  RV. 

b.  The  form  a-hrayas  ‘shameless’  is  a  transfer  from  the  radical  7-  declension,  and 
sobharayas  ‘descendants  of  Sobhari’  from  the  derivative  7-  declension. 

f.  This  form  is  made  from  66  stems  and  occurs  290  times  in  the  RV. 
The  commonest  examples  are:  utdyas  (42),  dhltdyas  (21),  matdyas  (20), 
dratayas  (18),  ratdyas  (18),  krstdyas  (17),  ksitdyas  (13)  ‘races’,  jdnayas  (12), 
vr stay  as  (12). 

a.  The  stem  arf-  has  the  same  anomalous  form  as  in  the  m.:  ary-ds,  which  occurs 
4  times  in  the  RV. 


1  Agreeing  with  agne. 

2  The  VS.  (il.  49)  has  darvi  from  darvi-  — 
darvi-.  The  VS.  (vlll.  43)  also  has  vi-sruti 
which  seems  to  be  an  irregular  V.  for  vi- 
srute ;  cp.  pw.  s.  v. 

3  The  derivative  - i ,  -u  and  -7  stems  are 

the  only  ones  which  do  not  take  -d  or  -an 

in  the  dual. 


4  Occurring  in  x.8512  and  possibly  iv.  56s. 

5  Occurring  X.  9754  and  perhaps  also  IV.  56s. 

6  BR.  and  Grassmann  place  this  form 
under  hdrita-. 

7  No  n.  forms  occur  in  the  I).  Ab.  dual. 
This  word  may  be  f.  also. 


286  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


b.  About  10  i-  stems  in  the  RY.  have  also  N.  pi.  forms  according  to  the  derivative 
/  -  declension:  avail  is 1  ‘streams’,  djcinls  ‘births’,  Hits'1,  ndktis  ‘nights’,  nirrtls,  niskrtls , 
puramdhls,  bhutnis r,  visvd-krsils 1  ‘dwelling  among  all  men’,  sa-yonis.  The  AV.  also  has: 
any  tills,  rstfs  ‘spears’,  dhamams  ‘tubes’,  nab  his,  par snts,  prstfs. 

c.  The  stems  yayi-  ‘speeding’,  subhri-  ‘shining’,  karkari -  ‘lute’  form  their  N.  pi. 
according  to  the  radical  7-  declension:  yayiyas,  subhriyas  (AV.),  karkaryas  (AV.). 

d.  Some  l- stems  have  transfer  forms  according  to  the  z'-declension:  ambayas, 
arunayas,  k  ion  ay  as  \  osadhayas,  sdlvarayas  (TS.  v.  4.  1  z2 ;  VS.  XVIII.  22).  The  TS.  has  also  : 
garbhinayas  (II.  I.  26),  pdtnayas  (v.  2.  112  etc.),  reva/ayas  (v.  2.  111),  vaniirayas  (tv.  1.  62). 

N.  A.  n.  1.  The  normal  form,  in  which  the  ending  -i  coalesces 
with  the  final  of  the  stem  to  -1,  is  made  from  4  stems  in  the  RV. :  a-pratt1 
irresistible’,  krudhml  ‘irascible’,  irz  ‘three’,  suci.  The  final  vowel  of  this 
form  is  further  shortened  in  six  stems:  aprat'i ,  a-sthuri  ‘not  single-horsed’, 
jam! ,  bhfiri ,  sdmi 3  ‘work’,  surabhi.  The  AY.  has  also  mdhi  (besides  aprat! 
and  bhfiri).  The  forms  in  -1  and  -i  (which  are  of  about  equal  frequency) 
taken  together  occur  about  50  times  in  the  RV. 

2.  There  is  a  secondary  form  (following  the  analogy  of  the  stems) 
in  -bni,  which  is  taken  by  4  stems  having  the  primary  form  also:  apratini , 
bhfirlni ,  sucwi,  surabhini.  'These  forms  occur  about  14  times.  'The  AV.  has 
also  dksini  and  dsthlni ;  the  latter  form  occurs  in  the  'TS.  as  well  (v.  7.  21); 
the  VS.  has  sihgini  (xxxix.  8)  ‘entrails’. 

A.  m.  The  ending  -11  here  (as  in  the  -a  and  -11  declension)  represents 

original  -ns,  which  in  one  half  (42)  of  the  total  occurrences  (84)  of  these 

forms  in  -in  in  the  RV.  is  preserved  as  -ms  or  (before  vowels)  -mr.  This 

A.  is  made  from  31  stems  in  the  RVL  The  commonest  examples  are 

surln  (14),  vanas-pdtTn  (n),  pantn  (9),  rasmtu  (6),  sakhin  (5),  girtn  (4)5. 
The  TS.  also  has  ddhi-patin  (1.  6.  64)  ‘lords’,  dhln  (iv.  5.  i2;  VS.  xvi.  5);  the  VS. 
has  tittirm  (xxiv.  20)  ‘partridges’,  idjin 6  (xxm.  8)  ‘parched  grain’,  sdcin u 
(xxnr.  8)  ‘groats’. 

a.  The  stem  art-  is  the  only  one  which  does  not  take  -n,  but  adds  the  normal 
ending  -as  instead,  the  A.  aryas  (which  occurs  7  times  in  the  RV.)  being  thus  identical 
with  the  N.  pi.  The  stem  vi-  in  its  only  occurrence  (I.  I041)  in  the  A.  pi.  uses  the 
N.  pi.  form  vdyas. 

f.  This  form,  which  is  made  by  adding  simple  -j-  (instead  of  -as),  e.  g. 
bhdmJs ,  occurs  from  42  stems  in  the  RV.  The  commonest  examples  are 
drafts  (16),  krsfts  (16),  ksitzs  (8),  carsants  (7)  ‘people’,  puraindhfs  (7),  avdnis  (6), 
dsastls  (5)7.  The  TS.  has  abhistis  (v.  4. 142),  d mails  (111. 1.44),  ydnis  (1.  5.  33), 
vyustfs  (iv.  3.  114);  and  sdcis  occurs  in  a  Khila  (p.  171,  6) 8. 

a.  As  in  the  m.,  the  stem  art-  has  aryas  (occuiring  4  times).  Two  N.  forms, 
ciirotayas  (x.  140^)  ‘granting  wonderful  gifts’  and  sucayas  (AV.  v.  G),  appear  to  be  used 
for  the  A. 

I.  m.9  This  form  is  made  with  the  regular  ending  -bhis  from  40  stems 
in  the  RV.  The  commonest  examples  are  ddribhis  (43),  rasnubhis  (36), 
pat  hi  bhis  (28)  ‘paths’,  ha  rib  his  (23),  sdk/iibhis  (15),  sur/bhis  { 14),  agn/bhis  (10), 
ahjibhis  (10)  ‘ornaments’,  rsibhis  (10),  vibhis 10  (9).  —  From  the  VS.:  pldsib/iis 
(xxv.  8). 


1  Beside  avdnayas,  uidyas,  bhumayas,  visvd- 
krstayas. 

2  The  Pada  text  has  aprati. 

3  BR.  set  up  a  n.  stem  sdmi-  beside  f. 
sand-.  Gr.assma.nn  recognizes  sdmi-  only, 
making  sdmi  always  the  I.  sing,  with  short¬ 
ened  final  vowel.  Cp.  the  I.  sing,  of  sdml- 
above  (p.  274). 

4  Lanman  395  enumerates  the  stems 

which  take  this  accusative. 


5  On  the  Sandhi  of  the  final  -n  in  this 
form  see  Lanman  394  f. 

6  Written  with  pluti  in  the  text  as  lajim, 
sdciin. 

7  The  stems  which  take  this  form  in  the 
RV.  are  enumerated  by  Lanman  3953. 

8  See  ScriEFTELOWiTZ’ note,  p.  171  (bottom). 

9  No  n.  form  occurs. 

i°  Not  accented  as  a  monosyllabic  stem. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Vowel  Stems.  287 

f.  This  form  is  made  in  the  same  way  as  the  m.  from  48  stems  in 
the  RV.  The  commonest  examples  are:  utibhis  (100),  svastibhis  (82),  matibhis 
(37),  dhlt'ib/iis  (27),  su-vrktibhis  (18). 

a.  The  form  utf  is  used  9  times  as  an  I.  pi.  in  the  RV.,  as  is  shown  both  by  the 
sense  and  by  the  forms  agreeing  with  it;  e.  g.  tvabhir  utf  (11.  202)  ‘with  thine  aids’. 

b.  A  transfer  from  the  f-declension  is  arantbhis  ‘tinder-sticks’. 

D.  m.  This  form  is  made  with  -bhyas  from  9  stems  in  the  RV.:  dsva- 
patibhyas  (VS.  xvi.  24)  ‘masters  of  horses’,  f  si  bhyas l,  gand-patibhyas  (VS.  xvr. 
25)  ‘lords  of  troops’,  ddsavanibhyas  ‘having  ten  courses’,  pdtibhyas ,  ydtibhyas 
N.  of  a  race,  rasmibhyas  (VS.  xxir.  28),  vi- bhyas 2 ,  vrdta-patibhyas  (VS.  xvr.  25) 
‘lords  of  companies’,  sucibhyas,  svd-patibhyas  (VS.  xiv.  28)  ‘masters  of  dogs’, 
sakhibhyas,  sanibhyas ,  sandhibhyas  (VS.  xxtv.  2  5),  suri  bhyas. 

f.  ksitibhyas ,  car  sanibhyas,  deva-jamibhyas  (VS.  xxtv.  24)  ‘sisters  of  the 
gods’.  There  is  also  the  transfer  from  the  f-declension  ndribhyas  ‘women’. 

Ab.  m.  This  case,  identical  in  form  with  the  D.,  is  made  from  12  stems 
in  the  RV. :  agni bhyas,  dtribhyas,  kavdribhyas  ‘niggardly’,  girlbhyas,  panibhyas, 
pavibhyas,  pldsibhyas,  yonibhyas  (VS.  xm.  34),  vdnas-pdtibhyas ,  vibhyas2, 
sakhibhyas,  sanibhyas,  sthivibhyas  ‘bushels’.  —  f.  amhatibhyas  ‘distresses’, 
ahgulibhyas  (AV.),  ksitibhyas,  carsanibhyas ,  jdnibhyas,  dhamanibhyas  (AV.) 
‘blasts’.  —  n.  asthibhyas 8  (AV.  11.  33^). 

G.  m.  This  form  is  made  from  28  stems  in  the  RV. :  (a)  oxy tones 
are  agnlndm ,  kavlndm,  girindm ,  carsamndm,  deva-jamindm  (AV.),  nidhindm 
‘treasures’,  panindm ,  pathindim,  manindm  (AV.),  mat  hind  m 4,  raytndm,  vapindm 5 
(AV.),  vindm ,  samndm 6;  (b)  otherwise  accented:  dtrlnam ,  dvlnam,  ahindm, 
fsTnam,  gandhdrinam  N.  of  a  people,  cardmnam  ‘active’,  tuvisvdmnam  ‘loud- 
roaring’,  dhunmam  ‘roaring’,  mahi-svamnam  ‘very  noisy’,  mumnam  ‘seers’, 
vdnas-pdtlnam ,  vi-malunam  ‘very  great’,  vydtinam  ‘steeds’,  sue  mam,  sdkhinam, 
harinam,  havir-mdthinam 7  ‘disturbing  sacrifices’.  Also  gr/ia-patmam  (VS.  ix.  39) 
‘householders’,  dhdrma-patlnam  (VS.  ix.  39)  ‘guardians  of  law’. 

f.  This  form  is  made  from  18  stems  in  the  RV.8:  (a)  oxytones:  kavlndm, 
krstcndm ,  ksitTndm,  carsamndm ,  jamlndm ,  dur-matlndm  ‘hatred’,  dhautlndun 
‘wells’,  pustlndm,  matindm ,  rayindm,  su-ksitindm,  su-matinam,  su-stutlndnr, 
(b)  otherwise  accented:  aratinam 9  (Kh.  1.  5s),  upa-stutinam  ‘invocations’, 
janindm,  nirrtinam,  marlclndm  ‘particles  of  light’,  sucTndm. 

L.  m.  This  form  is  made  with  the  ending  -sit,  which  becomes  -sit,  from 
16  stems  in  the  RV.:  a-kavisu  ‘not  wise’,  agnisit,  ahjisu,  d-samatisu  ‘incomparable’, 
djisa,  dpisu  ‘kinsmen’,  fsisit,  khadisu  ‘rings’,  girisn,  nidhisu,  pdthisu,  pavisn, 
yonisu,  rasmisu,  snbhrisu,  suri su. 

f.  This  form  is  made  from  21  stems,  all  but  three  of  which  ( a-vyathi -, 
jdmi-,  subhri-)  end  in  abhi-matisu  ‘plots’,  a-vyathi  sit,  isiisu ,  Tttisu,  rstisu, 
krstisu,  ksitisu,  gdv-istisu,  jamisu,  div-istisu  ‘devotions’,  deva-hutisu,  pdristisu 
‘distresses’,  pustisu,  prd-mtisu,  prd-turtisu  ‘speedy  motions’,  prd-yuktisu, 
prd-sastisu  (TS.1.7.71;  VS.ix.  6)  ‘praises’,  ydma-hutisu,  rdtisu,  vyustisii,  subhri  sit, 
sdtisu.  The  form  ndrisu10  is  a  transfer  from  the  T-  declension. 

n.  The  only  example  that  occurs  is  bhdrisu. 


1  Once  accented  rsibhyas  in  Valakhilya 
xi.  6,  doubtless  an  error. 

2  Not  accented  as  a  monosyllabic  stem. 

3  With  wrong  accent  for  asthibhyas ;  cp. 
asthabhyas  (VS.  XXIII.  44). 

4  Val.  58;  BR.  and  GRASSMANN  would  read 
matindm ,  which  is  actually  the  reading  of 
the  Kashmir  Ms. :  Scheftelowitz,  Die  Apo- 
kryphen  des  Rgveda  40. 


5  See  Whitney’s  note  on  AV.  xix.  246. 

6  Also  the  numeral  Irlndm. 

7  In  about  a  dozen  out  of  128  occurrences 
resolution  of  -dm  to  -aam  seems  necessary. 

8  Resolution  of  - dm  to  -aam  seems  to  be 
necessary  in  4  out  of  98  occurrences. 

9  Wrong  accent  for  aratinam. 

^  1  t 

10  On  the  other  hand  svdha-krtlsu  is  a 
transfer  from  this  to  the  f-declension. 


288 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


5.  a.  Radical  u-stems. 

Lanman,  Noun-Inflection  400 — 419.  —  Whitney,  Grammar  348 — 352. 

382.  This  declension  comprises  strictly  speaking  only  m.  and  f.  stems; 
for  the  few  distinctively  n.  forms  which  occur  are  made  only  from  stems  in 
which  the  u  is  shortened  and  which  therefore  in  form  belong  to  the  u-  de¬ 
clension.  The  normal  endings,  as  they  appear  in  the  inflexion  of  consonant 
stems,  are  taken  throughout.  The  G.  ph,  however,  adds  the  ending  -7ia?n  to 
compound  stems1;  and  the  N.  sing,  always  has  -s. 

This  declension  contains  seven  monosyllabic  stems,  one  of  which  is  m., 
five  f,  and  one  m.  and  f;  two  reduplicated  f.  substantives  and  one  adjective; 
and  about  60  compounds,  almost  exclusively  adjectives,  made  with  the  roots 
ju-  ‘speed’,  dyu-  ( din -)  ‘play’,  pu-  ‘purify’,  bhu-  ‘be’,  su-  ‘swell’,  su -  ‘bring  forth’, 
hu-  ‘call’,  and  with  the  modified  forms  kru -,  gu-  ‘go’,  d?'u-  ‘run’,  snu-  ‘drip’, 
which  may  be  treated  as  roots.  The  stems  occurring  are :  1.  monosyllables: 
m.  ju-  ‘speeding’,  ‘steed’,  su-  ‘begetter’;  f.  du-  ‘gift’,  bhd-  ‘earth’,  bhrd-  ‘brow’, 
s/7-  ‘mother’,  syd-  ‘thread’  (VS.),  srd-  ‘stream’.  2.  reduplicated  stems: 
juhd-  ‘tongue’,  juhd-  ‘sacrificial  spoon’,  jdgu-  ‘singing  aloud’.  3.  compounds 
(in  the  alphabetical  order  of  the  roots) :  apT-jd-  ‘impelling’,  kasojd-  ‘hastening 
to  the  water  (?)’,  N.  of  a  man,  dhi-jfl-  ‘inspiring  the  mind’,  nabho-jdt-  ‘cloud- 
impelling’,  mano-jd-  ‘swift  as  thought’,  yatu-jd-  ‘incited  by  ‘demons’,  vayo-jd- 
‘  stimulating  strength’,  vasu-jd-  ‘procuring  goods’,  visva-jd-  ‘all-impelling’, 
sadyo-jd-  ‘quickly  speeding’,  sena-jii-  ‘swift  as  an  arrow’.  —  e Jza-dyh-  m.  N.  of 
a  seer,  katna-dyd-  f.  N.  of  a  woman.  —  agre-pd- 2  ‘drinking  first’,  uda-pd- 
‘purified  by  water’,  keta-pd-  (VS.  TS.)  ‘purifying  the  will’,  ghrta-pd-  ‘clarifying 
ghee’,  madhu-pd -  ‘purifying  itself  by  sweetness’,  vata-pfi-  ‘purified  by  the  wind’, 
visna-pd-  m.  N.  of  a  man,  su-pd-  ‘clarifying  well’,  sva-pd -  ‘broom’.  —  dn- 
Cibhu-  ‘disobedient’,  abhi-bhd-  ‘superior’,  a-b/iti-  ‘present’,  pari-bhd-  ‘surround¬ 
ing’,  punar-bhd-  ‘being  renewed’,  puro-bhd-  ‘being  in  front’,  pra-bhd-  ‘excelling’, 
mayo-bhdi-  ‘causing  pleasure’,  vi-bhd-  ‘far-extending’,  visva-bhd-  ‘being  every¬ 
where’,  visva-sambhu-  ‘beneficial  to  all’,  sam-bhu-  ‘beneficent’,  sacd-bhfi-  ‘asso¬ 
ciate’,  su-bhu-  ‘good’,  svayam-bhfi-  ‘self-existing’,  sv-abhfi-  ‘helping  well’.  — 
siird-sti-  ‘exultant  with  liquor’.  —  a-sft-  ‘not  bringing  forth’,  a-susfi-  (AV.) 
‘barren’,  nava-sil-  ‘having  recently  calved’,  purva-sU-  ‘bringing  forth  first’,  pra-sd- 
‘bringing  forth’,  yama-sd-  ‘bringing  forth  twins’,  raka-sd-  ‘bringing  forth 
secretly’,  raja-sd-  ‘king-creating’,  visva-sfi-  ‘all- generating’,  vTra-sd-  ‘hero¬ 
bearing’,  sakfd-sdi-  ‘bringing  forth  once’,  su-sd-  ‘bringing  forth  easily’.  —  a-hd- 
‘invoking’,  u.-hd- 3  ‘crying  aloud’,  varsa-hd-  (VS.)  f.,  sumna-hdt-  (TS.)  ‘invoking 
favour’,  su-hd-  (VS.)  ‘invoking  well’.  —  mitra-krd-  f.  a  kind  of  demon.  — 
agre-gd -4  ‘moving  forwards’.  —  raghu-drd-  ‘running  swiftly’5.  —  ghrta-snd- 
1  dripping  ghee’6. 

a.  Vocalic  pronunciation.  Before  vowels  the  ii  has  regularly  a  vocalic  value  in 
pronunciation.  In  monosyllabic  stems  it  is  always  written  as  - uv,  generally  also  in 
compounds  even  when  preceded  by  a  single  consonant.  In  the  minority  of  compounds 
(some  9  stems  in  the  RV.)  it  is  written  as  v,  but  pronounced  as  a  vowel.  In  the  latter 
instances  it  is  always  given  as  u  below;  e.  g.  vibhvd  as  vibhud. 

b.  Accentuation.  Except  in  the  monosyllabic  stems,  which  follow  the  general 
rule,  the  accent  remains  throughout  on  the  same  syllable,  which  is  almost  always  the 
radical  one. 


1  The  monosyllabic  and  the  reduplicated 
stems,  on  the  other  hand,  added  -dm,  as  far 
as  can  be  inferred  from  bhuvdm  and  joguvdm, 
the  only  examples  which  occur. 

2  -pii-  here  —  -pa-  ‘drink’. 

3  Perhaps  an  onomatopoetic  word. 


4  -gil-  here  =  gd-  ‘go’. 

5  Cp.  Lanman  402. 

6  About  a  dozen  of  the  above  compounds 
(all  but  3  or  4  of  them  being  formed  with 
bhii-)  also  shorten  the  final  of  the  stem, 
which  is  then  inflected  like  an  u-  stem. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Vowel  Stems. 


289 


Inflexion. 

383.  The  inflexion  is  identical  in  the  m.  and  f.  Several  of  the  cases  do 
not  occur  at  all  in  the  m.,  viz.  Ab.  L.  V.  sing.,  I.  D.  Ab.  G.  L.  du.,  D. 
Ab.  pi.  In  the  monosyllabic  stems  several  cases  are  wanting  in  both  genders, 
viz.  A.  D.  V.  sing.,  and  all  the  cases  of  the  pi.  except  the  N.  A.  G.  The 
forms  actually  occurring,  if  made  from  bhd-  f.  ‘earth’  and  the  adjectives 
d-bhd-  ‘present’  and  vi-bhd-  ‘far-reaching’,  would  be  as  follows: 

1.  Sing.  N.  bhtts.  I.  bhuvd.  Ab.  bhuvds.  G.  bhuvds.  L.  bhuvi  (VS.). 
D  u.  N.  bhuva.  I.  bhubhyam  (VS.).  L.  bhuvds.  PI.  N.  bhuvas.  A.  bhuvas. 
G.  bhuvdm  (VS.). 

2.  Sing.  N.  dbhiis;  vibhUs.  A.  abhuvam ;  vibhuam.  I.  dbhi'ivd ;  vibhud. 
D.  dbhuve ;  vibhue.  Ab.  f.  vibhuas  (AV.).  G.  m.  dbhuvas. 

Du.  N.  A.  dbhitvd.  PI.  N.  dbhuvas ;  vibhuas .  A.  m.  f.  dbhuvas",  f.  vibhtas. 
I.  m.  f.  dbhubhis.  G.  m.  f.  abhundm.  L.  m.  f.  dbhiisu. 

The  forms  actually  occurring  are : 

Sing.  N.  m.  jds  (VS.  iv.  17),  sds;  eka-dyUs.  —  uda-pfis  (AV.),  k eta-pus 
(VS.  ix.  1  ;TS.iv.  1.  G),  juadhu-pUs  (AV.),  vata-pUs  (AV.).  —  abhi-bhds, pari-bhiis, 
puro-bhfcs ,  pra-bhfis  (AV.),  may o-b hfis ,  vi-bhUs  (AV.),  visvd-sambhUs ,  sam-bhus  (V S. 
AV.),  sacd-bhus ,  su-bhfts  (YS.  AV.),  svayam-bhus.  —  sumna-hus  (TS.  iv.  6.  3+), 
su-hfis  (VS.  1.  30)  ‘invoking  well’.  —  f.  bhus,  sds,  syds  (VS.  v.  21);  juhUs  (AV. 
VS.).  —  kama-dyds.  —  abhi-bhds  (AV.),  punar-bhds.  pra-bhds  (VS.  AV.),  mayo- 
bhds,  sam-bhds  (AV.).  — pra-sds  (AV.),  yam  a- sds,  raha-sds ,  vira-sds,  su-sds.  — 
varsd-hus  (VS.  xxiv.  38)  ‘frog’. 

A.  m.  1.  kaso-juvam ,  mano-juvam ,  vasu-juvam ;  abhi-bhuvam  (AV.), 
d-b/iuvam ,  mayo-bhuvam ,  visvd-sambhuvam ,  sambhuvam,  sacd-b/iuvaui ,  sv- 
dbhuvam ;  2.  visnd-puam’,  vi-bhuam ,  su-bhuam. —  i.juhuam  ‘sacrificial  spoon’, 

1.  kama-dyuvam,  visva-juvam ,  sacd-bhuvam ;  2.  a-suam l,  visva-suam  (AV.), 

sakrt-sdam. 

I.  m.  1.  mano-juvd ,  send-juvd ,  sv-a bhuvd ;  2.  vi-bhud.  — -  f.  bhuvd ;  juhud 
‘tongue’  and  ‘spoon’;  1.  punai'-bhuva  (AV.),  mayo-bhuvd  (TS.  1.  8.  31;  YrS. 
in.  47),  —  n.  1.  mayo-bhuvd ;  2.  su-pud  (VS.  1.  3). 

D.  m.  1.  abhi-blaive,  vi-bhuve  (VS.  xxii.  30),  visvd-bhuve ,  sacd-bhuve ; 

2.  visnd-pue,  vi-bhue ,  su-bhue. 

Ab.  f.  bhuvds ;  a-susuas  (AV.).  —  G.  m.  sam-bhuvas,  saca-bhuvas 2.  - 
f.  bhuvds.  —  L.  f.  bhuvi  (VS.).  —  V.  f.  juhu  (AV.). 

Du.  N.  A.  m.  matio-jiiva ;  mayo-bhuva,  sam-bhuva ,  saca-bhuva ;  ghrta- 
snuvd 3.  — f.  s ruvd ;  apT-juvd ;  punar-b/vivd ,  visva-sambhuva ,  visvd-sambhuzau 
(VS.  x.  9),  sambhuvd ,  sacd-b/rivd.  —  I.  f.  bhrubhydm  (VS.).  —  L.  f.  bhruvds. 

PI.  N.  m.  juvas ;  1.  d-duvas,  d-bhuvas,  u-huvas ,  7iabho-juvas ,  pari-bhuvas , 
?nano-juvas ,  mayo-bhuvas ,  raghudruvas ,  vayo-juvas ,  sam-bhuvas ,  V. 
bhuvas  (VS.  hi.  47),  sadyo-juvas ,  su-bhuvas,  sv-dbhuvas  4;  2.  vi-bhuas,  su-bhuas; 
surd-suas.  —  f.  duvas ,  bhuvas ;  juhu  as  ‘tongues’  and  ‘spoons’;  1.  V.  agre-guvas 
(VS.),  V.  agre-puvas  (VS.),  d/u-juvas,  punar-bhuvas,  mayo-bhuvas,  mitra-knh  as; 
V.  visva-sa?nbhuvas  (VS.  iv.  7);  2 .  ghrta-puas,  nava-si'tas ,  pra-suas ,  vi-bhuas, 
su-bhuas. 

A.  m.  dn-abhuvas,  mayo-bhuvas 5.  —  f.  duvas,  bhuvas',  d-bhuvas ,  d-huvas , 


1  The  transition  form  a-sum  (VS.)  under 
the  influence  of  the  derivative  1-  stems  also 
occurs.  The  form  ayogum  (VS.  xxx.  5)  is 
perhaps  of  the  same  kind. 

2  The  AV.  has  also  the  transition  form 

punar-bhuv-as. 

Indo-arische  Philologie.  I,  1. 


3  Cp.  Lanman  413  (middle). 

4  There  are  also  the  transfers  from  the 
u-  declension  d-prayuvas ,  madhydyuvas,  mi(rd- 
yitvas ,  sramayuvas. 

5  In  11.  143  y'/iy  is  perhaps  contracted  for 
juas. 


19 


290  1.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

ghrta-snuvas,  mayo-bhuvas ,  sana-juvas ;  pra-sdas,  raja-suas  (VS.  x.  1)  ‘king- 
creating’,  vi-bhdas1 2. 

I.  m.  a-bhdbhis.  —  f.  juhdbhis  ‘tongues’  and  ‘spoons’;  sva-pdbhis. 

G.  m.  joguvam ;  ydtu-jdndm.  —  f.  bhuvam 2  (VS.  xxxvii.  18);  purva - 
sdnam. 

L.  m.  a-bhdsu ,  puru-bhdsu  ‘appearing  to  many’.  —  f.  pra-sdsu. 


5.  b.  Derivative  */-  stems. 

Lanman,  Noun-Inflection  400— 419.  —  Whitney,  Sanskrit  Grammar  355 — 359, 
362—364. 

384.  This  declension  is  almost  entirely  restricted  to  f.3  stems,  which  (like 

the  derivative  or  B  group  of  the  radical  f-  declension)  accent  the  final 

vowel  and  in  inflexion  are  practically  identical  with  the  radical  stems.  The 
f.  stems  which  it  comprises  may  be  divided  into  two  groups.  The  first 

contains  about  18  oxytone  f.  substantives  corresponding  in  several  instances 

to  m.  or  n.  stems  in  -u  accented  on  the  first  syllable:  a-grd-  (m.  d-gru-) 
‘maid’,  kadrd-  (m.  kddru-  ‘brown’)  ‘Soma  vessel’,  kuhdt-  (AV.)  ‘new  moon’, 
gugguld-  (n.  guggulu-)  (AV.)  N.  of  an  Apsaras,  gufigd-  N.  of  a  goddess, 
canid-  ‘bowl’,  jatd-  (n.  jatu-)  (AV.  VS.)  ‘bat’,  land-  ‘body’,  dhandi-  (dhdnu-) 
‘sandbank’ (AV.),  nabhand-  ‘well’,  nrtd-  ‘dancer’,  prdakd-  (m.  prdaku-)  ‘serpent’ 
(AV.),  prajand-  (AV.)  ‘organ  of  generation’,  vad/id-  ‘bride’,  svasrdt-  (m.  svdsura-) 
‘mother-in-law’,  saranyd-  N.  of  a  goddess;  also  kydmbu -4  (n.  kiydmbu -)  an 
aquatic  plant  (AV.).  The  second  group  comprises  oxytone  f.  adjectives 
corresponding  to  m.  oxytones:  amhoyd-  ‘troublesome’,  aghlyd-  ‘malicious’, 
apasyd-  ‘active’,  abhi-dipsd-  ‘wishing  to  deceive’,  avasydi-  ‘desiring  favour’, 
asita-jhd-  (AV.)  ‘black-kneed’,  ayd-  ‘active’,  udanydi-  ‘seeking  water’,  caranyd- 
‘movable’,  carisnd-  ‘moving’,  jighatsd-  ‘hungry’,  tandi-  ‘thin’,  didhisd-  ‘wishing 
to  gain’,  dur-hanay d-  ‘meditating  harm’,  duvasyd-  ‘worshipping’,  derayd-  (VS.) 
‘devoted  to  the  gods’,  dravitnd-  ‘speeding’,  patayald-  ‘flying’,  panasyd-  ‘glorious’, 
parayisnd-  ‘victorious’,  prtanayd-  ‘hostile’,  pr sandy  d-  ‘tender-,  phalgdt-  ‘reddish’, 
babhrd-  ‘reddish  brown’,  bib  hats  d-  ‘loathing’,  makhasyd-  ‘cheerful’,  madhd -5 
‘sweet’,  mandrayd-  ‘gladdening’,  ma/uyd-  ‘joyous’,  mumuksd-  ‘wishing  to 
free’,  vacasyd-  ‘eloquent’,  vi-panyd-  ‘admiring’,  sundhyd-  ‘radiant’,  sandyd- 
‘wishing  for  gain’,  sudayitnd -  ‘yielding  sweetness’;  also  su-drd-  ‘having  good 
wood’  (dru-)  °. 

a.  Vocalic  pronunciation.  Before  vowels  the  -u  has  almost  invariably  a  vocalic 
value  in  pronunciation.  It  is  written  as  uv  in  the  substantives  agru -  and  kadru and  in 
adjectives  when  the  -u  is  preceded  by  y,  also  in  bib  hats  u- '.  Otherwise  though  always 
written  as  v  it  is  (except  four  or  five  times  at  the  most  in  the  RV.)S,  here  also  to  be 
pronounced  as  a  vowel.  Hence  the  forms  written  in  the  Sanrhita  with  simple  v  are 
given  below  with  u. 

b.  Accentuation.  The  derivative  ?7-stems  not  only  accent  the  final  syllable 9  but 


1  VS.  xxtv.  25  has  the  form  sTca-pus  a  kind 
of  bird. 

2  In  the  V.  visvasam  bhuvam  pate. 

3  There  are  only  five  m.  forms:  N. prdsus 
‘guest1,  atapla-tanjis'mh.ose.bodyxs  not  cooked1, 
sarva-tanus  (AV.)  ‘whose  body  is  entire1; 
A.  krka-dasuam  a  kind  of  demon;  I.  pi. 
maksubhis  ‘swift1. 

4  This  is  the  only  f.  stem  in  this  declen¬ 
sion  not  accented  on  the  final  vowel;  but 
TA.  VI.  41  has  the  normally  accented  kydmbu -. 

5  The  corresponding  m.  in  this  instance 

is  not  oxytone,  madhu -. 


6  Also  as  a  substantive  f.  ‘good  beam1. 
BR.  and  pw.  however  regard  su-druam  as  A. 
of  a  m.  substantive  su-dru-  ‘starkes  Holz1. 

7  This  is  the  regular  practice  in  the  TS. 
even  when  a  single  consonant  precedes  the 
•ft,  e.  g.  iaHuv-am;  cp.  IS.  13,  105  f. 

8  ianvds  3  times,  camvos  once,  tanvdm 
perhaps  once ;  cp.  Lanman  408  (top). 

9  Except  the  f.  kydmbu -  (AV.)  and  the 
two  m.  Bahuvrlhis  atapia-tanu-  and  sdrva - 
tanu -. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Vowel  Stems.  291 


retain  the  accent  on  that  syllable  throughout  their  inflexion.  In  this  respect  they  agree 
with  the  B  group  of  the  radical  T-  declension  and  differ  from  tbe  ordinary  derivative 
I-  declension. 

c.  Transition  forms.  There  is  an  incipient  tendency  here  to  be  affected  by 
the  analogy  of  the  derivative  f-stems.  The  only  certain  example  in  the  RV.  is  the  L. 
svasruam  (X.  8546)  for  *svasrui ;  the  I.  dravitmid  is  perhaps  another  instance1.  But  the 
AV.  has  at  least  10  such  forms:  A.  kuhum ,  tanum,  v  ad  hum ;  D.  agruvai,  vadhvdi,  svasruai ; 
Ab.  punar-bheevds',  G.  urvdruas 2  ‘gourd’,  prddkuds ,  svasruds ;  L.  tanuam.  The  VS.  has 
A.  pumscaltim,  D.  tanvai ,  G.  tanvds. 


Inflexion. 

385.  In  the  L.  sing,  the  -i  may  be  dropped  in  the  RV.  In  the  later 
Samhitas  -m  sometimes  appears  in  the  A.  for  - am ,  and  -ai,  -as,  -dm  are 
occasionally  taken  as  the  endings  of  the  D.  G.  L.  respectively.  The  ending 
-dm  appears  once  in  the  RV.  also.  The  forms  actually  occurring,  if  made 
from  tarni-  f.  ‘body’,  would  be  as  follows: 

Sing.  N.  tanfts.  A.  tanuam.  I.  tanud.  D.  tanue.  Ab.  tanuas.  G.  tam'ias. 
L.  tam'd  and  tarni.  V.  tanu. 

Du.  N.  A.  tanud.  D.  tamibhydm.  L.  tanuos. 

PI.  N.  tanuas.  A.  tanuas.  I.  tanibhis.  D.  tanhbhyas.  G.  tanhndm. 
L.  tanfisu. 

The  forms  actually  occurring  are: 

Sing.  N.  m.  prdsfis,  d-tapta-tanus ,  sdrva-tanus  (AV.).  —  f.  asita-jntts 
(AV.),  kuhfis  (TS.  AV.),  kyd mbits 3  (AV.),  guggulits  (AV.),  gungits ,  jatfis  (VS.), 
tanas,  dhanis  (AV.),  nrtfis,  patayalis  (AV.),  prddkits  (AV.),  phalgus  (VS. 
xxiv.  4),  madhiis  (AV.),  vadhiis ,  sundhyits ,  svasrits,  saranyds. 

A.  m.  krkadasiiam 4.  —  f.  carisnuam,  jighatsuani  (AV.),  tanuam 5, 
prddkiiam 6 7  (AV.),  vadhuam ,  su-druam1 ;  avasyiivam,  dur-handyuvam , 
yiivam  (VS.  1.  12),  makhasyuvam,  vacasyuvam,  sundhyuvam,  su-druvam  (SV.). 
—  With  ending  -m  for  -am:  kuhdm  (TS.  AV.),  tanfim  (TS.  AV.),  pums- 
caldm  (VS.  xxx.  5),  vad/iiim  (AV. ;  Kh.  iv.  51). 

I.  f.  tanud 8,  vadhiid ;  duvasyiiva.  —  D.  f.  tanue9.  —  With  ending  - ai : 
agnivai  (AV.),  ianvai  (VS.  xxm.  44),  babhrvdi  (VS.  xx.  28),  vadhvdi10  (AV.), 
svasruai  (AV.).  —  Ab.  f.  kadriivas ;  tanuas. 

G.  f.  agruvas,  sundhyuvas ;  tanuasf11,  vadhuas.  — With  ending  -as\  tanvds 
(VS.  in.  17),  prddkuds  (AV.),  svasruds  (AV.). 

L.  f.  cami'd,  taniii12.  —  Without  ending:  camn x3,  tana W  —  With 
ending  -am:  svasrudnr,  tanvdmlb  (AV.),  tamivam 10  (TS.  1.  7.  122). 

V.  f.  bdbhru ,  vddhu. 

1  Because  the  accent  is  shifted  to  the 
ending  as  in  the  derivative  1-  declension; 
cp.  Lanman  404. 

2  See  Lanman  41  i1. 

3  The  TA.  has  the  normal  accentuation 
kydmbu the  corresponding  stem  in  the  RV. 
is  kiydmbu -  n. 

4  That  the  word  is  m.  is  probable  because 
sarvam  seems  to  agree  with  it  (1.  297).  The 
A.  m.  dbhiruaen  ‘fearless’  is  a  transfer  from 
the  u-  declension. 

5  The  AV.  has  tanvam  once,  tanuam  1 6  times. 

The  TS.  regularly  has  tinuvam[  1.8.  io2,  etc.). 

6  The  Mss.  all  read  prddkva?n ;  see 
Whitney’s  note  on  AV.  x.  417. 

7  As  an  adj.  in  vii.  3220,  ‘made  of  good 
wood’;  as  a  subst.  in  X.  288  ‘good  beam’. 

8  The  AV.  has  tanud  4  times,  tanvd  5 

19* 


times,  the  IS.  has  tanuva  (I.  1.  io2 
In  RV.  x.  241  ca?7iu  is  once  perhaps  a  con¬ 
tracted  I.;  see  Lanman  409  (top). 

9  The  AV.  has  tanue  6  times,  tanve 
7  times.  The  TS.  has  tanuve . 

10  The  AV.  has  vadhvdi  and  vadhuai  once 
each. 

The  AV.  has  tanuas  10  times,  tanvas 
4  times.  The  TS.  has  ianuvas . 

12  Three  or  four  times  tanue ,  metrically 
lengthened  (the  Facia  has  e);  cp.  Lanman 
411  (bottom).  The  TS.  (iv.3.131)  has  tanuvi. 

13  camu  occurs  6  times,  earned  once. 

14  tank  occurs  once,  tanui  3  times. 

x5  This  should  doubtless  be  read  tanvam : 
see  Lanman  412. 

16  This  form  in  TS.  iv.  2.  63  is  a  variant 
,  for  the  G.  sing,  tanvds  of  RV.  X.  97 io. 


292  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

Du.  N.  A.  f  l.  camua ,  tanua.  —  D.  f.  hanitbhyam2  (TS.  vn.  3.  16').  — 

L.  camuos 3 4. 

PL  N.  f.  1.  agnivas;  camiias ,  j at  is  as  (A  V.),  tanuas prdakuas  (AV.), 
prajamias  (AV.).  —  2.  amho-yuvas ,  apasyuvas,  avasyuvas ,  ayuvas ,  udanyuvas , 
caranyiivas (AV.),  didhisuas,  panasyivas,  parayisnuas ,  prtandyivas ,  prsanayuvas, 
bib  hat suv  as,  makhasyuvas ,  mandr ayuvas,  mahlyuvas ,  mumuksuas,  sanayuvas , 
sudayitnuas.  —  yuva-yds  (iv.  418),  agreeing  with  N.  f.  dh'yas ,  appears  to  be 
a  contracted  form  for  -_y/7-z7Y5. 

A.  f.  1.  agnivas ;  tanuas °,  nabhanuas ,  vadhiias1 7.  —  2.  abhi-dipsuas , 
dravitnuas ;  vi-panyiivas ,  simdhyuvas s.  —  I.  m.  maksttbhis 9.  —  f.  tandbhis.  — 
D.  f.  tamibhyas.  —  G.  f.  1.  tanhnam ,  vadhdndm  —  2.  aghdyiinam 10  (AV.), 
babhrfmam ,  bib  hats  undm. 

L.  f.  1.  camfisu ,  tanfcsu .  —  2.  babhrhsu. 

6.  a.  Radical  w-  stems. 

386.  There  are  not  many  u-  stems  derived  from  roots  originally  ending 
in  -u,  as  several  of  these  (about  nine)  have  joined  the  consonant  declension 
by  adding  the  determinative  V11.  Some  eight  stems  are,  however,  formed 
from  roots  in  -z/,  all  of  them  but  one  {dyu-)  being  compounds.  These  are: 
z/y/z-  ‘day’,  abhi-dyu-  ‘heavenly’;  mita-dru- 12  ‘firm-legged’,  raghu-dru -  ‘running 
swiftly’;  d-pra-yu - 13  ‘assiduous’;  ddhri-gu -14  ‘irresistible’,  vanar-gii-  ‘forest¬ 
roaming’;  su-stii-  ‘highly  praised’15.  There  are  besides  some  12  stems  in 
which  u  is  radical  in  a  secondary  sense  as  representing  the  shortened  form 
of  the  vowel  of  three  roots  ending  in  -z7l6.  These  are:  dhi-jii -  ‘inspiring  the 
mind’,  from  ju-  ‘impel’;  su-pu-  ‘clarifying  well’,  from  pn-  ‘purify’;  and  com¬ 
pounds  of  bhu-  ‘be’:  d-pra-bhu-  ‘powerless’,  abhi-bhu-  ‘superior’,  d-bhu-  ‘empty’, 
ud-bhu-  ‘persevering’,  pari-bhu-  'surrounding’,  puru-bhu-  ‘appearing  in  many 
places’,  pra-bhu-  ‘powerful’,  mayo-bhu-  ‘delighting’,  vi-bhu-  ‘far-extending’, 
sam-bhu-  ‘beneficent’,  su-bhu-  ‘good’. 

387-  The  inflexion  of  these  words  is  identical  with  that  of  derivative 
u-  stems.  Forms  which  occur  are  the  following: 

Sing.  N.  m.  ddhri-gus ,  d-pra-bhus ,  pra-bhus ,  mayo-bhiis,  mita-drus , 
vanar-gus ,  vi-bhus ,  sam-bhus 17 .  —  n.  d-pra-bhu ,  d-prayu ,  d-bhu ,  ud-bhu  (AV.), 
pra-bhu ,  mayo-bhu ,  raghu-dru ,  vi-bhu ,  sam-bhu ,  su-bhu. 

A.  m.  ddhri-gum ,  abhi-dyu m}  abhi-bhum  (AV.),  d-bhum,  pra-bhum,  vi-bhum l8. 

I.  m.  mayo-bhuna.  —  n.  su-pund  (AV.). 


1  There  are  also  two  m.  transfers  from 
the  declension,  madhuyuva  and  past'd ; 
cp.  Lanman  403  and  413  (mid). 

2  This  is  really  a  transition  form  from 
the  derivative  zz-  declension. 

3  camuos  occurs  14  times,  catnvbs  possibly 
once  (ix.  9621). 

4  Once  tanvas ;  see  Lanman  408  (top). 
The  TS.  has  tanuvas. 

5  Op  ratha-yus  (x,  705)  standing  possibly 
for  -j/zzi'  =  yii-as,  see  Lanman  41 52. 

6  RV.  20  times,  AV.  3  times  ianiias;  RV. 
twice,  AV.  once  tanvas.  The  TS.  has  tanuvas . 
On  Weber’s  conjecture  (IS.  13,  58)  visvas  as 
A.  pi.  of  *visu-  see  Lanman  4165. 

7  The  Mss.  of  the  AV.  once  read  badhvas 
(=  vadhuas). 

8  On  ratha-yus  (vii.  25)  for  -4/L  =  yuas, 

see  Lanman  4163.  The  VS.  (xxi.  25)  has  jatus. 


9  This  is  only  a  metrical  lengthening  of 
the  stem  vowel  (Pada  zz). 

Cp.  Lanman  41S3. 

11  See  above,  stems  in  derivative -/ (307). 

12  From  dru -  ‘run'’.  On  sadru-  see  Whit¬ 
ney’s  note  on  AV.  XV.  71, 

O  From  yu-  ‘separate’,  ‘keep  away’. 

‘going  unrestrained’,  from^zz-  ‘go’  —gd-. 

O  The  words  sabar-dhii-  ‘yielding  nectar’, 
and  d-smrta-dhru-  ‘not  caring  for  enemies’, 
seem  to  be  compounded  with  - duh  (-dhuh) 
and  -druh  (- dhruk :  see  pw.). 

16  They  are  therefore  transfers  from  the 
radical  zz-  declension,  all  the  N.  A.  neuters 
of  which  are  thus  formed. 

17  sabar-dhus  (VS.  V.  26 ;  Kh.  IV.  520)  = 
sabar-dhuk. 

1 8  sabar-dhum  A.  f.  =  sabar-duham. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Vowel  Stems.  293 


D.  m.  adhri-gave ,  abhi-dyave . 

G.  m.  pra-bhos ,  su-stos.  —  L.  n.  ud-bhau  (VS.  xv.  1),  mita-drau. 

V.  m.  adZiri-go ,  pra-bZio  (A A.  iv.  1  =  Kh.  v.  4)1. 

Du.  N.  A.  V.  m.  adhri-gu 2,  ab/ii-dyu  (Kh.  1.  34),  pari-bZiti  (AV.),  puru- 
bZift ,  puru-bhu ,  vanar-gU ,  sam-bhil ,  sam-bhu. 

PI.  N.  m.  dd/iri-gavas 3,  abZii-dyavas ,  dZu-jdvas ,  mita-dravas 4,  vi-bZidvas , 
V.  vi-bZiv-as 5.  —  n.  mayo-bZiii . 

A.  m.  mayo-bZinn ,  vi-bhttn  (VS.  xx.  23). 

I.  m.  dyubZiis ;  d-pra-yubZiis ,  abZii-dyubZiis ,  vanar-gi'ibZiis  (AV.),  vi-bZu'ibhis. 

6.  b.  Derivative  u-  stems. 

Lanmax,  Noun-Inflection  400 — 419.  —  Wiiitney,  Sanskrit  Grammar  335 — 346, 

388.  This  declension  embraces  a  large  number  of  nouns  of  all  genders. 
The  masculine  stems  greatly  preponderate,  being  about  four  times  as  numerous 
as  the  feminine  and  neuter  stems  taken  together;  while  the  neuters  consider¬ 
ably  outnumber  the  feminines.  Thus  the  N.  and  A.  sing,  are  formed  by 
about  430  stems  in  the  m.,  by  68  in  the  n.,  and  by  46  in  the  f.  in  the  RV. 
The  normal  inflexion  which  is  practically  the  same  in  all  genders,  except 
the  N.  A.  sing.  du.  pi.  n.,  is  closely  parallel  to  that  of  the  i-  stems  (380). 
The  stem  takes  Guna  in  the  same  cases;  but  while  in  the  A  declension  only 
one  word  (<?r/-)  ever  uses  the  unmodified  stem,  8  or  9  words  may  do  so 
here.  The  endings,  too,  are  closely  analogous;  but  while  in  the  /-  declension 
the  ending  of  the  L.  sing,  is  always  dropped,  it  is  here  retained  in  several 
words ;  and  while  the  n-  declension  has  affected  only  the  I.  sing,  of  the  i- 
declension,  it  has  here  affected  all  the  other  cases  of  the  singular  which 
take  vowel  endings.  Finally,  the  accentuation  is  exactly  parallel  to  that  of 
of  the  i-  stems. 

a.  Adjectives  in  -u  often  use  this  stem  for  the  feminine  also;  e.  g.  earn-  ‘dear’; 
otherwise  they  form  the  f.  in -?7.  as  tanii-  m„  tanii-  f.  ‘thin’;  or  in  -7,  as  uru-  m.,  urv-i-  f. 
‘broad’,  prthu-  m.,  prthv-i-  f,  ‘broad’,  balm •  m.,  bahv-i-  f.  ‘much’,  mrdu •  (AV.)  m.,  mrdv-i- 
(VS.)  f.  ‘soft’. 

b.  The  8  stems  which  are  analogous  to  art-  in  having  forms  that  attach  the 
normal  endings  to  the  unaltered  stem  are :  pam-,  pitii- ;  kftu -,  kratu mddhu-,  vdsu-,  sisu-, 
sahdsra-bdhu-. 

c.  Oxytone  stems  when  the  final  vowel  is  changed  to  v,  throw  the  accent  on  a 
following  vowel  not  as  Svarita  but  as  Udatta;  they  also  shift  it  to  the -7 tain  of  the  G.  pi. 
even  though  the  stem  vowel  does  not  in  that  case  lose  its  syllabic  value;  e.  g .  pasu-ndm. 

d.  Transition  forms.  1.  There  are  in  the  RV.  only  three  forms  which  follow  the 
analogy  of  the  derivative  T-  declension:  D.  hv-ai,  G.  isv-as,  su-vdsiv-ds,  all  in  late  passages; 
the  AV.  also  has  rajjv-am b,  —  2.  Transitions  to  the  u-  declension  appear  in  the  A. 
a-bhTrvam ,  from  a-bhiru and  in  several  words  formed  with  the  suffix  -yu  which  make 
their  N.  pi.  or  du.  as  -yuvas,  -yitvd.  —  3.  Resides  some  46  I.  forms  m.  and  n.  sing.,  there 
are  several  transitions  to  the  n-  declension  in  the  remaining  cases  of  the  sing.,  all  neuter 
forms  (except  the  m.  G.  edntnas ):  D.  madhune\  Ab.  madhunas ,  sdnunas ;  G.  edrunas , 
ddnunas ,  dr  tin  as,  madhunas,  v  a  sun  as ;  L.  dyuni,  sdnuni;  also  a  few  other  forms  from  the 
later  Sarchitas. 

Inflexion. 

389.  The  N.  sing.  m.  f  always  takes  -s,  the  A.  simply  -///.  The  D.  Ab. 
G.  sing,  sometimes  attach  the  normal  endings  to  the  unmodified  stem;  but 


1  In  the  f.  V.  prthu-sto  ‘broad-tufted’,  the  the  radical  u-  declension  a-prayuvas,  raghu- 
u  of  the  stem  stu-  =  stukd-  ‘tuft’  may  be  radical,  druvas. 

2  a-snirta-dhru  =  asmrta-druh a .  5  See  Lanman  4142. 

3  For  adhri-gavas  owing  to  the  false  ana-  :  6  The  Mss.  in  AV.  vi.  1 2 1 2  read  rajvdm. 

logy  of  gavas  ‘cows’.  the  only  form  of  this  word  which  occurs  in 

4  There  are  also  the  forms  according  to  the  RV.  is  the  N.  sing,  rajjtis . 


294  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

they  generally  gunate  the  stem,  which  then  adds  only  -s  instead  of  -as  in 
the  Ab.  G.  The  L.  sing,  sometimes  gunates  the  stem  and  adds  but 

generally  takes  Vrddhi  without  an  ending.  The  V.  always  gunates  the  stem. 
The  N.  pi.  m.  f.  nearly  always  gunates  the  - u ,  to  which  the  normal  ending 
-as  is  added.  The  A.  pi.  in  the  m.  adds  -n,  in  the  f.  -s,  before  which  the 
vowel  is  lengthened.  The  G.  pi.  always  takes  -ndm,  lengthening  the  pre¬ 
ceding  vowel.  The  N.  A.  V.  du.  m.  f.  have  no  ending,  simply  lengthening  the 
final  vowel.  The  adjective  mddhu-  ‘sweet'  may  be  used  to  illustrate  the 
forms  actually  occurring: 

Sing.  N.  m.  f.  mddhus,  n.  mddhu.  A.  m.  f.  mddhum,  n.  mddhu.  I.  m.  f.  n. 
mddhvci,  m.  n.  mddhuna.  D.  m.  f.  n.  mddhave ,  m.  mddhve.  Ab.  m.  f.  n.  mddhos , 
m.  n.  mddhvas,  n.  mddhimas.  G.  m.  f.  n.  mddhos ,  111.  11.  mddhvas ;  11.  mddhunas. 
L.  m.  f.  n.  mddhau,  111.  n.  mddhavi ,  n.  mddhuni.  V.  m.  f.  madho ,  n.  mddhu. 

Du.  N.  A.  V.  m.  f.  mddhu,  n.  madhvT.  I.  111.  mddhubhyam.  D.  m. 
tnddhubhyam.  Ab.  111.  11.  mddhubhydm.  G.  111.  mddhvos,  n.  mddhunos  (AV.). 
L.  111.  f.  mddhvos. 

PI.  N.  V.  m.  f.  madhavas;  mddhvas.  N.  A.  n.  mddhu,  mddhu ;  mddhuni. 
A.  m.  mddhun;  mddhvas,  f.  mddhus  \  ?nddhvas.  I.  m.  f.  n.  mddhubhis.  D.  m. 
f.  n.  tnddhubhyas.  Ab.  111.  f.  mddhubhyas.  G.  111.  f.  n.  mddhunam.  L.  m.  f.  n. 

mddhus  u. 

The  forms  actually  occurring  are  the  following: 

Sing.  N.  m.  This  form  is  very  frequent,  being  made  from  250  stems 
in  the  RV.  and  occurring  nearly  900  times.  The  commonest  examples  are: 
i?idus  (64)  ‘drop’,  visnus  (34;  ‘Visnu’,  su-krdtus  (32)  ‘skilful’,  vasus  (25)  ‘good’, 
kdiis  (23)  ‘brightness’,  rbhiis  ( 21)  ‘deft’,  vayus  (20) ‘wind’,  visvdyus  (18)  ‘kind 
to  all  men’,  sunus  (18)  ‘son’,  sindhus  (17)  ‘river’,  cdrus  (16)  ‘dear’,  asmayus 
(16)  ‘desiring  us’,  devayus  (15)  ‘devoted  to  the  gods’,  ?na?ius  (15)  ‘man’.  — 
isus  ‘arrow’,  otherwise  f.,  is  once  (vm.  66 7)  111. 

a.  The  form  yus  ‘moving’  is  perhaps  a  corruption  in  vm.  I815,  where  Bloomfield 
(JAOS.  1906,  p.  72)  would  read,  for  ririslsta  yur,  ririsTsidyur  -----  ririsisia  ayur. 

b.  In  vii.  863  didfksupo  perhaps  stands  for  didfksus 4- upo ;  but  the  Pada  reads 
didfksu,  and  desiderative  adjectives  otherwise  accent  the  final  syllable;  cp.  Lanman  405 
(bottom). 

f.  This  form  is  made  from  31  stems  and  occurs  73  times  in  the  RV. 
The  commonest  examples  are  dheniis  (22)  ‘cow’,  sindhus  (11),  sdrus  (4) 
‘arrow’,  vasuyiis  (3)  ‘desiring  goods’,  isus  (2),  gdtiis  (2)  ‘course’,  cdrus  (2), 
jlvdtus  (2)  ‘life’1. 

N.  A.  n.  This  form,  which  has  no  ending,  is  made  from  68  stems  and 
occurs  over  400  times  in  the  RV.  The  commonest  examples  are  tnadhu  { 77) 
(‘sweetness’),  vasu  (77)  ‘wealth’,  uni  (51)  ‘wide’,  cdru  (27),  sdnu  (18)  ‘summit’, 
prthii  (15)  ‘broad’,  tri-dhdtu  (13)  ‘threefold’,  puni  (13)  ‘much’.  The  RV. 
once  has  pdsu  and  the  VS.  (xxm.30)  pasii  ‘animal’.  In  other  Samhitas  occur 
tdlu  (VS.)  ‘palate’,  trapu  (AV.  VS.)  ‘tin’. 

a.  The  final  is  metrically  lengthened  in  purii  (12  times),  mithu  (twice)  ‘wrongly’, 
and  uru  (once)2. 

b.  The  metre  seems  to  require  the  forms  ayu  (in.  492),  jaramytyii  (AV.  XIX.  30T), 
jisnii  (AV.  III.  191),  parayisnu  (AV.  VIII.  2*8),  bahii  (AV.  XX.  135 12),  instead  of  the  corre¬ 
sponding  forms  with  -j,  ayics  etc.,  of  the  Samhita  text. 

A.  m.  This  form  is  made  from  179  stems  and  occurs  over  700  times 
in  the  RV.  The  commonest  examples  are:  krdtum  (55)  ‘ability’,  ketum  (34), 
gatum  (33)  ‘course’  and  ‘song’,  indum  (27),  sisum  (26)  ‘child’,  sindhum  (22), 


1  Lanman  406  enumerates  the  stems  which  2  The  Pada  text  here  always  has  puru, 
form  this  N.  mithu ,  uru.  Cp.  RPr.  VII.  9,  19,  31;  IX.  3. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Vowel  Stems. 


295 


asum  (20)  ‘swift’,  urum  (18),  manyum  (18)  ‘wrath’,  vayutn  (18),  a  ins  uni  (17) 
‘shoot’,  siinum  (17),  dasyum  (15)  ‘fiend’,  pasum  (15),  bhdnurn  (15)  ‘lustre’, 
bhujyum  (15)  N.  of  a  man,  sdtrum  (15)  ‘enemy’. 

f.  This  form  is  made  from  15  stems  and  occurs  50  times  in  the  RV. : 
a-dhenum  ‘yielding  no  milk’,  aruna-psum  ‘of  ruddy  appearance’,  /sum,  knimum 
N.  of  a  river,  cdrum,  jdsum  ‘resting-place’,  jigatnum  ‘speeding’,  jlradanum 
‘sprinkling  abundantly’,  j Tv d turn ,  dhdnum  ‘sandbank’,  dhenum ,  bhujyum  ‘viper’, 
vasuyiim,  sdrum ,  sindhum. 

I.  m.  This  case  is  formed  in  two  ways.  1.  Four  stems  in  the  RV.  add 
the  normal  ending  -a,  before  which  the  -u  is  almost  invariably  pronounced 
as  v:  parasv-d  ‘axe’,  pasv-d ;  kratv-d r,  sisv-d.  —  2.  Owing  to  the  influence  of 
the  11-  declension  30  stems  in  the  RV.  add  -nd  instead  of  the  normal  -d: 
amsund ,  aktund  ‘light’,  an-dsund  ‘not  swift’,  a-bandhund  ‘kinless’,  indund , 
isund  (Kh.  iv.  I*)2,  urt'tnd ,  rjuna  ‘straight’,  rtuna  ‘fixed  time’,  ketiina , 
krdtund 3,  cetund  ‘heed’,  jisnund  ‘victorious’,  tri-dhdtuna ,  dh dm c i-ketun d  ‘smoke- 
bannered’,  dhrsnund  ‘bold’,  pasuna ,  bhdnund ,  mdnund ,  manyund,  ripuna 
‘deceiver’,  vagnuna  ‘roar’,  vahatund  ‘bridal  procession’,  vdyund,  vi-bhindund 
‘splitting’,  visnund ,  vrsa-psund  ‘of  strong  appearance’,  sddhuna  ‘straight’,  su- 
cetund  ‘benevolence’,  setuna  (TS.m.  2.  2  J)  ‘bridge’,  stanayitnund  ‘thunder’,  snund 5 
‘summit’. 

f.  This  form  is  made  from  7  stems  in  the  RV.  by  adding  the  normal 
ending  -d,  before  which  the  u  is  pronounced  as  a  vowel  in  five  stems:  cikitvd 
(AV.),  panvd  ‘praise’;  a-dhenvd ,  isvd  (AV.;  Kh.  iv.  5  3  x),  mddhva ,  mehatnvd 
N.  of  a  river,  rdjjvd  (AV.)  ‘rope’,  sdrvd ,  su-sartvd  N.  of  a  river,  hanvd  ‘jaw’. 

a.  Six  oxytone  stems  and  also  niithu -  form  instrumentals  with  interposed  -p-;  they 
are  used  adverbially  with  shift  of  accent  to  the  ending:  anu-sthuya  ‘immediately’,  amuya 
‘thus’,  dsuya  ‘quickly’,  dhrsnuya  'boldly’,  raghuyd  ‘swiftly’,  sddhuyd  ‘rightly’;  mithuya 
‘falsely’. 


n.  This  case  is  made  in  two  ways.  1.  The  normal  ending  -a  is  added 
directly  to  the  stem.  Of  this  formation  there  is  only  one  example:  mddhva 4 
‘honey’.  —  2.  Owing  to  the  influence  of  the  n-  declension  15  stems  in  the 
RV.  add  -nd:  urund ,  krdhund  ‘defective’,  ghrtd-snund  ‘dripping  with  ghee’, 
jardyund  ‘after-birth’,  titaund  ‘sieve’,  trsund  ‘greedy’,  tri-dhdtuna ,  ddnund 
‘fluid’,  druna 5  ‘wood’,  dhrsnund ,  pur  unhid  ‘far  and  wide’,  prthund ,  mddhund , 
vasund ,  sdnund,  svddund  ‘sweet’. 

D.  m.  This  case  is  formed  in  two  ways.  1.  The  ending  -<?  is  added  to 
the  unmodified  stem  in  three  words  in  the  RV. :  krdtve 6,  sisve,  sahdsra-bdhve1 
‘having  a  thousand  arms’.  —  2.  The  ending  <?  is  added  to  the  gunated  final 
vowel  in  over  60  stems  in  the  RV.  The  commonest  examples  are:  mdnave 
(36),  vayave  (23),  visnave  (13),  manydve  (12),  ayave  (10)  ‘living’,  sundve  (10), 
ddsyave  (9),  ripave  (7),  mrtydve  (6)  ‘death’,  purdve  (5)8  ‘man’. 

f.  This  case  is  made  in  the  same  way  as  the  second  form  of  the  m. 
from  only  three  stems  in  the  RV.:  jlvdtave ,  dhendve ,  sdrave. 

n.  This  case  is  formed  in  three  ways.  1.  The  ending  -e  is  added  to  the 


1  Twice  out  of  59  occurrences  pronounced 
kratud ,  The  form  kraivd  occurs  VS.  XXXiir. 
72  and  twice  in  the  Ivhilas  (ill.  162;  v.  63); 
and  in  Kh.  iv.536  kartvci  is  perhaps  meant 
for  kratva. 

2  For  the  isvd  of  AV.  v.  54. 

3  The  form  krdtund  occurs  12  times, 
kratva  59  times,  in  the  RV. 

4  This  form  also  occurs  in  VS.  XX.  56  etc., 

TS.  iv.  1.  81  (twice)  and  Kh.  v.  6+. 


5  The  words  snu-  and  dni-  are  not  accen¬ 
tuated  as  monosyllabic  stems  because  they 
are  the  reduced  form  of  the  dissyllables 
sanu-  and  darn-, 

6  krdtve  also  occurs  VS.  xiv. 8;  xxxvill.  28. 

7  Pronounced  -bdhue. 

8  Lanman  409  enumerates  the  stems  which 
take  this  dative. 


296  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


unmodified  stem  in  one  word:  pdsv-e \  —  2.  The  ending  -e  is  added  to 
the  gunated  stem  in  two  words:  urave,  visvtiyave. 

3.  Owing  to  the  influence  of  the  n-  declension  -ne  is  added  to  the  stem 
in  one  word  in  the  RV.:  madhune.  The  AV.  also  has  kasipune  ‘mat’. 

Ab.  m.  This  case  is  formed  in  two  ways.  1.  The  normal  ending  -as  is 
added  to  the  unmodified  stem  in  one  word  only:  pitv-as  ‘draught’.  — 
2.  The  ending  is  added  to  the  gunated  stem  in  20  words  in  the  RV. : 
amhds  ‘distress’,  adhvaryds  ‘officiating  priest’,  rids,  krsdnos  N.  of  a  divine 
archer,  ksipands  ‘archer’,  gdntos  ‘course’,  tanayiinos  ‘thundering’,  tanyatds 
‘thunder’,  devayds,  ninitsos  ‘wishing  to  blame’,  purds ,  babhrds  (Kh.  v.  1 5  n) 
‘brown’,  many  os,  mrtyds ,  ririksos  ‘wishing  to  injure’,  vanisthds  ‘intestine’,  vciyos , 
visnos ,  satros,  sindhos,  snds. 

f.  This  case  is  made  in  the  same  way  as  the  second  form  of  the  m. 
The  only  two  examples  are:  dhdnos  and  vdstos  ‘dawn’.  There  is  also  one 
transition  form  due  to  the  influence  of  the  T-  declension:  isv-ds. 

n.  This  case  is  made  in  three  ways.  1.  The  ending  -as  is  added  to 
the  unmodified  stem  in  one  word  only:  madhvas.  —  2.  The  ending  -s  is 
added  to  the  gunated  stem:  urds,  drds1  2,  mddhos  (Kh.  iv.  121;  TS.  iv.  4.  121), 
sdnos ,  svadds.  —  3.  Under  the  influence  of  the  n-  declension  -nas  is 
added  to  the  stem:  mddhunas ,  sdnunas . 

G.  m.  This  case  is  made  in  two  ways.  1.  The  ending  -as  is  added  to 
the  unmodified  stem  in  six  words:  pasvds ,  pitvas ;  krdtvas ,  madhvas,  vdsvas , 
sisvas 3.  —  2.  The  prevailing  form  is  made  by  adding  -j-  to  the  gunated  stem, 
and  appears  in  70  words.  The  commonest  examples  are4:  ayds  (221,  visnos 
(14),  sindhos  (13).  aktds  (11),  vayds  (10),  ddsyos  (8),  mdnos  (8),  satros  (5), 
kards  (4)  ‘singer’. 

a.  There  is  a  single  transition  form  according  to  the  n-  declension  cdrunas,  which 
occurs  only  once  (vm.  5 ’4). 


f.  This  case  is  formed  in  one  way  only,  like  the  second  form  of  the 
m.,  from  5  stems:  aktds ,  dhenos,  vdstos ,  sardyos  N.  of  a  river,  sindhos. 

n.  This  case  is  made  like  the  Ab.  n.  1.  madhvas 5,  vdsvas.  —  2.  The 

commonest  form,  made  from  8  stems  in  the  RV. :  urds ,  ksos  ‘food’,  gdggu/os 
(AV.)  ‘bdellium’,  cdros ,  mddhos  {-P  KM .),  vdsos  (  +  AV.),  vdstos{  +  AV.)  ‘dwelling’, 
sadhos,  svadds.  —  3.  cdrunas,  ddnunas,  drunas 6,  mddhunas1 ,  v  a  sun  as 8. 

L.  m.  This  case  is  formed  in  two  ways.  1.  The  normal  ending  -/  is 
added  to  the  gunated  final  vowel  in  7  stems:  anavi  ‘non-Aryan  man’, 
trasadasyavi  N.  of  a  king,  ddsyavi,  druhydvi  N.  of  a  man,  pdvlravi 
N.  of  a  man,  visnavi ,  sundvi.  —  2.  More  usually  the  ending  is 
dropped,  leaving  the  final  stem  vowel  with  Vrddhi  instead  of  Guna. 
This  form  of  the  L.  is  taken  by  19  stems  in  the  RV. :  aktdu  ‘at  night’, 
ay  du,  urdu ,  krdtau ,  cardu  ‘pot’,  druhydu ,  pars  an  N.  of  a  man,  pasdu , 


1  The  stem  pcisu-  occurs  once  in  the  N. 
as  a  neuter,  and  pasve  must  owing  to  the 
accent  be  taken  as  the  D.  of  that  stem; 
the  m.  stem  is  pasti-,  D.  pasdve. 

2  The  form  dips  also  occurs  in  Ivh.iv.5’1. 

3  Possibly  4  other  words  written  with  -os, 
should  be  pronounced  with  - uas :  dhrsrnias 
(x.  22^),  ripuas  (iv .  31  ^), pipruas  (vi.  227),  visnuas 
(vm.  3 110). 

4  Lanman  410  gives  a  list  of  the  stems 
taking  this  form  of  the  genitive. 

5  Pronounced  madhuas  twice  out  of  6? 

occurrences. 


6  There  is  no  certain  evidence  as  to  the 
gender  of  dru-  ‘wood’,  but,  as  it  is  a 
reduced  form  of  dam-  which  is  n.,  it  may  be 
assumed  to  be  n.  There  is  also  the  form 

drds. 

7  madhvas  occurs  67  times,  mddhos  1 3  times, 
madhnnas  9  times  in  the  RV.  The  VS.  has 
all  three  forms  in  independent  passages. 

8  vdsvas  occurs  38  times,  vdsos  8  times, 
vasunas  1 1  times  in  the  RV. 


VI.  Declension.  Nouns.  Vowel  Stems.  297 

pusti-gau  N.  of  a  man,  puta-kratau  N.  of  a  man,  purdu ,  mdnau  and  vianau  T, 
yddau  N.  of  a  man,  srusti-gau  N.  of  a  man,  sindhau,  setau  ‘bond’,  svarau1 2 
‘sacrificial  post’. 

f.  This  case  is  made  in  one  way  only,  like  the  second  form  of  the  m.  The 
only  example  in  the  RV.  is  sindhau ;  the  AV.  has  sarau 3  and  sfitau  ‘birth’. 

n.  This  case  is  formed  in  three  ways.  1.  With  the  ending'  -/  added  to 
the  gunated  stem  only  in  sdnavi ,  which  occurs  9  times.  When  the  adjective 
dry  a-  or  avydya-  ‘made  of  sheep’s  wool’  immediately  follows,  the  L.  of  this 
word  appears  as  sdno.  The  Pada  here  always  has  sdnau,  but  as  the  metre 
requires  a  short  syllable  it  seems  likely  that  the  ending  has  been  dropped 
to  avoid  a  disagreeable  sequence  of  syllables  in  sdnavy  dvye,  but  without 
leaving  the  lengthened  form  of  the  stem  (sdnav)  because  of  the  metre. 
A  parallel  form  appears  to  be  vdsto  in  the  formula  vast  a  usrds  ‘at  break  of 
dawn’,  which  occurs  5  times  in  the  RV. 4 *.  —  2.  As  in  the  m.,  the  usual  form 
is  that  in  -au  formed  from  8  stems:  a-rajjdu  ‘not  consisting  of  ropes’,  urdu , 
ghrsau  ‘lively’,  prthdu ,  mddhau ,  vdsau,  vildu  ‘stronghold’,  sdnau.  —  3.  Accord¬ 
ing  to  the  11-  declension:  dyuni,  ddruni  (AV.),  drum  (Kh.  1.  5  10 ),  sdnuni 5. 

V.  m.  This  case,  which  gonates  the  final  vowel,  is  formed  from  58 
stems.  The  commonest  examples  are:  indo  (144),  vaso  (62),  sata-krato  (47) 
‘having  a  hundred  powers’,  vdyo  (43),  suno  (36),  su-krato  (22I6. 

f.  This  case  which  has  the  same  form  as  the  m.,  is  made  from  6  stems: 
adri-sdno  ‘dwelling  on  mountain  tops’,  dur-hano  ‘ugly-jawed’,  prthu-sto  ‘having 
a  broad  tuft  of  hair’,  sindho ,  su-hlho  ‘having  strong  arms’,  sva-bhano  ‘self- 
luminous’. 

n.  The  V.  n.  seems  to  have  been  identical  in  form  with  the  N.  judging 
by  the  only  example  which  occurs:  guggulu1  (AV.  xix.  3s2). 

Du.  N.  A.  V.  m.  This  form,  which  is  made  by  lengthening  the  final 
vowel,  occurs  from  69  stems.  The  commonest  examples  are:  indra-vayd  (22) 
‘Indra  and  Vayu’,  vdjlnT-vasu  (21)  ‘rich  in  swift  mares’,  bahd  (20)  ‘arms’, 
vfsan-vasu  (18)  ‘possessing  great  wealth’,  Indra-vlsnu  (13)  ‘Indra  and  Visnu’. 
The  TS.  has  also  dgnd-visnu  (1.  8.  221)  ‘O  Agni  and  Visnu’.  There  are 
besides  two  forms  in  which  the  final  vowel  is  shortened8:  jigatnu  (vii.  6  5  T) 
‘speeding’  and  su-hantu  (vii.  194)9  ‘easy  to  slay’. 

f.  This  form  is  made  in  the  same  way  as  the  m.  but  is  much  rarer, 
occurring  from  5  stems  only:  jigatnii,  dhenfi,  sa-bandhu  ‘akin’,  samdna- 
bandhu  ‘having  the  same  kin’,  hdnu. 

n.  This  form  adds  the  regular  ending  -f.  The  only  example  in  the  RV. 
is  urv-i.  The  VS.  has  according  to  the  n-  declension  jdnu-n-i  (xx.  8)  ‘knees’. 

I.  m.  c tmsubhydm  (VS.vir.  1),  an-dtnayitnubhydm  ‘curative’,  nr-bahubhydm 
‘man’s  arms’,  bdhubhyam.  —  f.  hdnubhyam  (VS.  xi.  7  8)IU. 

D.  m.  i?idra-vayi'ibhya?n  (VS.  vii.  8),  mdra-visnubhyam  (VS.  vii.  23), 
bahubhydm. 


1  Accented  mandu  only  when  followed  by 
ad  hi. 

2  A  possible  m.  L.  with  n  would  be  rdjjuni , 
an  emendation  for  rajani  of  the  Mss.  (AV. 
xx.  1333).  For  the  reading  of  AV.xx.i3i12 
vanisthau  the  Mss.  have  vanis'hd  which,  if 
correct,  would  be  a  unique  example  of  -d 
in  the  L.  of  the  u •  declension. 

3  Emendation  for  sarau  of  the  Mss.;  see 
Whitney’s  note  on  AV.  v.  251. 

4  See  Kaegi,  Festgruss  an  Bohtlingk 

48  f. 


5  sanavi  occurs  9  times,  sdno  {dvye)  8 
times,  sdnau  to  times,  sdnuni  once. 

6  The  V.  vibhdvaso  in  Kh.  II.  82  is  wrongly 
accented. 

7  The  Mss.  read  guggulu  or  guggulo.  See 
Whitney’s  note  on  the  passage. 

8  In  both  Samhita  and  Pada  text. 

9  The  RV.  three  times  has  the  curious 
A.  m.  du.  bdhavd  =  bahu  apparently  from 
a  stem  bdhdva-, 

10  hdnubhyam,  a  transition  to  the  u-  stems, 
in  TS.  iv.  1.  io2;  vn.  3.  i6T. 


298  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

Ab.  m.  urubhyam  'thighs’,  bahubhyam.  —  n.  jdnubhyam  (AV.). 

G.  m.  urvos 1 ,  bahvds \  —  n.  according  to  the  n-  declension:  jdnunos  (AY.). 

L.  m.  urvos  (AV.),  bahvos1.  —  f.  hanvos L 

Pl.  N.  V.  m.  This  case  is  formed  in  two  ways.  1.  The  ending  -as  is 
added  to  the  unmodified  stem.  Of  this  formation  the  only  example  is 
mddhv-as  (occurring  4  times).  —  2.  The  ending  -as  is  added  to  the  gunated 
stem,  e.  g.  aktdv-as.  This  form  is  very  frequent,  being  made  from  161 
stems  and  occurring  over  700  times  in  the  RV.  The  commonest  examples 
are:  indavas  (67),  rbhavas  (57),  vdsavas  (46),  suddnavas  (42)  ‘bounteous’, 
shidhavas  (34),  asdvas  (30),  adhvarydvas  (27),  aydvas  (27),  kardvas  (18), 
mita-jhavas  (2)  ‘firm-kneed’. 

f.  This  case  is  formed  in  the  same  two  ways  as  the  m.  1.  Of  this  for¬ 
mation  there  are  only  two  examples:  mddhv-as,  sata-kratv-as .  —  2.  The 
regular  form  is  made  from  1 5  stems  in  the  RV. :  an-asrdvas  ‘tearless’,  a-bhlravas 
‘fearless’,  a-rendvas  ‘ dustless’,  isavas ,  tri-dhdtavas ,  dhendvas,  pdrsavas,  vasuydvas, 
sdravas ,  sanisydvas  ‘desirous’,  sd-manyavas  and  sa-?na?iydvas  ‘unanimous’, 
shidhavas ,  su-ketdvas ,  svd-setavas  ‘forming  one’s  own  bridge’,  hdnavas. 

N.  A.  n.  This  form  is  made  in  two  ways.  1.  Twelve  stems  take  no 
ending,  four  of  them  also  lengthening  the  final  vowel  sometimes.  These 
forms  occur  76  times  altogether  in  the  RV.,  48  times  with  short,  28  times 
with  long  vowel.  The  words  occurring  are:  uru ,  rju ,  cdru ,  tri-dhdtu ,  puru 2. 
bahu ,  mddhu ,  vdsu,  vilu ,  jvi/zz/,  su-dhdtu  ‘manifold’,  su-hdniu ;  urd,  purd 3, 
vdsu*,  Vila.  The  Pada  text  always  has  the  short  vowel.  —  2.  The  more 
usual  form  follows  the  n-  declension,  adding  -ni,  before  which  the  final 
vowel  is  lengthened.  It  is  made  by  14  stems5  and  occurs  127  times  alto¬ 
gether  in  the  RV. :  aghayuni  (Kh.  iv.  5 5)  ‘malicious’,  andni  (AV.)  ‘minute’, 
aldbuni  (AV.)6  ‘gourds’,  dsruni  (AV.)  ‘tears’,  karkandhuni  (VS.  xix.  23)  ‘jujube 
berries’,  car  uni,  tri-dhdtuni ,  ddnuni  ‘fluid’,  ddruni ,  devaydni ,  purdni ,  prthdni , 
bahtini ,  mddhuni ,  yuvaydni  ‘longing  for  you  both’,  vdsuni ,  vdstuni,  smasruni, 
sdnuni. 

A.  m.  This  case  is  made  in  two  ways.  1.  The  normal  ending  is 
added  to  the  unmodified  stem.  The  only  two  examples  of  this  formation 
are  pasv-ds  and  hftv-as1  ‘times’.  —  2.  The  usual  form  is  made  from  43  stems 
with  the  ending  -//,  before  which  the  vowel  is  lengthened.  The  original 
ending  -ns  still  survives  as  -mr  45  times  before  vowels  and  once  as  -ms 
before  ca8.  The  commonest  examples  are  sdtrun  (43),  ddsyun  (27),  sindhun 
(23),  aktdn  (9),  rtdn  (8),  pasdn  (5)9.  From  the  VS.:  akhdn  (xxiv.  26)  ‘moles’, 
nydhkun  (xxiv.  27)  ‘antelopes’,  madgdn  (xxiv.  22)  ‘diver-birds’,  malimlun 
(xi.  78;  TS.)  ‘robbers’,  rurUn  (xxiv.  27)  ‘antelopes’.  From  the  Khilas:  isiin 
(hi.  168). 

f.  This  like  the  m.  is  formed  in  two  ways.  1.  The  only  example  is 
mddhv-as,  which  occurs  twice.  —  2.  The  ending  -r  is  added,  before  which 
the  vowel  is  lengthened.  The  only  two  examples  in  the  RV.  (occurring  5 


1  To  be  pronounced  uruos,  bahuos,  hanuos 

in  the  RV. 

2  puru  seems  to  be  the  only  form  of  this 
kind  in  the  AV.,  where  it  occurs  once  (xix. 
49  V 

3  purti  occurs  24  times,  puru  12  times  (all 
but  once  at  the  end  of  a  Pada). 

4  vasit  occurs  twice,  vdsu  19  times  (12 
times  at  the  end  of  a  Pada), 

5  Half  of  these  also  take  the  form  without 

n  in  the  RV. 


6  The  Mss.  in  AV.  xx.  1341  read  aldbuni. 

7  The  A.  of  a  noun  kflu-  ‘making’,  used 
adverbially:  bhuri  kflvas  (ill.  184)  ‘many 
times’,  sdsvat  kftvas  (in.  541)  ‘innumerable 
times’,  ddsd  kftvas  (AV.  xi.  29)  ‘ten  times’. 

8  On  the  Sandhi  of  these  accusatives  in 
•  un  see  Lanman  415  (bottom)  and  416 
(top). 

9  Lanman  416  enumerates  the  stems  which 
form  this  A. 


VI.  Declension.  Pronouns.  Personal  Pronouns. 


299 


times)  are:  isils  and  dhends.  The  Khila  after  RV.  x.  9  has  the  form  varenya- 
kratus  ‘intelligent’,  but  the  text  of  Kh.  hi.  13  1  reads  varenya-kratus  \ 

I.  m.  This  form  is  frequent,  being  made  from  50  stems  and  occurring 
over  200  times.  The  commonest  examples2  are:  vdsubhis  (24),  aktubhis  (17); 
r tub  his  (15),  asubhis  (12),  pay  ubhis  {12)  ‘protectors’,  indub  his  (1 1),  bhdmibhis(j), 
rbhubhis  (6),  sindhubhis  (5),  snub  his 3  (5). 

f.  This  case,  formed  in  the  same  way  as  the  m.,  is  rare,  only  3  examples 
occurring  in  the  RV.  :  eka-dhenubhis  ‘excellent  cows’,  tri-dhdtubhis ,  dhenubhis. 

n.  a-renubhis  ‘dustless’,  asrubhis  (VS.  xxv.  9),  karkdndhubhis  (VS.  xxi.  32), 
jardiyubhis  (AV.),  bahubhis ,  mddhubhis  (Kh.  1.  1 1 7),  vdsubhis ,  smdsrubhis 
(VS.  xxv.  1;  SV.)  ‘beards’,  su-mdntubhis  ‘benevolent’. 

D.  m.  a-satnibhyas  ‘foeless’,  rtubhyas  (VS.xxn.  28),  rbhubhyas ,  guiigubhyas 
‘descendants  of  Gungu’,  trtsubhyas  ‘the  Trtsus’  (a  tribe),  dasabhlsubhyas , 
‘having  ten  reins’,  ddsyubhyas,  pasiibhyas ,  punibhyas ,  bahubhyas ,  mrgayiibhyas 
(VS.  xvi.  27)  ‘hunters’,  vasubhyas ,  sindhubhyas. 

f.  There  is  no  example  in  the  RV.  The  AV.  has  two :  isubhyas ,  dhenubhyas. 
—  n.  sdnubhyas  (VS.  xxx.  6). 

Ab.  m.  aktubhyas ,  jatrubhyas  ‘cartilages  of  the  breast  bone’,  jighatsubhyas 
(AV.)  ‘seeking  to  devour’,  ddsyubhyas ,  bahubhyas ,  bhrgubhyas  ‘Bhrgus’,  mrtyubhyas 
(AV.),  sd-bandhubhyas  (AV.).  —  f.  dhanubhyas ,  sindhubhyas. 

G.  m.  This  case  is  formed  from  23  stems  in  the  RV.,  12  being  oxy- 
tones  and  11  otherwise  accented:  1.  rtundm ,  rbhundm ,  rsunant  ‘flames’, 
cariindm,  devayunam ,  pasundm  (AV.  VS.  TS.),  pitundm ,  purundm ,  prdsunam 
‘very  swift’,  babhrundm ,  bahundm ,  yltundm  ‘spectres’,  ripundm ,  stay  and  m  (VS.) 
‘thieves’.  —  2.  abhi-kratundm  ‘insolent’,  abhtsundm  ‘reins’,  ahy-arsunam  ‘gliding 
like  a  snake’,  kratundm ,  trtsundm,  ddsyunam  (AV .),  piyarundm  (AV.)  ‘mischie¬ 
vous’,  bhfgundm ,  mdnundfn ,  vasunam,  satrundm,  sd-bandhunam  (AV.),  sindhunam , 
svarunam  ‘sacrificial  posts’.  —  f.  dhenundm ;  sindhunam.  —  n.  mddhunam, 
ydsunam  ‘embraces’,  vasunam. 

L.  m.  amsusu  (VS.  vm.  57),  aktusu ,  dnusu ,  asusu,  druhyusu ,  pasusu 
(AV.),  pur usu ,  bdhusu ,  yddusu ,  vi-bandhusu  (AV.)  ‘kinless’,  visvd-bhanusu 
‘all-illumining’,  satrusu ,  sindhusu.  —  f.  vdstusu ,  sind/msu 4.  —  n.  urusu , 

vdstusu,  smasrusu ,  sdnusu,  snu.su 5  (VS.  TS.). 


II.  Pronouns. 

Benfey,  Vollstandige  Grammatik  773  — 7S0  (p.  333—340)-  —  Whitney,  Sanskrit 
Grammar  490  —  526  (p.  185  — 199).  —  Pischel,  ZDMG.  35,  714 — 716.  —  Delbruck, 
Syntaktische  Forschungen  5,  204 — 221 ;  cp.  Brugmann,  KG.  494 — 525>  an(l  Die  Demon- 
strativa  der  indogermanischen  Sprachen,  Leipzig  1904. 

390.  The  pronouns  occupy  a  special  position  in  declension,  as  being 
derived  from  a  limited  class  of  roots  with  a  demonstrative  sense,  and  as 
exhibiting  several  marked  peculiarities  of  inflexion.  These  peculiarities  are 
in  some  degree  extended  to  a  certain  number  of  adjectives. 

1.  Personal  Pronouns. 

391.  These  are  the  most  peculiar  of  all,  as  being  for  each  person 
derived  from  several  roots  or  combinations  of  roots,  as  being  specially 
anomalous  in  inflexion,  as  not  distinguishing  gender  and,  to  some  extent, 

1  The  m.  A,  sindhun  occurs  ouce  (x.  352)  4  JyArw  (i.  5S3;  is  perhaps  a  transfer  form 

in  the  sense  of  a  f.  for  ay  usu  \  cp.  Lanman  4t9T- 

2  Lanman  416  (bottom)  enumerates  the  j  5  With  dissyllabic  accent  as  usual, 
stems  taking  this  case. 

3  Accentuated  like  a  dissyllable  as  elsewhere. 


300  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

not  even  number.  Some  resemble  neuters  in  form;  a  few  have  no  apparent 
case-ending;  in  two  of  them  the  acc.  pi.  masc.  does  duty  as  fern.  also. 

The  forms  of  the  first  and  second  person1  which  occur  are: 

1.  Sing.  N.  ahdm2.  A.  mam,  ma.  I.  may  a.  D.  mdhyam,  mdhya ,  me1 4. 
Ab.  mad*.  G.  mama,  me.  L.  mdyi 5. 

Du.  N.  vdm  (RV1).6.  A.  nan.  D. 7  nau.  Ab.  avad  (TS.).  G.8  nan. 

PL  N.  vayam.  A.  asmdn9,  nas^.  I.  asmdbhis.  D.  asmabhyam,  asme 
(RV.),  nas.  Ab.  asmad.  G.  asmdkam 10 ,  asmdka 11  (RV1.),  nas.  L.  asme ,  asmdsu 1 2 . 

2.  Sing.  N.  tv  dm I3.  A.  tvdm ,  tva.  I.  tvdya,  tvd  (RV.).  D.  tubhyam , 
tubhya,  te1*.  Ab.  tv  ad.  G.  tdva,  te.  L.  tve'1 5  (RV.  VS.),  ivdyi  (AV.  VS.  TS.). 

Du.  N.  y i4V dm.  A.  yuvdm ,  vdm.  I.  yuvabhyam,  yuvdbhyam.  D.  vdm. 
Ab.  yuvdd  (RV1.).  G.  yuvds  (RV.  and  Kh.i.  121),  yuvdyos  (TS.m. 5.41),  vdm. 

PI.  yuydm l6.  A.  yusmdn  I7,  f .  yusmds  (VS2.),  vasl8.  D.  yusmdbhyam, 
vas.  Ab.  yusmdd.  G.  yusmdkam I0,  yusmdka  (RV2.),  vas.  L.  yusme. 

a.  The  usual  stems  representing  these  personal  pronouns  in  derivation  or  as  first 
member  of  a  compound  are  ma-,  asma -;  tva-,  yuva-,  yusma-;  e.  g.  md-vant-  ‘like  me’, 
asma-dnih-  ‘hating  us’,  tvd-vanl-  ‘like  thee’,  tvd-yata-  ‘presented  by  thee’ ;  yuva-yu-  ‘desiring 
you  two’,  yuva-dhita-  ‘established  by  you  two’,  yuva-datta •  ‘given  by  you  two’;  yusma- 
yant-  ‘desiring  you’ ,  yusmd-uta-  ‘supported  by  you’;  yusmd-datta-  ‘given  by  you’1!?. 

b.  The  forms  ?nad-,  asmad-,  ivad-  occur  a  few  times  as  first  member  of  compounds ; 
thus  mdt-krta-  ‘done  by  me’,  mdt-sakhi-  ‘my  companion’,  mai-tds  (AV.)  ‘from  me’;  asmat- 
sak/ii -  ‘having  us  as  companions’,  asmcid-rdta-  (VS.)  ‘given  by  us’;  tvat-pitr-  (TS.)  ‘having 
thee  as  father’;  ivad-yoni-  (AV.)  ‘derived  from  thee’,  tvdd-v. vdcana-  (TS.)  ‘having  thee  as 
umpire’. 

c.  aham-,  mam-,  mama-;  asme-;  tvdm-  are  also  sometimes  found  as  first  member  of 
compounds;  thus  aham-uttard-  (AV.)  ‘struggle  for  precedence’,  aham-purvd-  ‘eager  to  be 
first’,  aham-yu-  ‘proud’;  mam-pasya-  (AV.)  ‘looking  at  me’;  mama-satya-  ‘dispute  as  to 
ownership’;  asme-hiti -  ‘errand  for  us’;  tvdm-kama-  ‘desiring  thee’,  ivdm-ahuti-  (TS.)  ‘offering 
to  thee’. 

2.  Demonstrative  Pronouns. 

392.  Td-  ‘that’,  which  also  serves  as  the  personal  pronoun  of  the  third 
person,  ‘he’,  ‘she’,  ‘it’,  is  typical,  in  its  inflexion,  of  the  adjectival  pronoun. 
It  has  the  special  peculiarity  of  using  the  stem  sa-  for  the  nom.  masc.  and 
fem.  sing,  and,  in  the  RV.,  for  the  loc.  sing.  masc.  and  neut.  The  general 
peculiarities  of  the  adjectival  pronominal  declension,  as  distinct  from 


1  Cp.  Gaedicke,  Akkusativ  12  —  14. 

2  On  the  formation  of  ahdm  cp.  J.  Schmidt, 
KZ.  36,  405  ff.  —  All  the  nominatives  of  the 
personal  pronouns  are  formed  with  -am  as 
also  the  N.  sing,  of  the  demonstrative  ay- 
am  and  the  reflexive  svaydm, 

3  The  unaccented  forms  of  the  personal 
pronoun  (85)  may  be  accompanied  by 
accented  words  in  agreement  with  them; 
e.  g.  te  jayatah  ‘of  thee  when  conquering’ ; 
vo  vrtdbhyah  ‘for  you  that  were  confined’  ; 
nas  tribhyak  ‘to  us  three’. 

4  mad  is  two  or  three  times  unaccented 
in  the  AV. 

5  Cp.  Bartholomae,  ZDMG.  50,  725. 

6  This  seems  to  be  the  only  nom.  form 
(VI.  5 5 x)  occurring  in  the  Samhitas.  The 
nom.  in  the  SB.  is  avbm ,  in  the  AB.  avam; 
the  acc.  in  the  SB.  is  avam.  The  form  vd?n 
must  be  an  abbreviation  of  avam. 

7  The  AB.  has  avdbhydm. 

8  The  SB.  has  avayos. 

9  asmdn  and  yusmdn  are  new  formatives 


according  to  the  nominal  declension;  cp. 
Brugmanx,  KG.  519,  2,  note. 

i°  asmdkam  and  yusmdkam  are  properly 
acc.  n.  of  the  possessives  asmdka-,  yusmdka-; 
cp.  Brugmann,  KG.  524,  4. 

11  Occurs  only  in  I.  17310. 

12  asmdsu  is  a  new  formation  according  to 

/  o 

the  inst.  asmd-bh  s. 

x3  tvdm  must  often  be  read  as  tuam. 
te,  originally  only  loc.,  is  used  as 
dat.  and  gen.;  similarly  me;  the  loc.  asme 
is  also  used  as  dat. 

15  Cp.  Bartholomae,  loc.  cit. 

10  Originally  *yus-dm  where  y  was  substi¬ 
tuted  for  the  sibilant  owing  to  the  influence 
of  vayam;  cp.  Bartholomae,  op.  cit.  726, 
note;  Brugmann,  KG.  513  and  note  3,  518. 

t-7  yusmdn  is  a  new  formation  according 
to  the  nominal  declension  (like  asmdn). 

18  The  inst.  was  originally  in  all  probability 
yusmd  (like  tvd),  which  later  became yusmabhis 
(like  asmdbhis). 

19  This  compound  maypreserve  the  old  inst. 


VI.  Declension.  Pronouns.  Demonstrative  Pronouns.  301 

the  nominal  a-  declension,  are  that  1.  in  the  singular  they  take  -d  instead  of 
-m  in  the  nom.  and  acc.  neut.;  the  element  -sma-  in  the  dat.,  abl.,  loc.  masc. 
and  neut.;  the  element  -sya-  in  the  dat.,  abl,  gen.,  loc.  fern.;  the  suffix  -in  in 
the  loc.  masc.  and  neut.1;  2.  in  the  plural  they  take  -e  for  -as  in  the  nom. 
masc.;  for  n  in  the  gen.  before  -am. 

1.  The  inflexion  of  td-  accordingly  is  as  follows: 

Sing.  N.  m.  sd-s2,  f.  sd,  n.  ta-d.  A.  m.  ta-m,  f.  td-m,  n.  td-d.  I.  m. 

tenci 3,  f.  tdya.  D.  m.  n.  td-smai ,  f.  td-syai.  Ab.  m.  n.  td-smat,  f.  td-syas. 

G.  m.  n.  td-sya,  f.  td-syas.  L.  td-smin 4,  sd-smin  (RV.),  f.  td-syam. 

Du.  N.  A.  m.  td,  tdu ,  f.  te,  n.  te.  I.  m.  f.  td-bhyam 5.  Ab.  m.  td-bhyam. 
G.  m.  n.  tdyos.  L.  m.  tdyos. 

PI.  N.  m.  te,  f.  tds,  n.  td,  tdni.  A.  m.  tdn,  f.  ids,  n.  td,  tdni.  I.  m.  n. 

te-bhis,  tdis  (AV.;  Kh.  it.  to1),  f.  td-bhis.  D.  m.  11.  te-bhyas ,  f.  td-bhyas. 

G.  m.  te-sam ,  f.  td-sdm.  L.  111.  te'-su,  f.  td-su. 

a.  The  stem  td-  is  frequently  used  in  derivation,  especially  that  of  adverbs;  e.  g. 
td-thd  ‘thus’,  td-vant-  ‘so  great’,  td-ti  (AV.)  ‘so  many’,  and  in  the  compound  ta-dfs -  ‘such’. 

b.  The  neuter  form  tad  is  often  used  as  the  first  member  of  a  compound ;  thus 
tad-anna -  having  that  food’;  tad-apas  ‘accustomed  to  that  work’;  tad-id-artha -  ‘having 
just  that  as  an  object’;  tad-okas-  ‘delighting  in  that’;  tdd-ojas -  ‘possessing  such  power’; 
tad-vasa-  ‘having  a  desire  for  that’;  tad-v'ui-  (AV.)  ‘knowing  that’. 

2.  Two  other  demonstrative  pronouns  are  formed  from  td-.  a.  One  of 
them,  eta-,  formed  by  prefixing  the  pronominal  element  e-°,  means  ‘this  here’. 
It  is  inflected  exactly  like  td-  and  is  of  common  occurrence.  The  forms 
which  occur  are : 

m.  Sing.  m.  N.  esds  or  esd2.  A.  etdm.  I.  etena.  D.  etdsmai  (TS.). 
Ab.  etdsmat  (AV.).  G.  etdsya  (AV.).  —  Du.  N.  etd,  etan.  —  PI.  N.  ete.  A.  etdn. 
I.  etebhis ,  etdis  (AV.).  D.  etebhyas. 

f.  Sing.  N.  esd.  A.  etdm.  I.  e tdya.  L.  etdsyam.  —  Du.  N.  etc.  —  PI. 
N.  etds.  A.  e tds.  I.  etdbhis  (AV.).  L.  etdsu  (AV.). 

n.  Sing.  N.  e tad.  —  PI.  N.  etd  (  +  VS.),  etdni. 

a.  The  stem  used  in  derivation  and  composition  is  eta-\  thus  eta-vant-  ‘so  great’; 
eta-drs-  ‘such’. 

b.  The  other  secondary  demonstrative,  tyd-,  is  derived  from  td-  with 
the  suffix  -yai  and  means  ‘that’.  It  is  common  in  the  RV.,  but  rare  in 
the  later  Samhitas8.  It  is  used  adjectivally,  being  nearly  always  accompanied 
by  its  substantive.  It  is  never  found  at  the  beginning  of  a  sentence  except 
when  followed  by  u ,  cid,  mt,  or  su9. 

The  forms  occurring  are: 

m.  Sing.  N.  sya 10  (  +  VS.).  A.  tydm.  G.  tydsya.  —  Du.  N.  tyd.  —  PI. 
N.  tye.  A.  tydn.  I.  tyebhis. 

f.  Sing.  N.  syd.  A.  tydm.  I.  tyd  (for  tydya).  G.  tydsyas.  —  Du.  N.  tye. 
—  PI.  N.  tyds.  A.  tyds. 

n.  Sing.  N.  tydd  (fl-TS.).  —  PI.  tyd,  tydni. 

393.  The  demonstrative  which  appears  as  aydm  in  in  the  nom.  sing, 
masc.  and  means  ‘this  here’,  employs  the  pronominal  roots  a-  and  (in  various 
modifications)  i-  in  its  inflexion,  the  latter  being  used  in  nearly  all  the 

1  This  suffix  is  once  found  in  the  RV.,  5  In  IX.  662  this  form  (f.)  seems  to  have 
in  the  form  of  -min,  attached  to  yddfs-  ‘having  a  loc.  sense;  see  Lanman  343** 

what  appearance’,  though  the  stem  ends  1  6  According  to  Brugmann,  KG.  495»  G 

in  a  consonant.  note  3,  originally  loc.  sing,  of  a-. 

2  On  the  Sandhi  of  sa-  and  esd-  see  7  Cp.  Brugmann,  KG.  40 1  and  495>  2* 

78.  8  It  occurs  two  or  three  times  also  in  B. 

3  The  Pada  text  always  reads  tena.  9  Cp.  Grassmann,  s.  v.  tyd-. 

4  sasrnin  occurs  nearly  half  as  often  as  10  syd-  and  tyd-  are  often  to  be  read  with 

tasmin  in  the  RV.  Vyuha. 


3°2 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


nom.  and  acc.  forms,  the  former  in  the  other  cases.  The  acc.  sing.  masc. 
and  fern,  starts  from  i-m  \  the  acc.  of  i-,  and  is  followed  by  the  nom.  acc. 
du.  and  pl.;  all  these  forms  having  the  appearance  of  being  made  from  a 
stem  ima-.  The  nom.  sing.  fern,  is  formed  from  i-1  2,  and  the  nom.  acc. 
sing.  neut.  from  i-d  (the  N.  A.  n.  of  i-),  both  with  the  suffix  -am  added. 
The  nom.  sing.  masc.  is  formed  from  a-  with  the  suffix  -am  and  interposing 
y-.  The  remaining  cases  formed  from  a-$  are  inflected  throughout  like  id-. 

The  inflexion  of  this  pronoun  is  accordingly  as  follows: 

Sing.  N.  m.  a-y-am ,  f.  i-y-dm,  n.  i-d-dm.  A.  m.  im-am ,  f.  im-dm,  n. 
i-d-am.  I.  m.  e-nd 3 4,  f.  ayd*.  D.  m.  a-smai5,  f.  a-sydi.  Ab.  m.  a-smdt 6, 
f.  a-syds.  G.  m.  a-sya 1 * ,  f.  a-syas.  L.  m.  a-smin,  f.  a-sydm. 

Du.  N.  A.  m.  imd,  imau,  f.  ime,  n.  ime.  D.  m.  a-bhydm  (RV1.).  Ab.  m. 
a-bhydm.  G.  m.  a-y-os  (RV.)S.  L.  m.  ay -os 9  (RV.). 

PI.  N.  m.  ime \  f.  imas,  n.  ima ,  imani.  A.  m.  imdn ,  f.  imds,  n.  imd , 
imdni.  I.  m.  e-bhis ,  f.  a-bhis I0.  D.  m.  e-bhyds,  f.  a-bhyds.  G.  m.  e-sdm , 
f.  a-sam.  L.  m.  e-su,  f.  a-sii. 

394.  The  corresponding  demonstrative  employed  to  express  remoteness, 
‘that  there’,  ‘yon’,  appears  in  the  nom.  sing.  masc.  fern,  as  asdu.  The  pro¬ 
nominal  root  employed  throughout  its  inflexion  is  a-,  but  always  in  an 
extended  form  only.  The  fundamental  stem  used  in  every  case,  excepting 
the  nom.  sing.,  is  a-m ,  acc.  masc.  of  a-;  this  is  extended  by  the  addition  of 
the  particle  u  to  amu -,  which  has  become  the  stem  in  the  oblique  cases  of 
the  sing,  (with  long  u  in  the  acc.  fem.) ;  in  the  plur.  amd-  is  the  fern,  and  ami- 
the  masc.  stem  (except  the  acc.).  The  nom.  sing,  forms  are  quite  peculiar. 
In  the  masc.  and  fem.  the  pronominal  root  a-  seems  to  be  compounded 
with  sa-  extended  by  the  particle  u\  a-sd-u  and  a-sd-u11;  while  the  neut.  has 
the  pronominal  -d  extended  with  the  suffix  -as:  a-d-ds.  Only  one  dual  form 
has  been  noted,  and  several  plural  case  forms  are  wanting.  The  forms 
found  in  the  Samhitas  are  the  following: 

m.  Sing.  N.  asdu.  A.  amum.  I.  amuna  (VS.).  D.  amu-smai.  Ab.  amu- 
smat  (AV.  TS.).  G.  amu-sya 1 2.  L.  amu-smin  (AV.).  —  PI.  N.  ami  A  A.  amdn 
(AV.).  D.  amibhyas  (AV.).  G.  ami-sam. 

f.  Sing.  N.  asdu.  A.  amttm.  I.  amuy d I4.  D.  amu-syai  (VS.).  G.  amu - 
syas  (AV.).  —  Du.  N.  amd  (AV.).  —  PI.  N.  amds.  A.  amdts. 

n.  Sing.  N.  adds.  —  PI.  N.  amd  (AV.). 

395.  A  defective  unaccented  pronoun  of  the  third  person  meaning  ‘he’, 
‘she’,  and  in  the  AV.  ‘it’,  is  e-na-is.  it  occurs  almost  exclusively  in  the 


1  Cp.  Brugmann,  KG,  495,  10. 

2  From  i-  is  also  formed  the  acc.  i-m  and 
the  neut.  i-d ,  both  used  as  particles. 

3  The  Pada  text  always  reads  end  (the 
unaccented  ena  occurs  twice).  This  and  all 
other  oblique  cases  formed  from  a-,  when 
used  as  nouns  may  lose  their  accent;  see 
85  /2  3;  cp.  Grassmann,  s.  v.  idam.  On  ay  dm 
see  Brugmann,  KG.  498,  3. 

4  This  inst,  is  fairly  frequent  in  the  RV. ; 
instead  of  it  anbyd  occurs  twice  (ix,  6512- 27), 
being  probably  a  later  correction  to  obviate 
the  hiatus.  Otherwise  no  forms  of  ana- 
( anena ,  anayd,  anayos)  occur  in  the  Sam¬ 
hitas.  But  anena  (n.)  occurs  in  Kh.  III.  167. 

5  asmai  and  asya  are  accented  on  the  . 

first  syllable,  the  former  four  or  five  times, 

the  latter  about  ten  times,  when  specially  em¬ 

phatic  at  the  beginning  of  a  Pada  in  the  RV. 


6  The  abl.  according  to  the  nominal  de¬ 
clension,  at,  is  used  as  a  conjunction. 

7  The  form  imdsya  also  occurs  once. 

8  To  be  read  as  ay  os. 

9  Seems  to  be  wrongly  read  as  ay  os  in 
the  Pada  text;  cp.  Lanman  344 3. 

10  dbhis  occurs  ten  times  in  the  RV. ;  it  is 
thrice  accented  dbhis  and  thrice  unaccented: 
cp.  note  5. 

11  Cp.  Brugmann,  KG.  495,  6;  498,  4. 

12  This  is  the  only  instance  of  -sya  being 
added  to  any  but  an  a-  stem. 

*3  This  form  is  Pragrhya  (70).  On  its 
origin  cp.  IF.  18,  64,  note. 

14  Used  adverbially,  with  shifted  accent. 

15  The  same  <?-  (loc.  of  a-)  as  in  e-ka- 
£one’,  e-zd  ‘thus’;  cp.  Brugmann,  KG.  495.  6. 


VI.  Declension.  Interrogative  and  Relative  Pronouns.  303 


acc.  (the  great  majority  of  occurrences  being  masc.  sing.).  Otherwise  it  is 
found  only  twice  in  the  inst.  sing,  and  three  or  four  times  in  the  gen.  dual. 
The  forms  occurring  are:  m.  Sing.  A.  enam .  I.  enena  (AV.).  —  Du.  A.  enau 
(AV.).  G.  e nos  (RV.),  enayos  (AV.).  —  Pi.  A.  enau. 

f.  Sing.  A.  enlmx.  Du.  A.  ene.  PI.  A.  ends.  —  n.  N.  enad (AV.;  Kh.  iv.  65). 

396.  Another  demonstrative  found  nearly  twenty  times  in  the  RV.,  but 
otherwise  occurring  only  once  in  the  AV.,  is  the  unaccented  pronoun  iva-  2 
meaning  ‘one’,  ‘many  a  one’,  generally  repeated,  in  the  sense  of  ‘one  — 
another’.  The  forms  occurring  are:  m.  Sing.  N.  tv  as.  A.  tv  am.  I.  tvena. 
D.  tvasmai.  PI.  N.  tve*.  —  f.  Sing.  N.  tva.  D.  tvasyai.  —  n.  Sing.  N.  tvad. 

a.  The  pronoun  ava. -4  ‘this’  is  found  two  or  three  times  in  the  RV., 

and  only  in  the  gen.  du.  form,  avos  in  combination  with  vam,  meaning  ‘of 

you  two  being  such’  (used  like  sa,  e.  g.  sd  tvdm  ‘thou  as  such’). 

b.  The  pronoun  ama-5  ‘this’  occurs  only  once  in  the  AV.:  dmo  ’ ham 
asmi  (xiv.  271),  ‘this  am  I’. 

3.  Interrogative  Pronoun. 

397.  The  interrogative  ka-,  ‘who?’,  ‘which?’,  ‘what?’  used  both  as  sub¬ 
stantive  and  adjective,  is  quite  regular  in  its  declension,  excepting  the  alter¬ 
native  neuter  form  ki-mb,  which  instead  of  the  pronominal  -d  has  the 
nominal  -m  (never  elsewhere  attached  to  a  stem  in  -i).  The  forms  occur¬ 
ring  are: 

m.  Sing.  N.  has.  A.  kdm.  I.  km  a.  D.  kdsmai.  Ab.  kasmdt  (AV.).  G. 

kdsya.  L.  kdsmin.  —  Du.  kau.  —  PI.  N.  ke.  I.  kebhis.  L.  kesu  (VS.). 

f.  Sing.  N.  kd.  A.  kdm.  I.  kdya.  G.  kdsyls  (AV.  VS.).  —  PI.  N.  kds . 
A.  kds.  L.  kdsu. 

n.  Sing.  N.  A.  ka-d'1  (RV.)  and  ki-m.  —  PI.  N.  A.  kd  and  kdni. 

a.  In  forming  derivatives,  which  are  numerous,  the  stem  of  the  interrogative 
employed  is  not  only  ka -,  but  also  ki-  and  ku-\  e.  g.  ka-ti  ‘how  many?’;  ki-yant-  ‘how 
great?’;  kii-ha  ‘where?’.  The  neuter  form  kim  is  twice  used  in  this  way:  kitn-yu-  ‘desiring 
what?’;  kim-maya -  ‘consisting  of  what?’. 

b.  In  the  formation  of  compounds  kad  occurs  twice  as  first  member :  in  kat-payd- 
‘greatly  swelling’,  and  kad-artha-  ‘having  what  purpose?’,  kim  is  similarly  used  a  few 
times  in  the  later  Samhitas;  thus  kirn-sild-  (VS.  TS.)  ‘being  in  stony  ground’,  kim-kara- 
(AV.)  ‘servant’. 

4.  Relative  Pronoun. 

398-  The  relative  pronoun  ya-  ‘who’,  ‘which’,  ‘what’  is  perfectly  regular 
in  its  declension.  The  forms  occurring  are: 

m.  Sing.  N.  yds8.  —  A.  yarn.  I.  yend 9  and  yena.  D.  ydsmai.  Ab .yasmat10. 
G .  ydsya.  L.  yasmin.  —  Du.  N.  A .  yd,  ydu.  D.  ydb/iyam.  G .  ydyos.  L .  ydyos 
and  yds11  (RV.).  —  PL  N.  ye.  A.  ydn.  I.  yebhis,  ydis  (AV. ;  Kh.  1.  9  2).  D. 
yebhyas.  G.  yesdm.  L.  ycsu. 


1  This  form  occurs  once  (vm,  6T9)  at  the  1 
beginning  of  a  sentence  and  is  then  accented 
as  e nam, 

2  The  unaccented  adverb  tvaddim?i  (MS. 
iv.  22 4 5 6)  ‘sometimes’,  is  derived  from  this 
pronoun. 

3  See  Whitney’s  note  on  AV.  vm.  g9  in 
his  translation. 

4  This  pronoun  also  occurs  in  the  Avesta; 
cp.  Brugmann  495,  10. 

5  From  this  pronoun  are  derived  the  inst. 
and  abl.  adverbs  (with  shifted  accent)  ama 
‘at  home’  and  a'nat  ‘from  near  at  hand’. 

6  The  nom.  masc.  is  preserved  as  a  petri- 


I  fied  form  in  na-kis  and  md-kis  ‘no  one’, 
‘nothing’,  ‘never’, 

7  The  relative  frequency  of  kad  to  kim  in 
the  RV.  is  as  2  to  3. 

8  yds  is  the  commonest  declensional  form 
in  the  RV.,  occurring  more  than  iooo  times. 

9  yend  is  twice  as  common  in  the  RV.  as 
yena\  the  Pada  text,  however,  always  reads 
yena  (cp.  Lanman  332). 

10  The  ablative  according  to  the  nominal 
declension,  yat,  is  used  as  a  conjunction. 

11  yds  for  ydyos,  like  yuvos  for  yuvayos ; 
cp.  BB.  23,  183  ;  ZD  MG.  50,  589. 


304  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


f.  Sing.  N.  yd.  A.  yd?n.  I.  ydyd.  G.  ydsyas.  L.  ydsyam.  —  Du.  N.  ye 
(TS.  AV.).  G.  ydyos.  L.  ydyos.  —  PI.  N.  yds.  A.  yds.  I.  ydbhis.  D.  ydbhyas. 
G.  ydsdm.  L.  ydsu. 

n.  Sing.  N.  A.  ydd.  —  Du.  ye.  —  PL  yd,  ydni. 

a.  The  stem  of  yd-  is  used  in  the  formation  of  many  derivatives;  e.  g. yd-thd  ‘as’ ; 
it  also  appears  as  first  member  of  a  compound  in  ya-dfs -  ‘which  like’.  The  neuter  form 
yad  is  once  used  similarly  in  the  RV. :  ydt-kama -  ‘desiring  what’. 

b.  The  relative  receives  the  indefinite  meaning  of  ‘whoever’1  by  the  addition  of 
has  ca,  kds  cid,  or  cid  alone;  e.  g.  ydd  vo  vaydm  cakrma  kdc  cid  cigah  (ll.  27M)  ‘whatever 
sin  we  have  committed  against  you’;  ydt  kim  ca  duritam  mayi  (i.  2312)  ‘whatever  sin  (there 
is)  in  me’;ye  cid  dhi  tvam  f  say  ah  purva  ulaye  juhurt  (1.4S14)  ‘whatever  early  seers  have 
called  on  thee  for  aid’. 

5.  Indefinite  Pronouns. 


399.  a.  In  the  RV.  there  are  found  the  two  simple  indefinite  pro¬ 
nouns  sama  (unaccented)  ‘any’,  ‘every’  and  simd-  ‘every’,  ‘all’.  The  six 
forms  of  the  former  which  occur  are:  m.  Sing.  A.  samam.  D.  samasmai. 
Ab.  samasmdt.  G.  samasya.  L.  samasmin.  —  PI.  N.  same.  From  simd-  are 
met  with  the  five  forms:  Sing.  V.  sima.  N.  simds.  D.  simdsmai  (neut.). 
Ab.  simdsmai.  —  PI.  simd. 

b.  Compound  indefinite  pronouns  are  formed  by  combining  the 
particles  ca,  cand ,  or  cid  with  the  interrogative;  thus  kds  ca  ‘any’,  ‘any  one’; 
kds  catid  ‘any  one  soever’,  ‘every’;  kds  cid  ‘any’,  ‘some’;  ‘any  one’,  ‘some  one’. 


6.  Reflexive  Pronouns. 

400.  1.  The  reflexive  adjective  is  si/d-  ‘own’,  which  refers  to  the  first 
and  second  as  well  as  the  third  person  of  all  numbers;  e.  g.  ydd,  indragnl, 
madathah  sve  durone  (1.  1087)  ‘when,  O  Indra  and  Agni,  ye  rejoice  in  your 
own  abode’. 

2.  The  substantive  reflexive  is  sva-y-am  ‘self’,  which  is  derived  from 
svd-  with  the  suffix  -am  and  interposing  y  (as  a-y-dm  from  a-).  It  is  properly 
used  as  a  nom.  referring  to  all  three  persons;  e.  g.  svaydm  yajasva  divi ,  deva, 
devdn  (x.  76)  ‘do  thou  thyself,  O  god,  worship  the  gods  in  heaven’.  Some¬ 
times,  however,  the  nominative  nature  of  the  pronoun  is  forgotten  and  svaydm 
is  used  agreeing  in  sense  with  another  case;  e.  g.  vatsdm  .  .  svaydm  gatum 
.  .  icchamanam  (iv.  1 8 lo)  ‘the  calf  himself  seeking  a  way’. 

3.  Other  cases  than  the  nom.  are  regularly  expressed  in  the  RV.  by 
tanu-  ‘body’;  e.  g.  svaydm  gatum  tanva  icchamanam  (iv.  1S10)  ‘himself 
seeking  a  way  for  himself  ( tanve )’;  yajasva  ianvcim  (x.  7°)  ‘worship  thyself’; 
md  has  m  a  hi  prajdya,  ?nd  tanfibhih  (x.  1285)  ‘may  we  suffer  no  harm  with 
(regard  to  our)  offspring  or  ourselves’.  The  reflexive  adjective  and  a 
possessive  gen.  may  be  added;  e.  g.  ague,  yajasva  tanvd?n  tdva  svdm  (vi.  1 1 2) 
‘Agni,  worship  thine  own  self’2. 

4.  There  are  one  or  two  instances  in  the  RV.  of  the  incipient  use  of 
atman-  ‘soul’  in  a  reflexive  sense;  thus  balam  dddhana  atmani  (ix.  1 1 3 1 ) 
‘putting  strength  into  himself’;  ydksmam  sdrvasmad  atmdnas  .  .  vi  vrhami 
(x.  1 63 6)  T  expel  the  disease  from  (thy)  whole  self’.  The  acc.  dtmdnam, 
though  not  met  with  in  the  RV.  as  a  reflexive,  is  frequently  found  so  used 
in  the  later  Samhitas 3 ;  also  in  Kh.  in.  103. 

a.  In  the  formation  of  compounds  sva-  several  times  appears  in  the  substantive 
as  well  as  the  adjective  sense  as  first  member;  e.  g.  sva-yukta -  ‘self-yoked’;  sva-yugvan • 
‘own  companion’,  svaydm  is  also  thus  used  in  a  few  compounds;  thus  svayam-ja -  ‘self- 
born’;  svayam-bhu -  ‘self-existent’. 


1  Cp.  Delbruck,  Syntaktische  Forschungen  2  Cp.  Delbruck  op.  cit.  135,  and  Grass- 

5,  569 — 570.  j  mann,  s.  v.  svd -  and  tanu-, 

3  See  Delbruck.  op.  cit.  155, 


VI.  Declension.  Pronouns.  Pronominals.  305 


7.  Possessive  Pronouns. 

401.  Possessive  pronouns  are  of  rare  occurrence  because  the  genitive 
of  the  personal  pronoun  is  generally  used  to  express  the  sense  which  they 
convey. 

a.  The  possessives  of  the  first  person  are  mamaka-  (RV.)  ‘my’,  mamaka- 
‘my’,  (both  formed  from  the  genitive  of  the  personal  pronoun  mama)1,  and 
asmdka-  ‘our’.  The  commonest  form  of  the  latter  is  the  N.  A.  neut.  asmdkam , 
which  is  used  as  the  gen.  plur.  of  the  personal  pronoun2.  The  other  forms 
occurring  are  asmdkena ,  as??idkdsas ,  and  asmakebhis.  The  VS.  also  has  the 
form  asmdkas  (iv.  24)  ‘our’  from  a  secondary  derivative3. 

b.  The  possessives  of  the  second  person  are  tdvaka-  (RV.)  ‘thy’, 
(from  tava ),  met  with  only  in  the  form  tdvakebhyas;  tvd -4  (RV.)  ‘thy’, 
found  only  in  the  inst.  pi.  tvdbhis  (11.  202);  and  yusmdka-  ‘your’,  the  N.  A. 
neut.  of  which  is  used  as  the  gen.  pi.  of  the  personal  pronoun  of  the  second 
person;  it  otherwise  occurs  only  in  the  RV.  in  the  two  forms  yusmdkena  and 
yusmdkdbhis. 

c.  Besides  being  used  reflexively,  svd-  is  fairly  often  employed  as  a 
simple  possessive,  generally  as  that  of  the  third  person,  ‘his’,  ‘her’,  ‘their’, 
but  also  of  the  second,  ‘thy’,  ‘your’,  and  of  the  first,  ‘my’,  ‘our’.  It  is, 
however,  inflected  like  an  ordinary  adjective,  having  only  two  isolated  forms 
according  to  the  pronominal  declension5.  The  forms  which  occur  are: 

m.  sing.  N.  svds.  A.  svdm.  I.  svena  and  svcnd 6.  D.  svdya.  Ab.  svdt. 
G.  svdsya.  L.  sve  and  svdsmin  (RV.).  —  PI.  N.  svds  (AV.).  A.  svdn  (AV.). 
I.  svcbhis  and  svdis.  D.  svcbhyas  (Kh.  v.  i2).  G.  svdndm  (AV.;  Kh.  11.  104). 
L.  svesu. 

f.  sing.  N.  svd.  A.  svdm.  I.  svaya.  D.  svdyai.  Ab.  svdiyds.  G.  svdsyds 
(RV.).  L.  svdydm.  —  PI.  N.  svds.  A.  svds.  I.  svdbhis.  L.  svdsu. 

n.  sing.  N.  A.  svdm.  —  PI.  A.  svd. 

8.  Pronominal  derivatives  and  compounds. 

402.  A  certain  number  of  derivatives  are  formed  from  the  roots  or 
stems  of  simple  pronouns  by  means  of  suffixes  which  modify  the  pronominal 
sense.  There  are  also  a  few  pronominal  compounds. 

a.  With  the  suffix  - ka ,  conveying  a  diminutive  or  contemptuous 
meaning,  derivatives  are  formed  from  the  pronouns  td-,  yd-,  sd-,  and  asdn ; 
thus  ta  ka-  (RV.)  ‘that  little’,  of  which  the  forms  A.  sing.  m.  takd-m  and  n. 
takd-d  occur;  yd-ka-  ‘who’,  ‘which’,  the  only  forms  met  with  being  N.  m.  yakds, 
f.  yakd  (VS.  xxiii.  22,  23),  and  N.  pi.  m.  yake  (RV.);  sa-kd-  (RV.  AV.)  ‘that 
little’,  of  which  only  N.  sing.  f.  sakd  occurs;  N.  sing.  f.  asakdu  ‘that  little’ 
(VS.  xxiii.  22,  23). 

b.  With  the  comparative  suffix  -tara  derivatives  are  formed  from  i-, 
ka-,  and  yd-;  and  with  the  superlative  suffix  - tama ,  from  the  latter  two; 
thus  i-tara-  ‘other’;  ka-tard-  ‘which  of  two?’;  ya-tard-  ‘who  or  which  of  two’; 
ka-tamd-  ‘who  or  which  of  many?’,  ya-tamd-  ‘who  or  which  of  many’. 

c.  With  -ti  derivatives  with  a  numerical  sense  are  formed  from  ka-,  td-, 
and  yd-;  thus  kd-ti  ‘how  many?’,  td-ti  (AV.)  ‘so  many’;  ya-ti  ‘as  many’.  No 
inflected  forms  of  these  words  occur. 


1  Cp.  Brugmann,  KG.  524,  2. 

2  Op.  cit.  524,  4. 

3  Formed  like  mamaka-  beside  mamaka-. 

4  Used  as  a  possessive  probably  under 

Indo-arische  Philologie.  1.  4. 


the  influence  of  sva-;  cp.  Brugmann, 
op.  cit.  524,  2. 

5  That  is,  svdsyds  and  svasmin. 

6  The  Pada  text  always  reads  svtna. 

20 


3°6 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


d.  With  -yant,  expressing  the  quantitative  meaning  of  ‘much’,  derivatives 
are  formed  from  i-  and  ki- :  i-yant-  ‘so  much’  (n.  N.  sing.  lyat,  pi.  iyanti\ 
f.  D.  sing,  iyatyai );  ki-yant-  ‘how  much?’  (sing.  N.  n.  adv.  kiyat,  D.  m.  kiyate , 
L.  kiyati  for  kiyati ;  N.  f.  kiyati). 

e.  With  -yant  are  formed  derivatives  from  personal  pronouns  with 
the  sense  of  ‘like’,  ‘attached  to’,  and  from  others  in  the  quantitative  sense 
of  ‘great’;  thus  tvd-vant-  ‘like  thee’,  md-vant-  ‘like  me’;  yuvd-vant-  (RV.) 
‘devoted  to  you  two’  (only  D.  yuvdvate) ;  y  us  md-vant-  (RV.)  ‘belonging  to 
you’  (only  L.  pi.  yusmdvatsu );  etdi-vant-  and  td-vant-  ‘so  great’;  yd-va?it-  ‘as 
great’;  i-vant-  ‘so  great’  (sing.  N.  n.  hat,  D.  m.  n.  hate ,  G.  hatas ;  pi.  A.  m. 
hatas );  ki-vant-  ‘how  far?’  (G.  khatas). 

f.  With  -drs,  -drsa,  -drksa  are  formed  the  following  pronominal  com¬ 
pounds:  T-drksa-  (VS.)  and  T-drs-  (VS.  TS.)  ‘such’;  eta-drksa-  (VS.)  and  eta- 
dr  s-  ‘such’  (N.  sing.  n.  eta  dr  k) ;  ki-drs-  Svhat  like?’  (N.  sing.  m.  kidrfi) ; 
td-drs-  ‘such’  (N.  sing.  m.  ta-drk );  ya-drs-  ‘what  like’  (sing.  m.  N.  yddrk ,  L. 
yadrsmin). 

9.  Pronominal  Adjectives. 

403.  Certain  adjectives  derived  from  pronominal  roots  or  allied  to 
pronouns  in  sense  conform  in  varying  degrees  to  the  pronominal  declension. 

1.  The  adjectives  which  strictly  adhere  to  the  pronominal  type  of 
inflexion  are  anyd-  ‘other’,  and  (as  far  as  can  be  judged  by  the  few  forms 
occurring  and  by  the  usage  of  the  later  language)  the  derivatives  formed 
with  -tar a  and  -tama  from  kd-  and  yd-.  The  specifically  pronominal  cases 
of  the  latter  which  have  been  met  with  are:  sing.  N.  n.  katardd  (AV.), 
yatardd;  katamdd ,  yatamdd  (AV.);  D.  m.  katamdsmai  (VS.);  G.  f.  katamdsyas 
(AV.);  L.  f.  yatamasyam  (AV.);  PI.  N.  m.  katame  (AV.),  yatame  (AV.).  No 
such  form  of  itara-  has  been  found.  The  forms  of  anyd-  which  occur  are: 

m.  sing.  N.  any  as.  A.  any  dm.  I.  anyena.  D.  anyd  smai  (AV.).  G. 
a?iydsya.  L.  anyds?nin.  —  PI.  N.  anyd.  A.  any  dm.  I.  anyebhis  and  anydis. 
D.  anydbhyas  (AV.).  G.  anyesam .  L.  anydsu. 

f.  sing.  N.  anyd.  A.  anydm.  I.  anydya.  D.  anydsyai.  G.  a?iydsyds. 
L.  anydsyam.  —  Du.  N.  anyd.  —  PI.  N.  anyds.  A.  anyds.  I.  any db his.  G.  anydsdm. 
L.  anydsu. 

n.  sing.  N.  anydd.  —  Du.  I.  anydbhyam  (AV.).  —  PI.  N.  anyd. 

2.  The  three  adjectives  dka-  ‘one’,  visva-  ‘all’,  sdrva-  ‘whole’  are  par¬ 
tially  pronominal,  following  this  declension  except  in  the  nom.  acc.  sing, 
neut.,  which  takes  the  nominal  -m.  Thus  sing.  G.  f.  dkasyas ,  L.  m.  dkasmin  \ 
pi.  N.  m.  dke ,  but  sing.  N.  n.  dkam ;  sing.  D.  visvasmai 2,  Ab.  visvasmdt -, 
L.  visvasmin2 ,  pi.  N.  m.  visve ,  G.  m.  visvesa?n,  f.  visvdsdm ,  but  sing.  N.  n. 
visvanr,  sing.  D.  m.  sarvasmai  (AV.),  f.  sdrvasyai  (AV.;  A  A.  hi.  2  s),  Ab.  m. 
sarvasmat ,  pi.  N.  m.  sdrve ,  G.  sdrvesam  (AV.),  f.  sarvdsdm  (AV.),  but  sing. 
N.  n.  sdrvam. 

3.  More  than  a  dozen  other  adjectives  which  have  pronominal  affinities 
in  form  or  sense  occasionally  show  pronominal  case-forms  (but  never  -d 
in  the  N.  A.  sing.  n.). 

a.  A  few  adjectives  formed  with  the  comparative  and  superlative  suffixes 
-ra  and  -ma  have  such  endings ;  thus  dpara-  ‘lower’  has  dpare  in  the  N. 
pi  m.  beside  dpardsas;  attar  a-  ‘higher’,  ‘later’,  forms  the  L.  sing.  f.  dittarasyd.ni 


1  The  AV.  once  has  eke  as  a  loc.  sing.;  2  The  RV.  has  the  nominal  forms  D. 
see  Whitney’s  note  on  AV.  XIX.  562  in  his  visvaya ,  Ab.  v'isvat ,  L.  visve,  once  each; 
translation.  visva/  (n.)  also  occurs  Kh.  II.  6l8. 


VI.  Declension.  Numerals.  Cardinals. 


(AV.),  N.  pi.  m.  uttare\  Ab.  L.  sing,  uttarasmat  and  uttarasmin  beside 
uttarat  and  uttare\  upara-  dower’  has  up  a  re  beside  u paras  and  uparasas  in 
the  N.  pi.  m.;  avama-  ‘lowest’  has  L.  sing.  f.  avamdsyam ;  uparnd-  ‘highest’ 
has  sing.  L.  f.  upamdsyatn\ ;  paramd-  ‘farthest’  has  sing.  f.  G.  paramdsyas  and 
L.  par am dsy am  (  +  VS.);  madhyamd-  ‘middlemost’  has  sing.  L.f.  tnadhyam asyam . 

b.  A  few  other  adjectives  with  a  comparative  or  pronominal  sense 
have  occasional  pronominal  endings.  Thus  para-  ‘ulterior’  has  sing.D.m .pdrasmai 
(AV.),  Ab.  m.  pdrasmat  ( +  AV.  VS.),  G.  f.  parasyas,  G.  pi.  m.  pdresam\ ;  L.  sing.  m. 
par  as  min  beside  pare ;  and  N.  pi.  m.  pare  beside  pdrasas.  purva -  ‘prior’  has 
sing.  m.  D.  pdrvasmai,  Ab.  purvasmdt ,  G.  pi.  m.  pdrvesam ,  f.  pftrvdsam  ;  and  the 
N.  pi.  m.  pdrve  is  very  common  beside  the  very  rare  pdrvasas.  nema-  ‘other’ 1 
has  m.  L.  sing,  nemasmin ,  N.  pi.  neme ,  but  N.  sing.  n.  nemam  and  G.  pi.  m. 
nemdnam  (unaccented),  svd -  ‘own’,  otherwise  following  the  nominal  declension, 
has  once  sing.  G.f.  sudsy  as  and  once  L.  n.  svdsmin.  samana-  ‘similar’,  ‘common’, 
has  once  Ab.  sing.  n.  samandsmat  beside  sa?na?idt. 

c.  A  few  adjectives  which  are  numerical  in  form  or  meaning  have 
occasional  pronominal  forms;  thus prathama-  ‘first’,  has  G.  sing.  f.  prathamdsyas 
(AV.);  trtiya-  ‘third’  has  L.  sing.  f.  trtiyasyam2  (AV.);  ubhaya-  ‘of  both  kinds’ 
has  m.  pi.  G.  ubhayesam,  and  N.  ubhaye  beside  ubhayasas  and  ubhayds 3; 
kevala -  ‘exclusive’  has  once  N.  pi.  m.  kevale. 


III.  Numerals. 

Benfey,  Vollstandige  Grammatik  764 — 771.  —  Whltney,  Sanskrit  Grammar  475 — 488. 
—  Cp.  Brugmann,  KG.  441 — 451. 

404.  The  series  of  the  numerals  is  based  on  the  decimal  system  of 
reckoning.  The  names  of  the  first  ten  cardinals,  which  are  of  an  adjectival 
character,  form  the  foundation  of  the  rest  either  by  compounding  or  derivation; 
the  ordinals  and  numerical  adverbs  being  further  derived  from  the  correspond¬ 
ing  cardinals. 

A.  Cardinals. 


405.  The  names  of  the  first  ten  cardinals  are:  eka-  ‘one’;  dvd-  ‘two’; 
tri-  ‘three’;  catur-  ‘four’;  pdnca  ‘five’;  sds-  ‘six’;  saptd  ‘seven’;  astd  ‘eight’; 
ndva  ‘nine’;  das  a  ‘ten’. 

a.  The  numbers  intermediate  between  ‘ten’  and  ‘twenty’  are  Dvandva 
compounds  formed  by  prefixing  the  accented  unit  to  ddsa  ‘ten’:  eka-dasa 4 
(‘one  and  ten’)  ‘eleven’;  dvd- das  a 5  ‘twelve’;  trayo-dasa 6  (AV.  VS.  TS.) 
‘thirteen’;  cdtur-dasai  ‘fourteen’;  pdnca-dasa  ‘fifteen’;  s o-das a 8  (VS.  TS.) 
‘sixteen’;  saptd-dasa  (TS.)  ‘seventeen’;  astd-dasa  (TS.)  ‘eighteen’;  ndva-das'a 
(VS.)  ‘nineteen’. 

b.  The  remaining  cardinals  are  substantives.  The  names  of  the  decades 
from  ‘twenty’  to  ‘ninety’  are  either  old  Dvandva  compounds  or  derivatives 
formed  with  the  suffix  -ti.  They  are  vim-sat!-  ‘twenty’;  trim-sat  ‘thirty’; 


1  Cp.  Neisser,  BB.  30,  303. 

2  The  pronominal  endings  are  recognized 
as  alternative  in  the  later  language  as  regards 
dvillya-  and  trtiya- ;  the  Brhaddevata  (vm.  95) 
has  prathamasyam  as  well  as  dvitiy asyam. 

3  ubha-  ‘both’  is  declined  in  the  dual  only : 
N.  A.  m.  ubha  and  ubhau ,  f.  ubhr ,  I.  ubhabhyam 
(once  in  RV.),  G.  ubkayos  (twice  in  RV.). 

4  With  eka-  for  eka-  under  the  influence 
of  dvd  das  a. 


5  Here  the  N.  m.  du.  form  dvd  is  retained 
instead  of  the  stem  form  dva-. 

6  In  this  and  other  numeral  compounds 
the  N.  m.  plural  form  remains  in  every  case  ; 
e.  g.  tan  .  .  .  trdyas-trimsatam  a  vaha  (1.  452) 
‘bring  those  thirty-three’. 

7  As  first  member  of  a  compound  catur • 
is  regularly  accented  catur-, 

8  For  sas-dasa,  see  above  43,  b,  3;  56,  b. 


308  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


catvdrim-sat  ‘forty’;  panca-sat  ‘fifty’;  sas-ti-  ‘sixty’;  sapta-ti-  ‘seventy’;  asl-ti- 
‘eighty’;  nava-ti-  ‘ninety’.  The  last  four  are  abstract  fem.  nouns  derived  from 
the  simple  cardinal  (except  asT-ti-) 1  and  meaning  originally  ‘hexad  etc.  (of 
tens)’.  The  others  are  fem.  compounds,  the  first  member  of  which  is  ‘two’, 

‘three’,  ‘four’,  or  ‘five’,  and  the  second  a  remnant  of  the  IE.  word  for  ‘ten’; 

thus  trim-sat  meant  ‘three  tens’,  vimsati -  was  probably  in  origin  an  old 
dual  of  this  formation  which  ended  in  -T  but  was  transformed  by  the  influence 
of  sasti-  etc.  to  a  singular  fem.  in  -ti 2. 

c.  The  numbers  intermediate  between  these  decades  are  Dvandva 

compounds  formed  by  prefixing  the  accented  unit  to  the  decade;  thus  astd- 

vimsati-  (VS.)  ‘twenty-eight’;  eka-trimsat  (VS.)  ‘thirty-one’;  trdyas-trvnsat  ‘thirty- 
three’;  nava-catvdrimsat  (TS.)  ‘forty-nine’;  ndva-sasti-  (TS.)  ‘sixty-nine’; 
ndvdsiti-  (TS.)  ‘eighty- nine’ ;  pdnca-navati -  (TS.)  ‘ninety-five’;  sdn-navati-  (TS.) 
‘ninety-six’;  astd-navati-  (TS.)  ‘ninety-eight’. 

a.  In  the  TS.,  the  number  preceding  a  decade  is  also  expressed  by  ekan  na  ‘by 
one  not’ = ‘minus  one’;  thus  ekan  na  vimsati-  ‘twenty  less  one’  =  ‘nineteen’;  ekan  na 
catvdrimsat  ‘thirty-nine’;  ekan  na  sas/i-  ‘fifty  nine’;  ekan  nasiii-  ‘seventy-nine’;  ekan  na  satam 
‘a  hundred  less  one’,  ‘ninety-nine’5. 

Intermediate  numbers  may  also  be  expressed  by  adding  together  unit  and 
decade  with  or  without  ea;  e.  g.  nava  ca  navatvn  ca  ‘ninety  and  nine’;  navatim  nava 
‘ninety-nine’. 


d.  The  numbers  expressing  ‘a  hundred’  and  its  multiples  are  sata-  Too’; 
sahdsra-  ‘1000’;  a-yuta-  (AV.  TS.)  ‘10000’;  ni-yuta-  (TS.;  Kh.1v.128)  ‘100000’; 
pra-yuta-  (VS.  TS.)  ‘1000000’;  drbuda-  (TS.;Kh.iv.  128)  ‘10000000’;  nydrbuda- 
(AV.  VS.  TS.)  Too 000 000’ h 


a.  Intermediate  numbers  are  compounded  in  the  same  way  with  sat  a-  as  with  the 
preceding  decades;  e.  g.  eka-satam  ‘a  hundred  and  one’;  caiuh-satam  ‘a  hundred  and  four’; 
trims ac-chatam  ‘a  hundred  and  thirty’. 

[i.  Multiples  may  be  expressed  in  two  ways.  Either  the  larger  number  is  put  in 
the  dual  or  plural  multiplied  by  the  smaller  one  used  adjectivally;  e.  g.  live  sate  (vn.  l822) 
‘two  hundred’;  sastim  sahdsra  (vi.  266)  ‘sixty  thousand’;  trini  said  tri  sahasrani  trim  sac  ca 
nava  ca  (ill.  99)  ‘three  thousand  three  hundred  and  thirty-nine’.  Or  the  multiplier 
may  be  prefixed  to  the  larger  number,  forming  with  it  a  possessive  compound  accented 
on  the  final  syllable;  e.  g.  trayastrimsat  trisatah.  satsahasrah  (AV.)  ‘six  thousand  three 
hundred  and  thirty-three’.  Numbers  below  a  hundred  are  sometimes  used  multiplicatively 
in  these  two  ways;  e.  g.  navattr  nava  (i.  84O)  ‘nine  nineties’ = ‘eight  hundred  and  ten’; 
iri-sajia -5  ‘thrice  seven’;  tri-navd-  (V S.J  ‘having  thrice  nine’. 


Inflexion. 

406.  With  regard  to  their  inflexion,  which  in  many  respects  is  peculiar, 
the  cardinals  may  be  divided  into  three  groups. 

a.  The  first  group  comprises  the  first  four  numerals.  These  are  the 
only  cardinals  which,  like  other  adjectives,  distinguish  the  genders.  They  also 
distinguish  the  numbers  as  far  as  the  sense  admits:  cka-  ‘one’,  while  inflected 
chiefly  in  the  singular,  forms  a  plural  also  in  the  sense  of  ‘some’;  dva- 
‘two’  is  of  course  inflected  in  the  dual  only;  and  tri-  ‘three’  and  catur-  ‘four’ 
in  the  plural  only. 

1.  eka-  is  declined  like  the  second  group  of  pronominal  adjectives6. 
The  only  form  of  the  abl.  sing. 5  met  with  follows  the  nominal  declension, 


1  asi-  is  radically  related  to  asfati,  cp. 
56,  a. 

2  Cp.  Brugmann,  KG.  443,  1. 

3  In  the  TS.  (B.)  are  also  met  with  ekasman 
na  pahcdsat  and  ekasyai  na  pahcdsat  (vii.  4.  75) 
‘forty-nine’:  WHITNEY  477,  b. 

4  In  TS.  vii.  220  these  numerals,  followed 
by  satnudra -,  rnadhya -,  anta-,  pardrdha-,  occur 


in  succession:  we  may  infer  from  the  first 
few  that  each  successive  number  is  equal  to 
ten  times  the  preceding  one;  cp.  Whitney 
475,  c.  The  contents  of  TS.  VII,  2.  11 — 20 
are  almost  entirely  numerals. 

5  Inflected  according  to  the  a-  declension  : 
inst.  iris  apt  a  is, 

6  See  above  403,  2. 


VI.  Declension.  Numerals.  Cardinals.  309 

viz.  ekdt,  used  in  the  compound  numerals  ekan  na  trimsdt  ‘twenty-nine’  etc. 
occurring  in  the  TS.  A  single  dual  case,  from  eka-  in  the  sense  of  ‘a 
certain’,  appears  in  eke  yuvati  (AV.  x.  7 42)  ‘a  certain  pair  of  maidens’.  The 
forms  to  be  found  in  the  Samhitas  are :  m.  sing.  N.  ekas.  A.  ekam.  I.  ekena. 
G.  e'kasya.  L.  ekas  min ;  pi.  N.  eke.  D.  ekebhyas.  —  f.  N.  eka.  A.  ekam. 

l.  e'kayd.  G.  ekasyas;  du.  N.  e'ke  (A. V.);  pi.  N.  ekas  (AV.).  —  n.  N.  sing,  ekam ; 
pi.  eka. 

2.  flVa-  ‘two’,  declined  in  the  dual  only,  is  quite  regular.  The  forms 

occurring  are:  m.  N.  dvd,  dvdu.  I.  dvdbhyam .  G.  dvdyos.  L.  dvdyos.  — 

f.  N.  dve.  I.  dvdbhyam.  —  n.  N.  due.  L.  dvdyos. 

a.  The  dual  form  dvd  is  retained  in  the  first  member  of  the  numeral  compound 

dvd-dasa  ‘twelve’.  Otherwise  dvi-  is  used  as  the  stem  of  dva -  in  derivation,  e.  g.  dvi-dhd 

‘twofold’;  and  as  the  first  member  of  compounds,  e.  g.  dvi-pad-  ‘biped’. 

3.  The  cardinal  tri  -  ‘three’  is,  in  the  masc.  and  neut.,  inflected  like  a 
regular  i-  stem.  The  fern,  stem  is  tisr - :  the  gen.  pi.  is  once  (v.  6g1 2)  written 
tisrndm  (though  the  r  is  actually  long  metrically)1.  The  forms  occurring 
are:  m.  N.  trdyas.  A.  trln.  I.  tribhis.  D.  tribhyds.  G.  trindm.  L.  trisii.  — 
f.  N.  tisrds.  A.  tisrds.  I.  tisfbhis.  D.  tisrbhyas.  G.  tisrndm 2.  L.  tisrsu.  — 
n.  N.  A.  tri ,  trini. 

a.  The  stem  used  in  derivation  and  compounding  is  regularly  tri -,  e.  g.  tri-dha  ‘in 
three  ways’;  tri-pad-  ‘three-footed’.  But  tr-  appears  in  tr-td-  (AV.)  ‘third’,  as  a  N.,  and 
in  the  secondary  ordinal  tr-t-iya-  ‘third’;  and  in  numeral  compounds  trim  appears  in 
trim-sat  ‘thirty’,  and  trdyas  in  trdyo-dasa  ‘thirteen’,  and  trdyas-trirnsat  ‘thirty-three’. 

4.  caiur-  ‘four’  has  the  stem  catvdr-  in  the  strong  forms  of  the  masc. 
and  neut.  In  the  gen.  it  has  the  peculiarity  of  taking  n  before  the  ending 
dm ,  though  the  stem  ends  in  a  consonant3 4.  The  fern,  stem  is  cdtasr -,  which 
is  inflected  like  tisr-  and  shifts  its  accent  like  pdiiea.  The  forms  occurring  are: 

m.  N.  eatvdras.  A.  caturas.  I.  caturbhis.  D.  eaturbhyas  ( AV.).  G.  cat  urn  dm  h  — 
f.  N.  edtasras.  A.  cdtasras.  I.  catasrbhis 5.  —  n.  N.  A.  catvdri. 

a.  The  stem  used  in  derivation  and  compounding  is  regularly  caiur- ;  e.  g.  caiur- 
dhd  ‘in  four  ways’;  cdtur-dasa  ‘fourteen’;  catus-pad- 6  ‘four-footed’.  But  it  is  once 
catvdrim-  (from  the  n.  pi.)  in  the  numeral  compound  catvdrimsal  ‘forty’. 

b.  The  second  group,  comprising  the  cardinals  from  ‘five’  to  ‘nineteen’, 
though  used  adjectivally,  does  not  distinguish  gender,  and  takes  no  ending 
in  the  nom.  and  acc.  These  numerals  also  share  the  same  peculiarities  of 
accentuation7. 

5.  N.  A.  pdinca  ‘five’.  I.  pancdbkis.  D.  pancdbhyas.  L.  paticdsu. 

6.  sds-  ‘six’:  N.  A.  sat.  I.  sadbhis.  D.  sadbhyds 8. 

7.  N.  A.  sapid  ‘seven’.  I.  saptdbkis.  D.  Ab.  saptdbhyas.  G.  saptandm. 

8.  That  the  cardinal  for  ‘eight’  was  an  old  dual9  is  indicated  by  its 
forms  in  the  N.  A.  astd,  astdu  and  in  the  only  other  cases  occurring,  I.  astd- 
b/tis,  D.  asta-bhyas  (TS.).  According  to  the  analysis  of  the  Pada  text  in  a 
late  passage  of  the  RV.  (x.  27^),  astbttardttdt  contains  the  N.  astd,  doubt¬ 
less  because  it  is  preceded  by  sapid  and  followed  by  ndva  and  dasa. 

a.  The  stem  used  in  compounding  has  mostly  the  dual  form  astd ;  thus  astd-pad- 
‘eight-footed’,  astd-vandhura-  ‘eight-seated’10;  astd-dasa-  (TS.)  ‘eighteen’,  astd-vimsd-  (AV.) 


1  See  above  12,  13;  cp.  Benfey,  Vedica 
und  Verwandtes  4. 

2  On  the  accentuation,  see  94,  2  a. 

3  It  shares  this  peculiarity  with  san-ndni, 
the  gen.  plur.  of  sas-,  which  however  does 
not  seem  to  occur  in  any  of  the  Samhitas, 

4  With  accent  on  the  final  syllable  like 
the  genitives  of  pdnca  etc, 

5  G.  catasrndm  and  L.  catasfsu  occur  in  B. 


6  On  the  Sandhi,  see  above  7S, 

7  That  is,  of  accenting  -a  before  the  ter¬ 
minations  -bhis,  -bhyas,  -su,  and  the  final 
syllable  in  the  gen.  See  above,  93. 

8  Cp.  note  3. 

9  Cp.  Brugmann,  KG.  441,  8. 

i°  These  are  the  only  two  occurrences  in 
the  RV.,  for  in  asta-karnd-  (x.  62;)  the  first 
member  is  doubtless  a  past  participle. 


3IQ 


I.  AiLGEMEINES  UND  SPRACHE.  4.  VEDIC  GRAMMAR. 


‘twenty-eightfold’,  asici-cakra-  (AV.)  ‘eight-wheeled’,  asla-paksa-  (AV.)  ‘eight-sided’,  astd-yoga- 
(AV.)  ‘yoke  of  eight’.  The  form  as/a-  begins  to  appear  in  the  AV.  in  the  derivative  asla-dha 
‘in  eight  ways’;  and  in  the  compounds  asta-krlvas  ‘eight  times’,  astd-yoni-  ‘having  eight 
wombs’,  asta-vrsd-  ‘eight  times  chief’. 

9.  N.  A.  ndva  ‘nine’.  I.  navdbhis.  D.  navdbhyas  (TS.).  G.  navandm. 

10.  N.  A.  das  a  ‘ten’.  I.  dasdbhis .  D.  dasabhyas  (TS.).  G.  dasandm.  L.  dasdsu . 

11.  N.  A.  ekadasa  ‘eleven’.  D.  ekadasdbhyas  (TS.). 

12.  N.  A.  dvddasa  ‘twelve.  D.  dvadasdbhyas  (TS.). 

13.  N.  A.  trdyodasa  ‘thirteen’.  I.  trayodasdbhis  (TS.).  D.  trayodasdbhyas  (TS.). 

14.  N.  A.  cdturdasa  ‘fourteen’.  D.  caturdasdbhyas  (TS.). 

15.  N.  A.  pdhcadasa  ‘fifteen’.  D.  pahcadasdbhyas  (TS.). 

16.  N.  A.  sddasa  (VS.)  ‘sixteen’.  D.  sodasdbhyas  (TS.). 

17.  18.  The  N.  of  the  cardinals  for  ‘seventeen’  and  ‘eighteen’  does  not 

seem  to  occur  in  Mantras.  D.  saptadasdbhyas  (TS.);  astadasdbhyas  (TS.). 

19.  N.  A.  ndvadasa  (VS.)  ‘nineteen’.  I.  navadas'dbhis  (VS.).  D.  ekan  nd 

vimsatyai  (TS.). 

c.  The  third  group  of  cardinals,  comprising  the  numbers  from  ‘twenty’ 
onwards,  are  substantives  inflected  regularly  according  to  the  declension  of 
the  stem  final;  e.  g.  N.  vimsati-s  ‘twenty’,  A.  vimsati-m ,  I.  vi/nsaty-dr,  N.  trimsdt 
‘thirty’,  A.  trimsdt  am,  I.  trimsdt- a,  L.  trims  dt-i.  The  decades  ‘twenty’  to 
‘ninety’  and  their  compounds  are  fern,  and  nearly  always  inflected  in  the 
sing.;  but  if  the  sense  requires  it  they  may  be  used  in  the  plural;  e.  g.  ndva 
navatih  ‘nine  nineties’;  navdndm  navatmdm  (i.  19113)  ‘of  nine  nineties’. 

a.  said-  ‘a  hundred’  and  sahasra-  ‘a  thousand’  are  neuters,  which  may  be  declined  in 
all  numbers;  e.  g.  rive  late  ‘two  hundred’;  sapid  satdni  ‘seven  hundred’. 


Syntactical  employment  of  the  Cardinals. 

407.  a.  The  numerals  from  ‘one’  to  ‘nineteen’  are  used  adjectivally; 

e.  g.  trdyo  virdh  (nr.  56s)  ‘three  heroes’;  saptdbhih  putrdih  (x. 72°)  ‘with  seven 
sons’;  jdnesu  pahcdsu  (in.  379)  ‘among  the  five  races’.  The  bare  stem  (in  the 
numerals  of  the  second  group)  is,  however,  sometimes  used  in  the  oblique 
cases;  e.  g.  sapid  hdtrbhih  (ill  104)  ‘with  seven  priests’;  ddhi  pdhca  krstisu 
(n.  210)  ‘over  the  five  tribes’. 

a.  Exceptionally  these  numerals  are,  however,  to  be  met  with  governing  a  genitive ; 
e.  g.  data  kaldsandm  (iv.  32J9)  ‘ten  jars’. 

b.  The  third  group  of  numerals  (from  ‘twenty’  upwards),  as  singular 
substantives,  is  treated  in  two  ways. 

1.  They  may  govern  a  genitive;  e.  g.  pancasdtam  dsvandm  (v.  185)  ‘fifty 
horses’;  sastim  dsvandm  (vnr.4629)  ‘sixty  horses’;  satdm  gondm  (1. 1262)  ‘a  hundred 
kine’.  So  also  when  said-  and  sahasra-  are  in  the  du.  or  pi.;  e.  g.  gdivani  satdni 
(vii.  10310)  ‘hundreds  of  kine’;  sahdsrani  gdvam  (vm.  5 1 ‘thousands  of  kine’. 

2.  They  may,  remaining  singular,  agree  in  case  with  the  following  plural, 
being  then  used  adjectivally  (not  appositionally,  because  they  always  precede 
the  substantive  in  this  use);  e.  g.  trimsdd  devdh  (in.  99)  ‘thirty  gods’; 
trims dtam  yjjandni  (1.  123s)  ‘thirty  leagues’;  trimsdtd  hdribhih  (11. 1 8 5)  ‘with 
thirty  bays’;  satena  hdribhih  (11.  186)  ‘with  a  hundred  bays’;  satdm  pur  ah 
(iv.  27 x) ‘a  hundred  forts’;  sahdsrani  hdrayah  (iv.  4b3)  ‘a  thousand  bays’.  The 
following  word,  agreeing  with  sahasra -,  may  be  in  the  singular  as  a  ^collective; 
thus  siinas  cic  chepam  niditam  sahdsrad  ydpad  amuhcah  (v.  27)  ‘Sunahsepa, 
who  was  bound,  thou  didst  release  from  a  thousand  posts’. 

a.  said -  and  sahasra-  have,  in  their  adjectival  use,  the  peculiarity  of  sometimes  either 
being  put  in  the  plural  themselves  or  retaining  the  N.  A.  neuter  sing,  form  (like  pahca) 
when  in  agreement  with  an  inst.pl.;  e.  g.  said  purah  (1.  53s)  ‘a  hundred  forts’;  sahasrany 


VI.  Declension.  Numerals.  Ordinals.  Derivatives.  31  i 


adhirathani  (x.  989)  ‘a  thousand  wagonloads’;  saidm  purbhih  (vi.  4S8)  ‘with  a  hundred 
forts’;  sahasram  rsibhih.  (1.  189s)  ‘with  a  thousand  seers’. 

ft.  The  numeral  pronouns  kdti  ‘how  many?’,  tad  ‘so  many’,  ydti  ‘as  many’,  remain 
uninflected  in  agreement  with  nominatives  and  accusatives  plural,  which  are  the  only 
cases  found  occurring  with  them  in  the  Samhitas  L 


B.  Ordinals. 


408.  The  ordinals,  being  all  adjectives  ending  in  -a,  are  declined 
throughout  in  the  masc.  and  neut.  according  to  the  nominal  ^-declension. 
The  feminine  is  formed  with  -I* 2,  except  in  the  first  four,  which  take  -a,  viz. 
prat  ham  A- 3,  dvittya -,  trtiya-* ,  turiya-  (TS.).  The  ordinals  may  best  be  divided 
into  four  groups  according  to  the  formation  of  their  stems. 

1.  The  ordinals  from  ‘first’  to  ‘tenth’  are  formed  with  various  suffixes, 
viz.  (-t)-fya,  - tha ,  thamd ,  -ma,  the  first  four  in  a  somewhat  irregular  manner. 

a.  pra-thamd-  ‘first’  was  doubtless  formed  from  pra-  with  the  superlative 
suffix  - tama 4,  meaning  ‘foremost’,  the  initial  of  the  suffix  being  probably 
changed  under  the  influence  of  other  ordinals  formed  with  -tha  ( sasthd -,  etc.). 

b.  The  next  three  ordinals  are  formed  with  the  suffix  -iya:  dvit-iya- 
‘second’,  trt-fya-  ‘third’,  secondarily  through  dvi-td-  ‘second’,  and  tr-tdi-  ‘third’, 
both  used  as  names;  tur-iya-  ‘fourth’  for  * ktur-iya -  (beside  catur-thd -).  The 
latter  when  used  in  the  fractional  sense  is  accented  turiya-  (A V. )  ‘quarter’5. 

c.  The  ordinal  for  ‘sixth’,  besides  the  alternative  forms  for  ‘fourth’  and 
‘seventh’,  is  formed  with  -tha :  sas-thd-  (AV.  VS.),  catur-thd-  (AV.  VS.), 
saptd-tha-  (RV.). 

d.  The  ordinals  for  ‘fifth’  and  ‘seventh’  to  ‘tenth’  are  formed  with  -ma: 
pahca-ma-  (AV.  VS.),  sapta-md-  (VS.)  beside  saptd-tha -,  asta-md -,  nava-md -, 
dasa-ma-. 


2.  The  stems  of  the  ordinals  for  ‘seventh’  to  ‘nineteenth  are  the 
same  as  those  of  the  cardinals,  except  that  they  are  accented  on  the  final 
syllable.  In  inflexion  they  differ  from  the  cardinals  in  following  the  ordinary 
nominal  a-  declension;  thus  from  ekadasd-  ‘eleventh’  are  formed:  sing.  m.  A. 
ekadasdm ;  pi.  N.  ekadasdsah ,  A.  ekadasfin ,  I.  ekadasdis. 

3.  The  ordinals  for  ‘twentieth’  to  ‘ninetieth’  (including  their  com¬ 
pounds)  seem,  judged  by  some  three  examples  met  with  in  the  Samhitas 
(and  some  four  others  in  B.),  to  have  been  abbreviated  forms  of  the  car¬ 
dinals,  ending  in  -d:  cka-vimsd-  ‘twenty-first’  (B.)  ‘consisting  of  twenty-one’  (VS.), 


catvarimsd -  (RV.)  ‘fortieth’,  asta-catvarimsa- (VS.)  ‘forty-eighth’;  catus-trimsd-  (B.) 
‘thirty-fourth’,  dua-pancasd-  (B.)  ‘fifty-second’,  eka-sastd-  (B.)  ‘sixty-first’. 

4.  The  ordinals  for  ‘hundredth’  and  ‘thousandth’  are  formed  with  the 
superlative  suffix  -tama:  sata-tamd-)  but  sahasra-tama-  has  been  noted  in  B. 
passages  only  (TS.  SB.). 


C.  Numeral  Derivatives. 


409.  A  number  of  derivatives,  chiefly  adverbs,  are  formed  from  the 
cardinals. 

a.  There  are  a  few  multiplicative  adjectives  derived  with  the  suffixes 
-<2,  - ya ,  -taya,  -vaya ;  thus  tray-d-  ‘threefold’  (from  tri-) ;  dva-yd-  ‘twofold’; 
ddsa-taya-  ‘tenfold’;  cdtur-vaya-  ‘fourfold’. 

b.  Multiplicative  adverbs  are  formed  in  three  different  ways.  ‘Once’ 


x  Cp.  Delbruck  50. 

2  Inflected  like  stems  in  derivative  -7:  377. 

3  Both  prathartia-  and  trtiyd-  have  one 

form  each  according  to  the  pronominal  de¬ 

clension  in  the  AV.  (403,  3,  c). 


4  Cp.  the  adverbial  acc.  pra-tamam  (B.) 
‘specially’.  See  Brugmann,  KG.  447,  1. 

5  Similarly  in  B.  passages  calurtha -  quarter’, 
irtiya-  ‘third’. 


31 2 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


is  expressed  by  sa-kft ,  which  originally  seems  to  have  meant  ‘one  making’. 
The  next  three  are  formed  with  the  suffix  -s:  dvl-s  ‘twice’;  trl-s  ‘thrice’,  catits 
(AV.)  ‘four  times’  (for  *catur-s,  cp.  Av.  cathru-s)1.  Others  are  expressed  by  the 
cardinal  and  the  form  kftvas  ‘times’  (probably  =  ‘makings’,  acc.  pi.  of  *kf/u -), 
which,  except  in  asta-kftvas  (AV.)  ‘eight  times’,  is  a  separate  word;  thus 
das  a  kftvas  (AV.)  ‘ten  times’,  bhdri  kftvas  (RV.)  ‘many  times’2. 

c.  Numeral  adverbs  of  manner  are  formed  with  the  suffix  -dha ; 
thus  dvi-dha  ‘in  two  ways  or  parts’;  similarly  tri-dha  and  tre-dhd ,  catur-d/v 7, 
pahca-dhct  (AV.),  sodhd 3,  sapta-dhd  (AV.  VS.  TS.),  asta-dhd  (AV.),  nava-d/ui 
(AV.),  sahasra-dhd. 

VII.  THE  VERB. 

Benfey,  Vollstandige  Grammatik  788 — 920.  —  WHITNEY,  Sanskrit  Grammar  527  — 1073. 
—  Delbruck,  Das  altindische  Verbum,  Halle  1874.  —  Avery,  Contributions  to  the  history 
of  verb-inflection  in  Sanskrit,  JAOS.  X.  (1876),  219—276;  31 1—324.  —  Jul.  v.  Negelein, 
Zur  Sprachgeschichte  des  Veda.  Das  Verbalsystem  des  Atharva-Veda,  Berlin  1898. 

410.  General  characteristics.  —  The  verbal  system  comprises  the 
two  groups  of  forms  which  include,  on  the  one  hand,  the  finite  verb  and, 
on  the  other,  the  nominal  formations  connected  with  the  verb.  The  former 
group  represents  the  forms  made  with  personal  endings,  viz.  indicative,  sub¬ 
junctive,  injunctive,  optative,  and  imperative.  The  latter  group  consists  of 
infinitives  (nouns  of  action)  and  participles  (agent  nouns).  These  differ  from 
ordinary  nouns  inasmuch  as  they  participate  in  the  characteristics  of  the  verb, 
governing  cases,  being  connected  with  particular  tenses,  being  used  in  different 
voices,  and  being  liable  to  tmesis  when  compounded  with  prepositions. 

A.  The  finite  verb  distinguishes  the  primary  conjugation  of  the  root 
and  the  secondary  conjugation  of  derivative  formations,  viz.  desiderative, 
intensive,  causative,  and  denominative.  The  latter  class  does  not,  however, 
differ  in  origin  from  the  former;  but  doubtless  because  (in  contrast  with  the 
present  stems  of  the  primary  conjugation)  it  preserves  the  distinctive  meaning 
of  the  stem,  it  extends  the  form  of  the  present  stem  beyond  the  present 
system  to  the  whole  conjugation. 

The  finite  verb  further  distinguishes  voice,  tense,  mood,  number,  and 
person. 

a.  There  are  two  voices,  active  and  middle,  which  are  distinguished 
throughout  the  inflexion  of  the  verb  (largely  also  in  the  participle,  though  not 
in  the  infinitive).  The  middle  forms  may  be  employed  in  a  passive  sense, 
except  in  the  present  system  where  there  is  a  special  passive  stem  inflected 
with  middle  terminations.  Some  verbs  are  conjugated  in  both  active  and 
middle;  e.  g.  krnu-ti  and  krnu-te  ‘makes’;  others  in  one  voice  only,  e.  g.  ds-ti 
‘is’;  others  partly  in  one  and  partly  in  the  other;  e.  g.  pres,  varta-te  ‘turns’, 
but  perf.  vavdrt-a  ‘has  turned’. 

b.  There  are  five  tenses  in  ordinary  use,  viz.  the  present,  the  imper¬ 
fect,  the  perfect,  the  aorist,  and  the  future.  The  terms  imperfect,  perfect, 
and  aorist  are  here  used  in  a  purely  formal  sense,  that  is,  as  corresponding 
in  formation  to  the  Greek  tenses  bearing  those  names.  No  Vedic  tense  has 
an  imperfect  meaning,  while  the  perfect  sense  is  generally  expressed  by  the 
aorist. 

c.  Beside  the  indicative  there  are  four  mocds,  the  subjunctive,  the 
injunctive,  the  optative,  and  the  imperative,  all  formed  from  the  stem  of  the 

1  Cp.  Brugmann,  KG.  450,  I.  3  For  sas-dha-,  cp.  above  43,  b,  3;  56,  b; 

Cp.  Whitney  1105,  a.  and  p.  307,  note  8. 


2 


VII.  Verb.  Finite  Verb.  Personal  Endings. 


3i3 


present,  the  perfect,  and  the  aorist.  The  imperfect  has  no  moods;  and  the 
only  modal  form  occurring  in  the  future  is  the  unique  subjunctive  karisyds , 
from  kr-  ‘make’. 

d.  The  finite  verb  is,  as  in  other  languages,  used  in  three  persons  in 
all  tenses  and  moods  excepting  the  imperative,  where  the  first  persons  are 
supplied  from  the  subjunctive.  As  in  declension,  the  three  numbers,  singular, 
dual,  and  plural,  are  in  regular  use  throughout. 

B.  The  nominal  verb-forms  comprise: 

a.  Participles.  The  tense-stem  of  the  present,  future,  aorist,  and  perfect 
each  forms  an  active  and  a  middle  participle;  e.  g.  gdcchant -,  gdccha-mana- 
‘going’;  karisydnt-  ‘going  to  do’,  yaksyd-mana-  ‘going  to  sacrifice’;  krdnt -,  krana- 
‘making’;  cakrvdms -,  cakrand-  ‘having  done'.  Besides  these,  there  are  passive 
participles,  present,  perfect,  and  future.  The  present  form  is  made  from  the 
passive  stem  in  -ya;  e.  g.  stUyd-mana-  ‘being  praised’.  The  perfect  passive 
participle,  on  the  other  hand,  is  formed  from  the  root;  e.  g.  kr-td-  ‘made’; 
as  is  also  (with  few  exceptions)  the  future  passive  participle  or  gerundive ; 
e.  g.  vand-ya -  ‘praiseworthy’. 

b.  Gerunds.  These  are  stereotyped  cases  (chiefly  instrumentals)  of  verbal 
nouns,  and  have  the  value  of  indeclinable  active  participles  with  a  prevailingly 
past  sense;  e.  g.  gatvi  and  gatvdya  ‘having  gone’. 

c.  Infinitives.  There  are  about  a  dozen  differently  formed  types  of 
infinitives,  which  are  cases  of  verbal  nouns  made  directly  or  with  a  suffix 
from  the  root,  and  hardly  ever  connected  with  a  tense  stem;  e.  g.  idh-am 
‘to  kindle’;  gdn-tavai  ‘to  go’. 


A.  The  Finite  Verb. 

411.  All  forms  of  the  finite  verb1  may  be  classed  under  four  groups: 
(1)  the  present  system,  comprising  the  present  tense  together  with  its  moods 
and  participles,  and  its  augmented  past  tense,  the  imperfect;  (2)  the  perfect 
system,  comprising  the  perfect  tense  together  with  its  moods  and  participles, 
and  its  augmented  past  tense,  the  pluperfect2  (494);  (3)  the  aorist  system, 
comprising  the  aorist  tense  together  with  its  moods  and  participles;  (4)  the 
future  system,  comprising  the  future  tense3  together  with  its  participles, 
and  its  augmented  past  form,  the  conditional4. 


Personal  Endings. 

412.  The  characteristic  feature  of  the  finite  verb  is  the  addition  of 
personal  endings5.  These  are  divided  into  active  and  middle;  in  each  of 
which  groups,  again,  primary  and  secondary  forms  are  to  be  distinguished. 
The  primary  forms  appear  throughout  the  present  and  future  indicative,  but 
in  the  middle  only  of  the  perfect  indicative6.  The  secondary  forms  appear 
in  augmented  indicatives,  in  injunctives  (which  are  identical  in  form  with  un¬ 
augmented  past  indicatives),  in  the  imperative  (several  forms  of  which  are 
identical  with  the  injunctive)7,  and  in  the  optative.  The  subjunctive  fluctuates 
between  the  primary  and  the  secondary  endings,  but  the  latter  are  about 


1  Over  18  coo  occurrences  of  verb-forms 
have  been  noted  by  Avery  (221)  in  the 
RV. 

2  This  term  is  used  in  a  purely  formal 
sense,  as  this  rare  tense  has  not  a  pluper¬ 
fect  meaning. 

3  There  is  no  periphrastic  future  in  the 

Samhit&s, 


4  There  is  only  a  single  occurrence  of 
this  formation  in  the  Samhitas. 

5  Cp.  Avery  225  f. ;  Brugmann,  KG. 
771—798. 

6  The  3.  pi.  has  here  the  peculiar  ending 
-re. 

7  Cp.  Brugmann,  KG.  729. 


314  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

twice  as  frequent  as  the  former1.  The  perfect  indicative  active  has  some  of 
the  regular  secondary  endings  (-va,  met ,  -ur\  but  the  rest  are  of  a  peculiar  type. 

Active  endings. 

Primary.  Sing.  1.  -mi2.  2.  -si.  3.  -A*3.  Du.  1.  - vas 4.  2.  -thas$.  3.  -tas5. 
PI.  1.  - masi ,  -mas6.  2.  -///a,  -thatia 7 .  3.  - a?iti 8. 

Secondary.  Sing.  1.  2.  -t9.  3.  -/IO,  Du.  1.  -m.  2.  -/<?;;/.  3.  -A?///. 

PI.  1.  -via.  2.  -/<?,  -tana 1  h  3.  -#//,  -7/r12. 

Middle  endings. 

Primary.  Sing.  1.  2.  13.  3.  -te1*.  Du.  1.  -vahe'lS.  2.  - cithe l6.  3.  -ate'6. 

PI.  1.  - make 17 .  2.  - dhve' 8.  3.  - ante I9. 

Secondary.  Sing.  1.  -f2°.  2.  -thus21.  3.  -ta22.  Du.  1.  -vahi.  2.  - dthdm 23. 
3.  -atam 23.  PI.  1.  -mahi.  2.  -dhvam  24 .  3.  -anta2$. 

a.  Beside  the  perfect  endings  containing  r,  act.  du.  2.  - athur ,  3.  -atur,  pi.  3. 

middle  -?r,  some  verbs  have  endings  with  initial  r  in  the  3.  pi.  mid.  ind.  and  opt.  of 
most  tenses.  These  endings  are  -r<?  and  -rate  in  the  pres,  ind.;  in  the  perf.  ind.; 

-ran  in  the  opt.  pres,  and  the  ind.  imperfect,  pluperfect,  and  aorist;  -ram  in  the  ind.  aor. ; 
-ranta  in  the  pluperfect;  -rata  in  the  opt.  In  the  AV.  -ram  and  -ratam  appear  in  the 
3.  pi.  impv.  mid.  26. 

b.  More  than  twenty  roots  have  forms  in  which  certain  endings  are  added  to  the 
root  with  the  connecting  vowel  /  or  less  commonly  7.  These  roots  are  an-  ‘breathe’, 
am-  ‘injure’,  as-  ‘be’,  Id-  ‘praise’,  Is-  ‘rule’,  cud-  ‘impel’,  jan-  ‘beget’,  tu-  ‘be  strong’,  dhvan- 
‘sound’,  bru-  ‘speak’,  vatu-  ‘vomit’,  vas -  ‘clothe’,  vrs-  ‘rain’,  snath-  ‘pierce’,  sru-  ‘hear’, 


1  Avery  227  (middle). 

2  The  subjunctive  has  -uni  and  instead  of 
it  (13  times)  -a;  cp.  Avery  225  (mid.)  and 
Brugmann,  KG.  772. 

3  The  perf.  ind.  has  the  peculiar  endings 
I.  -a  or  -an,  2.  -tha,  3.  -a  or  -au  in  the 
sing. 

4  This  ending  does  not  occur  in  the  RV.; 
cp.  Delbruck,  Verbum  p.  24. 

5  The  perf.  act.  du.  has  the  peculiar 
endings  2.  - athur ,  3.  -atur. 

6  -masi  occurs  109  times  in  the  RV.,  being 
more  than  5  times  as  frequent  as  -mas  (cp. 
Whitney  548;  Avery  226),  but  in  the  AV. 
•mas  has  become  commoner  than  -masi  in 
the  proportion  of  4  to  3.  On  these  endings 
cp.  Neisser,  BB.  30,  31 1— 315. 

7  In  the  RV.  - tha  occurs  more  than  6 
times  as  often  as  -thana  (Avery  226).  The 
perf.  ind.  has  the  peculiar  ending  -a. 

8  The  an  is  replaced  by  a  (for  the  sonant 
nasal)  in  reduplicated  verbs  and  a  few  others 
treated  as  such;  cp.  Delbruck,  Verbum  p.  51 
(mid). 

9  The  impv.  act.  adds  -dhi,  -hi,  -ana,  -tat 
or  no  ending. 

10  The  3.  impv.  has  -tu  instead  of  -t;  in 
the  RV.  and  TS.  also  -tat;  see  418  b. 

11  In  the  RV.  -ta  occurs  more  than  4 
times  as  often  as  -tana  (560  occurrences  to 
125:  Avery  226). 

12  In  the  ind.  perf.,  the  ind.  j-aorist,  and 
the  optative,  -ur  always  appears,  sometimes 
also  in  the  imperfect;  cp.  Delbruck,  Verbum 
p.  52.  The  impv.  has  - antu ,  which  loses  its  n 
under  the  same  conditions  as  -anti. 


I3  In  the  AV.  -sai  is  the  only  form  of  the 
subjunctive  (Whitney  561,  a). 

H  -tai  occurs  once  in  the  RV.  for  • te  in 
the  subjunctive;  it  is  the  usual  form  in  the 
AV.  In  the  RV.  -e  sometimes  occurs  for 
-te  in  the  ind.  pres.;  it  is  the  only  ending 
in  the  perf.  ind. 

*5  The  subjunctive  has  -vahai. 

16  In  the  a-  conjugation  - cthe  and  -etc; 
aithe  and  -aite  appear  in  the  RV.  as  sub¬ 
junctives  in  several  forms;  -aite  occurs  once 
as  an  indicative;  cp.  WHITNEY  547,  c  and 
561,  a;  Delbruck,  Verbum  106  and  p.  45 
(mid.). 

J7  -mahai  is  the  usual  form  in  the  sub¬ 
junctive  in  the  RV.  and  AV. 

18  In  the  RV.  once  -dhvai  in  the  sub¬ 
junctive. 

x9  In  the  impv.  -antdm  and  -atam. 

20  In  the  optative  (Iy)-a. 

21  In  the  impv.  -sva. 

22  In  the  impv.  -tarn. 

23  In  the  ^-conjugation  -ethdm  and  -e/dm. 

2 1  Once  - dhva  in  the  RV. 

25  In  the  impv.  -antdm ;  both  this  ending 
and  -anla  lose  their  n  under  the  same  con¬ 
ditions  as  -anti.  The  perf.  ind.  has  -re. 

26  See  Delbruck,  Verbum  76—78;  Avery 
226;  Brugmann,  KG.  797;  cp.  also  Bollen- 
sen,  ZDMG.  22,  599;  Kuhn,  KZ.  18,  400; 
Benfey,  Ueber  die  Entstehung  und  Verwen- 
dung  der  im  Sanskrit  mit  r  anlautenden 
Personalendungen,  Abh.  d.  Ges.  d.  Wiss.  zu 
Gottingen  15,  Gottingen  1870;  Windisch, 
Berichte  der  sachsischen  Gesellschaft  d.  Wiss. 
1889,  p.  1  ff. ;  Zimmer,  KZ.  30,  224  ft. 


VII.  Verb.  Finite  Verb.  Augment.  Formation  of  the  Moods.  315 

svas-  ‘breathe’,  sidh-  ‘repel’,  stan-  ‘thunder’,  stambh- 1  ‘prop’.  There  are  also  a  few  3.  plurals 
in  -i-re,  viz.  ruzurc,  pinvire,  srnvire,  sunvire  and  hinvire ,  in  which  the  connecting  vowel  i 
appears1 2. 

The  Augment. 

413.  The  augment3 4  (originally  doubtless  an  independent  temporal  particle) 
consists  of  the  syllable  a-,  which  is  prefixed  to  the  imperfect,  pluperfect,  aorist, 
and  conditional,  giving  to  those  forms  the  signification  of  past  time.  It  in¬ 
variably  bears  the  acute  when  the  verb  is  accented,  like  the  preposition 
immediately  preceding  a  verb  in  a  principal  sentence  (m).  The  augment 
sometimes  appears  lengthened  before  n,  y,  r  or  v,  the  only  examples  being 
d-nat,  from  nas-  ‘attain’;  d-ynnak  (beside  a-yimak ),  d-yukta  (beside  d-yukta ), 
and  d-yuksdtam ,  from  yuj-  ‘join’;  d-rinak  and  d-raik ,  from  ric-  ‘leave’;  d-var, 
from  vr-  ‘cover’;  d-vrni ,  from  vr-  ‘choose’;  d-vrnak ,  from  vrj -  ‘turn’;  a-vidhyat 
(beside  d-vidhyat ),  from  vyadh -  ‘wound’.  The  only  one  of  these  forms  written 
with  a  in  the  Pada  text  is  d-var  (but  once  also  a-var).  There  is  also  one 
passage  (11.  1 7* 9)  in  which  the  metre  seems  to  require  that  yds  td  ’vidhat 
should  be  read  yds  ta  dvidhat h 

a.  With  the  initial  vowels  i,  u,  r  the  augment  irregularly  contracts  to 
the  Vrddhi  vowels  ai,  au ,  dr\  e.  g.  dicc/ias ,  2.  sing,  imperf.  of  is-  ‘wish’; 
dunat ,  3.  sing,  imperf.  of  ud-  ‘wet’;  drta,  3.  sing.  aor.  of  r-  ‘go’.  This  appears 
to  be  a  survival  of  a  prehistoric  contraction  of  a  with  i,  u,  r  to  ai,  du ,  dr, 
which  is  otherwise  almost  invariably  represented  by  e,  0,  ar 5. 

b.  The  augment  is  very  often  dropped.  This  optional  loss  is  to  be 
explained  as  a  survival  from  the  Indo-European  period  when,  being  an  in¬ 
dependent  particle,  the  augment  could  be  dispensed  with  if  the  past  sense 
was  clear  from  the  context.  In  the  RV.  the  number  of  examples  in  which 
the  augment  is  wanting  (about  2000)  is  considerably  more  than  half  that  of 
forms  in  which  it  is  prefixed  (about  3300),  more  than  one  half  of  these  un¬ 
augmented  forms  being  aorists.  In  the  AV.  the  number  of  forms  which  lose 
the  augment  is  less  than  half  that  of  those  which  retain  it,  more  than  four 
fifths  of  these  unaugmented  forms  being  aorists.  In  sense,  the  forms  which 
drop  the  augment  are  either  indicative  or  injunctive.  The  indicatives  have 
for  the  most  part  a  past,  but  often  also  (generally  when  compounded  with 
prefixes)  a  present  meaning.  In  the  RV.,  the  indicative  and  injunctive  un¬ 
augmented  forms  are  about  equal  in  number6;  the  injunctives  being  used  in 
nearly  one-third  of  their  occurrences  with  the  prohibitive  particle  md.  In  the 
AV.  about  nine-tenths  of  the  unaugmented  forms  are  injunctive,  some  four- 
fifths  of  these  being  construed  with  md. 


Formation  of  the  Moods. 

414.  1.  Subjunctive  7.  The  subjunctive  is  a  very  common  mood  in  the 
RV.  and  the  AV.,  occurring  three  or  four  times  as  often  as  the  optative.  It  is 
formed  from  the  present,  the  perfect,  and  the  aorist8.  The  stem  is  formed 
by  adding  a  to  the  indicative  stem.  When  a  strong  and  weak  stem  are 
distinguished,  the  a  is  attached  to  the  former;  while  it  coalesces  to  d  with 
the  final  of  the  stem  in  the  a-  conjugation.  Thus  the  subjunctive  stem  of 


1  Avery  226. 

2  Avery  227  (top). 

3  Cp.  Avery  225;  Brugmann  KG.  626. 

4  Whitney  585,  a. 

5  Cp.  above  19  a,  4.  5. 

6  Whitney  587,  a.  According  to  Avery 

225,  the  unaugmented  forms  of  the  RV. 


have  a  historical  sense  in  488  instances 
only. 

7  See  especially  W.  Neisser,  Zur  vedischen 
Verballehre  (Inaugural-Dissertat.),  Gottingen 
1882  =  BB.  7  (1883),  211 — 241. 

8  Only  a  single  form  of  the  future  sub¬ 
junctive  occurs. 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


316 


the  root  duh-  ‘milk’  is  dbh-a-\  of  yuj-  ‘join’  yunaj-a- ;  but  of  bhu-  ‘be’  bhav-a-. 
Owing  to  the  analogy  of  the  a-  conjugation,  other  verbs  sometimes  add  a 
instead  of  a ,  e.  g.  brav-a-thd  from  bru-  ‘speak’1.  The  subjunctive  is  on  the 
whole  inflected  like  an  indicative,  but  with  fluctuations  between  the  primary 
and  the  secondary  endings,  besides  some  variations  in  the  endings  themselves. 
Thus  in  the  active,  (1)  the  ending  of  the  1.  sing,  is  -dni,  of  which  the  ni  is 
dropped  thirteen  times  in  the  RV.,  e.  g.  doh-ani,  yundj-ani,  bhdv-ani)  bhav-a) 
(2)  the  1.  du.  and  1.  3.  pi.  have  the  secondary  endings  -va,  - ma ,  -a?i  only; 
e.  g.  doh-ava,  dJh-ama,  ddh-au;  bhdv-ava ,  bhdv-ama ,  bhav-an)  (3)  the  2.  3.  sing, 
may  take  the  secondary  endings  as  well  as  the  primary;  e.  g.  doh-a-si  or 
dbh-a-s ;  bhdv-a-ti  or  bhav-a-t 2 3. 

In  the  middle,  (1)  the  only  secondary  ending  is  found  in  the  3.  pi, 
-anta,  which  occurs  beside  and  more  frequently  than  -ante)  (2)  the  ending  -ai, 
which  is  normal  in  the  1.  sing,  (being  =  a-\-d),  has  spread  from  that  person 
to  forms  in  which  e  would  be  normal.  Thus  the  1.  du.  has  -dvahai  only;  in 
the  1.  pi,  -amahai  is  the  usual  form  in  the  RV.  and  AV.  beside  the  rarer 
- dmahc ;  in  the  2.  sing.,  -sai  always  appears  for  -se  in  the  AV.,  though  it  does 
not  occur  in  the  RV.;  in  the  2.  pi,  -dhvai  occurs  once  for  - dhve 3  in  the  RV.; 
in  the  2.  3.  du.,  -aithe  and  -aite  occur  several  times  in  the  RV.,  being  doubtless 
intended  for  subjunctive  modifications4  of  the  indicative  -ethe  and  -ete  of  the 
a-  conjugation;  in  the  3.  sing.,  -tai  occurs  once  in  the  RV.  for  -te,  and  is  the 
usual  form  in  the  AV. 


a.  The  subjunctive  endings  in  combination  with  the  -a  of  the  stem 
are  accordingly  the  following: 

Active  Middle 


sing. 

du. 

pi. 

sing. 

du. 

pi 

I. 

ani,  -a 

-a-va 

-a-ma 

1.  -ai 

-d-vahai 

- a-mahai ,  -a-ma he 

2 . 

- a-si 5,  -as6 * 

-a-thas 

-a-tha 

2.  - a-se ,  -a- sai 

-aithe 

- a-dhve , 

-a- dhvai 

3* 

-a-ti1 ,  -a-t 

-a-tas 

*s. 

1 

Q 

1 

3.  -a-te,  -a-tai 

-aite 

- a-Tite , 

-a-fita. 

415.  Injunctive.  The  unaugmented  forms  of  past  tenses  used  modally, 
are  sometimes  called  improper  subjunctives8,  but  they  are  more  suitably 
termed  injunctives,  as  they  appear  to  have  originally  expressed  an  injunction. 
This  is  borne  out  by  the  fact  that  since  the  IE.  period  the  second  and  third 
persons  imperfect  (except  the  2.  sing,  act.)  had  come  to  be  used  as  regular 
imperatives  expressing  a  command  9.  But  the  unaugmented  forms  of  the 
imperfect  that  could  be  distinguished  from  the  regular  imperative  (as  bhdras, 
bhdrat,  bharan)  and  especially  unaugmented  aorists10,  are  often  used  in  a  sense 
fluctuating  between  that  of  the  subjunctive  (requisition)  and  of  the  optative 
(wish)  “.  Thus  bhdratu  ‘let  him  bear’,  but  bhdrat  ‘may  he  bear’,  bhfit  ‘may 
he  be’. 

416.  Optative.  This  mood,  which  is  comparatively  rare  in  the  Sam- 
hitas,  is  formed  from  the  present,  the  perfect,  and  the  aorist.  The  stem  is 
formed  with  -yd  or  -T,  which,  when  strong  and  weak  stem  are  distinguished, 


1  Cp.  Whitney  560  e;  Brugmann,  KG.  719. 

2  The  subjunctive  in  a  is  in  origin  an  old 
injunctive:  Brugmann,  KG.  716  (end). 

3  In  the  form  madayddhvai  ‘may  ye  rejoice’. 

4  krnvaite ,  however,  appears  once  as  an 
indicative;  see  Delbruck,  Verbum  p.  45. 

5  In  the  aor.  subj.,  - si  occurs  only  once 
in  the  RV. 

6  In  the  a-  conjugation  a  appears  throughout : 

- dsi ,  -as,  etc. 


7  In  the  aor.  subj.,  -ti  occurs  only  six  times 
in  the  RV. 

8  Whitney  563. 

9  The  3.  sing,  and  pi,  e.  g.  bhdrat-u  and 
bharatit-u ,  are  explained  as  injunctives  and  the 
particle  u\  Brugmann,  KG.  729,  1. 

10  The  aorist  injunctives  were  probably 
used  originally  with  the  prohibitive  particle 
ma  only:  Brugmann,  KG.  716,  2  (end). 

Cp.  Whitney  575. 


VII.  Verb.  Formation  of  the  Moods.  317 


are  attached  to  the  latter.  In  the  a-  conjugation  -I  is  added  (coalescing  with 
a  to  e )  throughout;  in  other  verbs  -T  is  added  in  the  middle  only,  and  -yd 
(often  to  be  read  as  -id)  in  the  active  only1. 

a.  Roots  ending  in  a  usually  change  that  vowel  to  e  before  -yd ;  e.  g.  de-yatn 
(perhaps  to  be  explained  as  dd ijani) 2 3  ‘I  would  give’.  But  d  is  sometimes  retained,  as 
in  yd-yam  ‘I  would  go’. 

b.  The  endings  are  the  secondary  ones.  There  are,  however,  some  irregularities 

in  the  I.  sing,  and  the  3.  pi.  1.  The  3.  pi.  mid.  always  takes  -ran  instead  of  -an.  2.  The 
3.  pi.  act.  always  takes  -ur,  before  which  the  a  of  -yd  is  dropped,  while  in  the  a-  con¬ 
jugation  y  is  interposed  between  e  J  and  -ur.  3.  The  I.  sing.  mid.  has  the  peculiar  ending 
a  with  y  interposed  between  it  and  the  modal  -T.  4.  The  I.  sing.  act.  of  the  a-  con¬ 

jugation  attaches  - am  instead  of  -m  (the  termination  -em  being  unknown),  interposing  y 
between  it  and  the  e*  of  the  stem. 

a.  The  endings  of  the  optative  in  combination  with  the  modal  suffix 
are  accordingly  the  following: 


1.  Graded  conjugation. 


sing. 

Active 

du. 

pi. 

sing. 

Middle 

du. 

Pi-  . 

1.  -ydi-m 

-yd-va 

-yd-ma 

1.  -i-y-d 

-T-vdhi 

-i-mdhi 

2.  -yds 

-yd-t am 

-yd-ta 

2.  -T-thds 

-T-y-dthdm 

-T-dhvam 

3.  -yd-t 

-yd-tdm 

-y-ur 

3.  -i-td 

-T-y-dtam 

-l-r-dn 

1.  -e-y-am 

-e-va 

2. 

-e-ma 

a-  conjugation. 

1.  -e-y-a 

-e-vahi 

-e-mahi 

2.  -e-s 

-e-tam 

-e-ta 

2.  -e-t has 

-e-y-atham 

-e-dhvam 

3.  -e-t 

-e-tdm 

-e-y-ur 

3.  -e-ta 

-e-y-dtam 

-e-r-an. 

417. 

Precative. 

This  is  a 

form  of  the  optative  which  adds 

an  -s  after 

the  modal  suffix  in  several  persons,  and  is  made  almost  exclusively  from 
aorist  stems.  In  the  RV.  there  occur  a  few  forms  of  the  precative  in  three 
persons  (1.  3.  sing.,  1.  pi.)  active,  and  in  two  persons  (2.  3.  sing.)  middle; 
thus  active:  1.  sing,  bhu-ya-s-am  (aor.)  ‘may  I  be’;  3.  sing,  as-yds  (for 
*as-yj-s-t)  ‘may  he  attain’  (aor.);  babhu-yas  ‘may  he  be’  (perf.);  i.pl.  kri-yd-s-ma 
‘may  we  do’  (aor.);  middle:  2.  sing.  mam-s-T-s-t/ids  (aor.)  and  3.  sing.  mam-s-T-s-ta 
(aor.),  from  man-  ‘think’. 

418.  Imperative.  This  mood  has  no  mood-sign  of  its  own,  as  all  the 
first  persons  are  subjunctives  and  the  second  and  third  persons  are  mostly 
old  injunctives.  The  purely  injunctive  forms  are  the  2.  3.  du.  and  2.  pi.  active 
and  middle,  ending  in  - tarn ,  -tdm,  -ta ;  - dthdm ,  - dtdm ,  -dhvam.  The  3.  sing, 
pi.  act.  in  - tu 4 *  and  -antus,  and  the  3.  pi.  mid.  in  -antd?n 5  may  be  modi¬ 
fications  of  injunctives.  The  imperative  has,  however,  distinctive  forms  of  its 
own  in  the  2.  sing,  act.:  - dhi ,  -hi,  -ana,  -tat)  and  in  the  middle:  2.  sing,  -sva 
and  3.  sing,  -tdm  or  -dm. 

a.  The  2.  sing.  act.  in  the  ^-conjugation  has  no  ending,  employing  the 
bare  stem  (like  the  vocative  singular  of  the  a-  declension);  e.  g.  bhdra 
‘support’;  nesa  ‘lead’  (aor.  of  | f ni-).  In  the  graded  conjugation,  when  a 
strong  and  weak  stem  are  distinguished,  the  ending  is  attached  to  the  latter: 
-dhi  is  added  after  both  consonants  and  vowels,  -hi  (the  later  form  of  -dhi) 
after  vowels  only;  thus  ad-dhi  ‘eat’;  sru-dhi  and  srnu-dhl  ‘hear’;  i-ht  ‘go’, 
jdgr-hl  ‘awake’,  pipr-hi  ‘save’,  srnu-hi  ‘hear’.  In  the  nd-  class,  -hi  is  added 


1  On  the  accentuation  cp.  above  9  and  24  a. 

2  Cp.  Brugmann,  KG.  555  (bottom). 

3  The  e  (for  a)  is  here  probably  due  to 

the  influence  of  the  other  forms  -es,  -ct,  etc.: 

Brugmann,  KG.  728. 


4  Cp.  Brugmann,  KG.  729,  ij  IF.  18,  71 ; 
Delbruck,  Vergl.  Syntax  2,  p.  357* 

5  The  ending  -antu  and  -antdm  lose  their 
n  under  the  same  conditions  as  -anti  (p.  3 1 4, 
note  8). 


3 1 8  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

only  when  the  root  ends  in  a  vowel,  but  -anax  when  it  ends  in  a  consonant; 
thus  pu-mhi  ‘purify’,  but  as-ana  ‘eat’. 

b.  The  ending  -tat  occurs  some  twenty  times  in  the  RV.  When  strong 
and  weak  stem  are  distinguished,  it  is  added  to  the  latter;  e.  g.  vit-t&t  ‘thou 
shalt  regard’,  dhat-tat  ‘thou  shalt  place’,  krnu-tat  ‘thou  shalt  make’,  pimT-tat 
‘thou  shalt  purify’,  etc.1  2  Its  use  is  almost  restricted  to  the  2.  sing.  It  is, 
however,  once3  found  in  the  RV.  and  once  in  the  TS.  in  the  sense  of  the 
3.  sing.,  once  as  2.  du.  in  the  RV.,  once  as  2.  pi.  in  the  TS.,  and  once  as 

1.  sing,  in  AV.4.  It  appears  to  have  the  value  of  a  future  imperative,  ex¬ 
pressing  an  injunction  to  be  carried  out  at  a  time  subsequent  to  the  present. 
It  may  originally  have  been  identical  with  the  abl.  tfid  ‘after  that’,  ‘then’; 
krnu-tat  would  thus  have  meant  ‘do  (it)  then’  5. 

I.  The  Present  System. 

419.  This  group  consists  of  a  present  indicative  together  with  a  sub¬ 
junctive,  an  injunctive,  an  optative,  an  imperative,  and  participles,  besides  a 
past  augmented  tense  called  the  imperfect  because  formed  analogously  to 
the  Greek  tense.  This  is  the  most  important  system,  as  its  forms  are  about 
three  times  as  common  as  those  of  the  three  other  systems  taken  together6. 
Hence  roots  are  generally  classified  according  to  the  manner  in  which  their 
stems  are  formed  in  the  present  system.  Here  two  distinct  conjugations 
may  be  conveniently  distinguished. 

The  first  or  a-  conjugation,  all  the  stems  in  which  end  in  - a ,  retains 
the  stem  unaltered  (like  the  a-  declension)  in  every  tense,  mood,  and  parti¬ 
ciple,  accenting  the  same  syllable  throughout  the  present  indicative,  its  moods 
and  participles,  as  well  as  the  unaugmented  imperfect 7.  The  secondary  con¬ 
jugations  in  -a  (desideratives,  intensives,  causatives,  denominatives)  as  well  as 
the  future8,  follow  this  conjugation  in  their  inflexion. 

The  second  or  graded  conjugation  is  characterized  by  shift  of  accent 
between  stem  and  ending,  accompanied  by  vowel  gradation.  Minor  differences 
consist  in  the  loss  of  n  in  the  3.  pi.  middle,  in  the  addition  of  another  suffix 
(-ana  instead  of  -. mana )  in  the  middle  participle,  in  the  employment  of  an 
ending  in  the  2.  sing.  impv.  act.,  and  in  vowel  gradation,  with  shift  of  accent, 
in  the  modal  suffix  of  the  optative. 

a.  The  first  or  a-  conjugation. 

420.  The  special  characteristics  of  this  conjugation  are: 

1.  The  -a  of  the  stem  is  lengthened  before  the  endings  of  the  1.  du.  and 
pi.  which  begin  with  v  and  nr,  e.  g.  jayamasi  ‘we  conquer’;  while  the  initial 
a  of  the  endings  of  the  3.  pi.  - anti ,  - a?ite ,  -an,  - a?ita ,  is  dropped;  e.  g.  bhdra-nti 
‘they  bear’. 

2.  The  optative  sign  is  throughout  -T,  which  combines  with  the  -a  of  the 
present  stem  to  e;  e.  g.  bhdves. 

3.  The  2.  sing.  impv.  act.  has  no  ending  except  the  comparatively  few 
instances  (about  sixteen)  in  which  -tat  is  added. 


1  On  the  origin  of  this  peculiar  imperative  |  5  Brugmann,  KG.  732. 

form  cp.  Brugmann,  KG.  839,  5.  j  6  Wiiitney  600,  a. 

2  See  Delbruck,  Verbum  38.  7  But  when  the  augment  was  added,  it 

3  Op.  cit.  77;  Whitney  571,  b.  Avery,  received  the  accent  just  like  the  verbal  pre- 

however  (225,  bottom),  states  that  it  occurs  position  in  a  principal  sentence  (the  verb 
5  times  in  the  RV.  as  a  3.  sing.  itself  remaining  unaccented). 

4  Whitney,  loc.  cit.  1  8  Also  aorist  stems  ending  in  -a. 


VII.  Verb.  Present  System. 


3l9 


4.  The  2.  3.  du.  mid.  substitute  e  for  the  a  of  the  endings  -athe,  -ate) 
e.  g.  2.  vahethe  ‘ye  two  travel’,  3.  vardhete  ‘they  two  thrive’. 

5.  The  middle  participle  regularly  ends  in  -mdna. 

a.  Five  classes  or  types  may  be  distinguished  in  the  present  stems  of 
the  a-  conjugation.  These  are:  1.  Stems  in  which  the  radical  syllable  has  a 
strong  grade  accented  vowel1;  e.  g.  bhdra-ti ,  from  bhr-  ‘bear’.  2.  Stems  in 
which  the  radical  syllable  has  a  weak  grade  vowel,  the  thematic  a  being 
accented2;  e.  g.  ruja-ti ,  from  ruj-  ‘break’.  3.  Stems  formed  with  the  suffix 
-ya,  being  either  (a)  ordinary  transitive  or  intransitive  verbs 3,  e.  g.  ds-ya-ti 
‘throws’;  or  (b)  passives,  e.  g.  m-yd-te  ‘is  led’.  4.  Stems  ending  in  -ay a, 
being  either  (a)  causatives  (-dya)  or  (b)  denominatives  (-ay a) 4.  5.  Stems 

formed  with  the  suffix  -sa,  added  to  the  reduplicated  root,  being  desideratives; 
e.  g.  pi-pd-sa-  ‘desire  to  drink’.  The  last  two  classes,  which  retain  the  present 
stem  throughout  their  inflexion,  constitute  three  of  the  secondary  conjugations 
which  will  be  treated  separately  below  (541  —  570). 

1.  The  radically  accented  a -  class  (bhdva-). 

421.  This  is  by  far  the  commonest  type  of  the  a-  conjugation,  about 
300  such  present  stems  occurring  in  the  Samhitas5.  The  radical  vowel  takes 
Guna,  unless  it  is  medial  and  long  by  nature  or  position;  thus  from  ji-  ‘con¬ 
quer’  :  jay -a-\  in-  ‘lead’  :  nay-a- ;  bhu-  ‘be’  :  bhav-a-)  budh-  ‘awake’  :  bodh-a-) 
srp-  ‘creep’  :  sarpa -;  but  jinv-  ‘quicken’  :  jinv-a -;  krld-  ‘play’  :  krid-a-.  Roots 
with  medial  a  remain  unchanged,  e.  g.  vad-  ‘speak’  :  vdd-a-. 

a.  There  are,  however,  several  irregularities  in  the  formation  of  the  present  stem: 

1.  iih -  ‘consider’  takes  Guna:  oka-  (but  uh-  ‘remove’  remains  unchanged:  ft  ha-) ;  guh-  ‘hide’ 
lengthens  its  vowel:  guha- ;  kram -  ‘stride’  lengthens  its  vowel  in  the  active:  krama-  (but 
krama -  in  the  middle);  krp-  ‘lament’  retains  its  vowel  unchanged:  kppa-.  —  2.  The  roots 
dams-  ‘bite’  and  sahj-  ‘hang’  lose  their  nasal:  ddsa-,  saja-.  —  3.  gam-  ‘go’,  yam-  ‘reach’, 
yu-  ‘separate’  form  their  stem  with  the  suffix  -cha-:  gaccha-,  yaccha-,  yuccha-.  —  4.  Four 
stems  are  transfers  from  the  reduplicating  class6 *:  piba-  from  pd-  ‘drink’,  tistha-  from 
sthd-  ‘stand’,  sfda-1  (for  *si-sad-a-)  from  sad-  ‘sit’,  sasca- 8  (for  *sa-sac-a-)  from  sac-  ‘accom¬ 
pany’;  four  others9  are  transfers  from  the  nu-  class,  being  either  used  beside  or  having 
entirely  superseded  the  simpler  original  stems:  i-nv-a-  from  i-  ‘send’,  beside  i-no-ti ; 

ji-nv-a-  from  ji-  ‘quicken’,  beside  ji-no-si;  hi-nv-a-  from  hi-  ‘impel’,  beside  hi-no-ti ;  p'uiv-a- 
‘fatten’  was  doubtless  originally  *pi-uu-  from  the  root  pi-  io. 

422.  Present  indicative.  The  forms  of  this  tense  which  actually  occur, 
if  made  from  bhdva-,  would  be  as  follows: 

Active.  Sing.  1.  bhdva-mi,  2.  bhdva-si,  3.  bhdva-ti.  Du.  1.  bhdvd-vas  (TS.), 

2.  bkdva-thas ,  3.  bhdva-tas.  PI.  1.  bhdvd-masi  and  bhdva-mas,  2.  bhdva-tha xt, 

3.  bhdva-?iti. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  bhdv-e ,  2.  bhava-se ,  3.  bhdva-te I2.  Du.  1.  bhdva-vahe , 
3.  bhdv-ete.  PI.  1.  bhdvd-mahexi> ,  2.  bhdva-dhve ,  3.  bhdva-nte. 

The  forms  which  actually  occur  are  the  following: 


1  The  first  class  of  the  Indian  gramma¬ 
rians. 

2  The  sixth  class  of  the  Indian  gramma¬ 
rians. 

3  The  fourth  class  of  the  Indian  gramma¬ 
rians. 

4  The  nominal  a  preceding  the  -ya  is 
here  sometimes  dropped  or  changed  to  d 
or  1.  See  below  562.  Some  of  these  verbs 
in  -aya,  having  lost  their  special  stem 
meaning,  are  treated  as  a  class  (the  tenth) 
of  primary  verbs. 

5  See  Whitney  214 — 216,  cp.  744. 

6  dad-a *  occasionally  appears  for  the 

regular  dadd-,  from  dd-  ‘give’. 


7  See  Rozwadowsici,  BB.  21,  147. 

8  A  reminiscence  of  its  reduplicative  origin 
is  the  loss  of  the  nasal  (the  sonant  becomings) 
in  the  ending  of  the  3.  pi. :  sdsca/i,  sascata. 

9  rnv-a-,  beside  r-no-ti  from  r-  ‘send’,  is 
a  similar  transfer  to  the  sixth  class. 

See  Whitney,  Roots,  under  pinv. 

11  vcida-thana  is  the  only  example  of  the 
ending  -thana  in  the  indicative  of  the  a » 
conjugation. 

12  The  RV.  once  has  sob  he  as  3.  sing,  for 

sobhate. 

13  Delbruck,  Verbum  p.  30  (top),  AvErY 
p.  235,  Whitney  735,  b,  and  GrassmanN, 
under  man  ‘think’,  give  mandmahe  (IX.  412), 


-2o  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

Present  Indicative. 

Active.  Sing.  1.  acdmi ,  arcami ,  avami ,  uhdmi  (AV.  VS.),  khanami , 
gdcchami  (AV.),  card  mi,  coddmi ,  jatidmi,  jaydrni,  tap  a  mi  (AV.).  tisthdmi  (AV.), 
dahdmi ,  dhdvdmi  (AV.),  nay  ami  (AV.  TS.),  pacdmi  (AV.),  pat  a  mi,  pibdtni ', 
bhajdmi,  bhdrdmi,  bhavdmi  (AV.),  mdnddmi  (TS.  iv.  2.  61),  yacchdmi  (AV.), 
yajdmi  (AV.),  ydcdmi ,  rapdmi,  rdjdmi ,  rohdmi  (AV.),  vaddmi ,  vapdmi  (AV.), 
vdhdmi ,  sains  ami,  siksdmi,  sumbhdmi ,  sajdmi,  sapdmi,  sidlmi '  (AV.),  svadami, 
hardmi. 

2.  atasi,  arsasi,  arhasi ,  dvasi,  invasi 2,  ilhasi,  ksayasi,  carasi ,  jayasi, 
jinvasi 2 ,  jdrvasi,  tapasi{  AV.),  tarasi,  tip  ha  si 1 ,  tdrvasi,  ddsasi,  dhanvasi,  dhdvasi , 
ndyasi,  pdiasi,  pinvasi2,  p/'basi1 ,  bhdvasi ,  bhdsasi,  madasi  (A V.),  y  dec  has  i,  ydjasi , 
rdksasi ,  rdjasi,  rohasi,  vancasi  (AV.),  vddasi ,  vapasi,  v arsasi  (AV.),  vdhasi, 
samsasi,  siksasi,  sdrpasi  (AV.);  sascasi r,  s  Ida  si  harasi  (AV.). 

3.  acati  (AV.),  djati ,  aW//  (AV.),  ayati,  drcati ,  ardati  (AV.),  arsati,  arhati, 

dvati ,  invati 2,  Thati  (Kh.  11.  io1*),  uhati,  ejati,  osati,  krdndati ,  kramati (AN .), 

krilati,  ksdyati ,  ksarati,  khanati  (AV.),  khddati ,  gdcchati,  gu/iati  (AV.),  cdrati, 
cetati,  jdyati,  j Invati2,  jivati,  jurvatijr ayati,  tapati ,  tdrati ,  tis thati  l,  tsdrati  (AV.), 
dadati \  dahati  (AV.),  ddsati ,  ddsati,  dhdmati,  dhdvati  ‘runs’  and  ‘washes'’, 
ndksati,  ndndati  (AV.),  ndyati ,  navati  (AV.)  ‘praises’,  pacati ,  pdtati ,  pinvati 2, 
pibati l,  ptyati ,  bodhati,  bhdjati ,  bhdnati ,  bhdrati,  bhdrvati,  bhdvati ,  bhdisati  (AV.), 
b hdsati ,  bhcdati,  mddati ,  mdrdhati ,  mehati  (AV.),  ydcchati ,  y djati,  ydtati,  yabhati 
(TS.  vii.  4.  192),  ydmati,  ydcati  (AV.),  yucchati ,  rdksati,  rddati,  rapaii,  rdjati , 
radhati,  rejati,  rebhati,  rddhati,  rosati ,  rdhati ,  vahcati  (AV.),  vddati,  vdpati , 
varjati,  vardhati ,  varsati  (AV.),  vasati  ‘dwells’,  vahati,  vdsati,  venati ,  samsati, 
s'dsatij  siksati,  sundhati,  sumbhati ,  sdcati  (AV.  TS.),  sarjati,  sdrpati ,  sddhati, 
sfdati r,  sddhati,  skandati,  stobhati ,  sphurjati  (AV.),  sredhati ,  hdrati ,  hi/nsati 4 
(Kh.  iv.  5”). 

Du.  1.  cardv as  (TS.  1.  5.  io1).  —  2.  acathas,  drcathas,  arhathas ,  dvathas , 
invathas 2,  karsathas,  ksdyathas ,  gdcchathas ,  ghosathas ,  cetathas,  janathas, 
jinvathas2,  jivathas,  jUrvathas,  tisihatas x,  dhdmathas,  naksathas,  nayathas , 
pdtathas,  pinvathas 2,  bhdrathas ,  bhdvathas,  bhusathas ,  mddathas,  yajathas , 
ydtathas ,  raksathas  (AV.  TS.),  rdjathas,  rohathas ,  vanathas,  varathas ,  vahathas , 
siksathas ,  sadathas,  sadhathas,  sidathas l,  svddathas. 

3.  invatas2,  ejatas  (AV.),  ksayatas ,  khddatas  (AV.),  gacchatas  (AV.), 
ghosatas,  cdratas,  tisihatas1  (AV.),  dravatas  (AV.),  dhdvatas  ‘wash’,  naksatas, 
pdcatas  (AV.),  pinvatas2,  pibatas \  bhdvatas ,  bhihatas,  manthatas,  mardhatas, 
yacchatas  (AV.),  yucchatas ,  raksatas,  rdjatas ,  vardhatas  (AV.),  vasatas,  vdhatas. 

PL  1.  arcamasi,  drhamasi ,  khanamasi  (AV.),  caramasi  and  cdramas  (AV.), 
jandmasi ,  jayamasi,  tardmasi,  ddyamasi  (AV.),  dahamasi  (AV.),  namdmasi 
(AV.),  naydmasi  and  naydmas  (AV.),  pibdmas 1  (AV.),  bddhamasi ,  bhajdmas 
(AV.),  bharamasi,  mddamasi  and  m  a  da  mas,  methdmasi,  yajamasi  and  yajamas, 
vddamasi  and  vadamas,  vasdmasi  (AV.),  samsamas  (AV.),  sajamasi  (AV.), 
hardmasi  (AV.)  and  hardmas  (AV.). 

2.  aj at  ha 5,  dvatha,  ejatha ,  krilatha,  ksdyatha,  khddatha,  gdcchatha , 
carat  ha  (AV.),  cctatha,  jinvatha2,  tdksatha,  tttrvatha ,  dhdvatha  (AV.), 
ndyatha ,  nasatha ,  patatha ,  pinvatha 2  (TS.  hi.  1.  n8),  bhdratha,  bhdvatha, 
bhUsatha,  mddatha,  mo  sat  ha,  rdksatha,  rdjatha ,  r ejatha ,  va  hatha ,  sdrpatha .  — 
With  -thana  only  vadathana. 

3.  a c anti  (AV.),  ajanti ,  drcanti,  drsanti,  drhanti ,  avanti ,  krandanti, 


but  this  is  due  to  Sandhi  (108),  manamahe 
’ti  standing  for  manamahe  citi  (Pp.). 

1  A  transfer  from  the  reduplicating  class. 

2  A  transfer  from  the  class. 


3  A  transfer  from  the  root  class  for  j&r//, 

4  A  transfer  from  the  infixing  class. 

5  The  Samhita  lengthens  the  final  vowel 
in  at  least  ten  of  the  following  forms. 


VII.  Verb.  Present  System. 


kramanti  (AY.),  krilanti ,  krosanti ,  ksdranti ,  ksodanti ,  khananti  (AV.),  kbddanti 
(AV.),  gacchanti ,  gam  anti,  guhanti ,  car  anti,  jay  anti,  jar  anti,  jinvanti x,  jivanti , 
taksanti,  tap  anti,  taranti ,  tisthanti 1  2,  tr as  anti,  tsar  anti ,  dabhanti,  da  hand,  dasanti 
(AV.),  dravanti,  dhanvanti,  dhamand,  dhavand ,  dh fin' anti,  naksanti,  nandand , 
namanti,  nay  anti,  nasanti  ‘they  attain’,  niksanti  (AV.),  nindand ,  pdcanti,  pdtanti, 
pinvar.ti l,  pi  band2,  p  iy  anti,  bhajand,  bhana?id,  bhdrand ,  bhavanti,  bhusand, 
majjand,  mddand,  mdnthanti ,  maraud,  mardhand,  mimand 2  (wa-  ‘bellow’), 
mehanti ,  ydcchand ,  ydjanti,  ydcanti  (AV.),  yodhand  (AV.),  rdksanti,  ran  anti , 
rddand,  rdjanti ,  rebhand,  rohanti ,  vddanti,  vanand,  vdpa?iti,  vdrdhand,  v  dr  sand, 
valganti  (AV.),  vasanti ,  vasand  (AV.),  vahanti,  venanti,  samsanti,  siksanti,  sdcanti , 
scdtand,  sapanti,  sarpand  (AV '.),  stdanti 2,  sedhand ,  skandand ,  stobhand ,  sravanti, 
svddanti,  svdrand ,  hdranti  (AV.),  hints  anti 3. 


Indicative  Middle. 

Sing.  i.  aje,  dme,  arce,  ikse,  gacche  (TS.  i.  i.  io2),  (AV.  TS.),  name, 
nikse  (AV.),  badhe  (AV.),  bhdre,  bhikse,  mande,  ydje,  rabhe,  Idbhe  (AV.),  vade, 
vd?ide ,  varte,  sraye  (AV.),  sake  (AV.),  svaje  (AV.),  have. 

2.  arsase  (AV.),  chase,  garhase,  gahase,  cdksase,  cayase,  jarase,  josase  (AV .), 
tisthase 2,  tosase,  do  base,  ?iaksase,  nayase,  pavase,  p  invase  l,  bad  base,  bhrajase, 
mamhase,  mandase,  modase,  yacchase,  yajase,  yamase ,  raksase,  ramase  (AV.), 
rbcase,  rohase,  vdrdhase ,  vahase,  sumbhase,  sobhase,  sdcase,  stdvase,  harsase. 

3.  ajate,  ay  ate,  fksate  (AV.),  Isate,  fsate,  ejate6',  edhate ,  bhate,  krpate ,  kalpate 

(AV.),  kramate ,  kridate  (AV.),  gacchate,  gahate,  guhate,  ghosate,  cdyate ,  estate, 
codate,  cydvate  (AV.),  jdrate,  jrmbhate ,  tandate ,  tisthate2,  tejate,  tosate,  daksate, 
dadate2  { AV.),  dadhate2  (TS.11. 2. 1 24),  debate 5,  dyotate  (AV.),  dhavate,  naksate, 
ndmate ,  nay  ate  {AY.),  nasate ,  ndsate,  pacate  (AV.),  pdyate,  pavate,  pinnate T,  pibate2, 
prdthate,  plavate,  bddhate,  bhdjate,  bhandate ,  bhayate,  bhdrate,  bhiksate ,  bhbjate, 
bhrdjate,  bhresate,  mdmhate,  madate  ( AV .),  mdrate,  modate,  y ajate,  yatate,  yamate, 
yojate,  ramhate,  raksate ,  rapsateb,  rdmate,  rambate,  rejate,  rbcate,  rohate,  Idyate 
(AV.),  vancate  (AV.),  vadate,  vanate,  validate,  vapate,  v  dr  ate  ‘covers’,  v  art ate, 
vardhate,  varsate  (AV.),  vasate  (x.  373),  v abate,  vepate,  vyathate ,  sapate  (AV.), 
siksate,  sumb  bate,  s  ray  ate  (AV.),  sdcate ,  s  abate,  sadbate,  sccate,  senate ,  star  ate, 
sayate,  stdvate ,  smayate,  sydndate,  svadate,  hdrsate,  havate,  has  ate1 ,  bvdrate.  — 
With  -e  for  -te :  y’cw,  mabe,  sdye,  seve,  stave. 

Du.  1.  sd cava  be. 

2.  jayethe,  jaretbe,  raksethe,  varetbe ,  vabethe,  srayethe,  sacetbe. 

3.  carete,  javete,  tarete ,  namete,  bldhete  (AV.),  bbayete,  bharete,  metbete, 
yatete ,  rejete,  vadete,  vartete,  vardhete,  vepete,  vyathete,  sacete,  smayete ,  bavete. 

PI.  1.  ksadamabe  (AV.),  caydmahe9  ( A V.),  jaramahe,  ndksamabe,  navamabe, 
ndsamabe ,  badbamahe,  bhdjdmahe,  bkdyamabe,  bbardmabe,  nidnamabe10,  mandd- 
mahe,  maramahe ,  yajdmahe ,  ydedmabe,  rabhamahe ,  vdnamahe,  vdndamabe, 
sahamahe  (AV.),  stardmahe,  stavdmahe ,  svajdmahe,  bavamabe. 

2.  cayadhve ,  dbavadbve,  badhadhve,  bbdradbve,  mandadhve,  vahadhve, 
sayadhve,  sdcadhve  (AV.). 


1  Transfer  from  the  -nu  class. 

2  A  transfer  form  from  the  reduplicating 
class. 

3  A  transfer  from  the  infixing  nasal  class. 

4  In  apejate  in  tv.  48*,  V.  64-S  Pp .  apaljate. 

5  dohate  (x.  1337),  Delbruck,  Verbum  97, 
and  Avery  233,  is  a  mistake  for  dohate  (a 
transfer  from  the  root  class). 

6  Cp.  Bartholomae,  IF.  io,  18. 

7  From  has-  ‘go  emulously’,  a  secondary 

Indo-arische  Philologie  I.  4. 


form  of  ha-  ‘leave’(ix.  275;  x.  1273);  cp.  p.322, 
note  3.  This  form  is  given  by  Avery  25S  as 
subjunctive  of  the  s-  aorist  of  ha-. 

8  (iv.  381).  With  irregular  accent,  like  that 
of  similar  forms  in  the  graded  conjugation. 

9  Conjecture  for  cayasmahe,  AV.  XIX.  4S1 : 
see  Whitney’s  note  on  the  passage  in  his 
Translation. 

10  See  note  on  bhdvamahe,  above,  p.  319, 
note  ^3. 


21 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


322 

3.  ay  ante,  iksante  (AV.  TS.) ,  fsante ,  edhante,  ksjdante,  gdcchante  (TS.iv.  2.  61 2), 
cetante ,  cyan  ante,  jay  ante,  jarante  ‘sing’,  tlsthante x,  dddante 1  (AV.\  dhavante, 
naksante,  namante ,  navante,  pdvante,  pibante' ,  plavante  (AV .),  bddhante ,  bhajante , 
bhayante,  bhdrante,  bhrdjante,  m'dante  (AV.),  ydjante,  y  at  ante,  ydcante,  raksante, 
rante 2,  raps  ante  (AY.),  rabhante,  ramante ,  rejante,  rocante ,  vadante,  v  dr  ante, 
vdrtante,  vardhante,  vahante,  vyathante,  say  ante,  sumbhante ,  srayante,  sac  ante, 
sdpante ,  s  ah  ante,  stavante,  spardhante,  svajante,  svadante,  hdrante,  havante, 
hdsante 3  (AY.). 


Present  Subjunctive  4. 

423.  Active.  Sing.  1.  ajdni  (TS.vn.  4. 191;  VS.  xxm.  19),  cardni,  jivani 
(AV.),  tardni  (AV.),  naydni,  pacdni,  bhajdni ,  rdjdni ,  vadani  (AV.),  vdhdni, 
hardni  (AV.).  —  Without  -ni:  area. 

2.  a.  With  -si:  djasi,  gacchasi  (hN .),  jaydsi,  tistkdsi'1  (AV.),  naydsi  (AV.), 
pibdsi l,  bhdjasi,  bhavdsi,  bhdsdsi  (AV.),  yajdsi,  vaddsi,  vahasi. 

b.  With  -5:  <2Z/<z.r,  gacchas,  jay  as,  jivas  (AV.),  jttrvas^,  tisihas x,  bharas, 
vadas  (AV.),  vands  (AV.),  vdrdhas,  siksds. 

3.  a.  With  -f/:  ajdti ,  ejdti  (AV )),  gacchati,  jayati,  jlvati,  tdpdti,  tisthdti1> 
dabhati,  dahdti,  dhanvati,  ndyati,  pdcati,  pdtati,  padati,  plbdti  ^  bbdhdti,  bhdjati, 
bhdrati ,  bhdvati,  mardti,  ydjdti ,  raksdti  (AV.),  vaddti,  vahdti  (AV.),  sdmsdti , 
sdpati  (AV.),  sumbhdti  (AV.),  srdydti  (AV.),  sidati  z,  svadati ,  svardti. 

b.  With  dr  cat,  dr  sat,  dr  hat,  dvdt,  invdt 6,  ejat,  g  dec  hat,  ghdsat,  jandi 

(AV.vi.  8 1 3),  jivdt,  tlsthdt  \  ddsdt  (AV.),  ddsat,  dhavat  (AV.),  nay  It  (AV.),  nindat, 
pdclt,  patdt,  p'tbdt l,  bhajat  (AV.),  bhdrat,  bh&sdt,  yacchdt,  yajat ,  resdt  (AV.), 
rJhdt  ( AV.),  vdrdhat,  vahat  (AV.  TS.),  sdmsdt,  sap  at  ( AV.),  siksat,  sarpdt  { AV.), 
s hand  at  (TS.  1.  6.  22),  s  mar  at  (AV.),  ha  rat  (AV.). 

Du.  1.  edrava,  jdyava,  pibava  l,  vdnava,  samsava. 

2.  avdthas ,  tardtha;  (AV .),  tisthdthas  ndyathas  (AV.),  plbdthas l,  bhdvdthas 
(AV.),  vadathas,  smardthas. 

3.  carditas1 ,  pibdtasz,  vdhatas,  sdpatas. 

PI.  1.  dredma,  krdmama,  khdndma  (TS.  iv.  1.  23),  taksdma ,  namdma  (TS. 
v.  7. 41),  patdma  (Kh.  p.  1 7 1.  6),  bhajdma,  bhdrdma,  bhdvama ,  madarna,  man- 
thdma,  mardma,  yajdma,  rddhdma,  vaddma,  vardhama,  vdsama ,  sresdma 8, 
hdrdma. 

2.  avatha,  gacchdtha ,  jayatha ,  jlvdtha  (TS.  v.  7.  44)  9,  yacchdtha  (AV.), 
v  a  hatha. 

3.  dr  can,  krlldn,  gdcchan,  ghdsan,  car  an,  jivdn  (AV.),  ddsdn  (AV.), 
pat  an ,  yacchdn  (AV.),  vaddti,  vdrdhan I0,  vahdn,  siksdn  (AV.),  sfddn'1  (AV.), 
hardn  (AV.). 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  gdcchai  (AV.),  tndnai ,  marai,  stdvai.  —  2.  vardhase ; 
naydsai  (AV.).  —  3.  jar  ate,  t/sthdte'1 ,  pavdte,  bhaydte,  ydjate,  vdhate,  srdydte , 
svajdte ;  cardtai  (AV.),  jayatai  (TS.  AV.),  yajdtai,  srayatai  (AV.),  svajditai  (AV.). 


1  A  transfer  form  from  the  reduplicating 
class. 

2  According  to  Roth,  ZDMG.  20,  71,  for 
*  ran- ante  \  Whitney,  Roots  —  r-ante ,  under 

‘go’ ;  also  Grassmann,  under  root  or. 

3  From  /^ar-  ‘go  emulously’:  see  Whitney’s 
note  on  AV.  iv.  36s. 

4  No  forms  of  the  2.  3.  pi.  subj.  middle 
occur  in  this  class. 

5  Delbruck  p.  37  (top)  gives  taksas ,  which 

I  cannot  trace. 


6  A  transfer  from  the  class. 

7  Delbruck,  Verbum  82,  gives  tis/ katas, 
but  I  cannot  trace  it. 

8  Perhaps  from  irA*  =  i/A-  ‘clasp’:  cp. 
Whitney,  Roots. 

9  Delbruck  48  gives  pibatha  also. 

vdrdhan  (1.  704;  VI.  1711)  as  well  as  aredn 
(iv.  5 5 2 ;  v.  315)  are  given  as  indicatives  by 
Delbruck,  Verbum  91 ;  cp.  p.  327,  note  3. 


VII.  Verb.  Present  System.  323 

D  u.  1.  rabhavahai  (TS.iv.  4. 71  2),  sacavahai,  sahavahai.  —  3 .  ydtaite. 

PL  1.  nasamahai ,  bhajamahai  (AV.),  ydjamahai ,  vanamahai. 

Present  Injunctive. 

424.  Active.  Sing.  1.  cydvam ,  taksam ,  tistham  \  bhojam ,  yojam. 

2.  (AV.),  guhas ,  caras,  tisthas 1  (AV.),  ddhas ,  namas  (AV.), 

madas  (AV.),  yamas,  vadas  (VS.  xxm.  2  5),  vanas ,  vapas ,  vdras ,  vasas,  vends, 
socas. 

3.  ai'cat,  arsat( AV.)3,  karsat,  krandat,  krdmat^  (AV.),  ksarat,  carat,  cetat, 
cbdat,  janat,  jay  at \  jdsat,  taksat,  tandrat 5 6,  tap  at,  tamat,  tdrat,  t 'is  that  *,  dadat1, 
ddbhat,  ddsat,  dAsat,  ddsat,  drdvat,  naksat,  nay  at ,  nasat ,  pdcat ,  pdtat, 
pinvat2,  pibat l,  prdthat,  bldhat,  bhdrat,  bhavat  (AV.);  bhdsat,  bhramsat 
(AV.),  inadat  (AV.) D,  minat,  yamat7,  ranat,  rddat,  rdpat,  radhat ,  rejat,  resat, 
rodhat,  vadat,  vdrat ,  vartat,  vdrdhat,  vasat,  sakat,  sardhat,  siksat,  sndthat, 
sramat,  sadat,  sdrpat,  sale  at z,  svdjat. 

PI.  3.  arcati ,  car  an ,  dabhan,  dhavan,  ndksan,  ndsan  (‘lose’  and  ‘reach’), 
bharan  (AV.),  bhavan  (AV.),  yaman,  rdnan ,  vaman ,  vardhan,  sdsan,  sadhan s, 
si  dan  L 

Middle.  Sing.  2.  guhathas  (AV.),  badhathas,  rabhathas  (AV.). 

3.  is  at  a,  bharata,  rocata ,  vdrdhat  a,  sacata,  sAdhata. 

PI.  3.  amanta,  dyanta,  caranta ,  cyavanta,  j an  ant  a,  tlsthanta l,  naksanta , 
namanta ,  ndyanta ,  navanta ,  nasanta,  nasanta,  pinvanta 2,  pravanta,  bhajanta , 
bhananta,  bhdranta,  bhiksanta,  yaks  ant  a ,  yavanta,  rananta ,  ranta  (1.  6 1 11 ; 
vii.  393)9,  r amanta,  rejanta,  vanta  10 ,  vdranta  (‘cover’),  vardhanta,  vradhanta, 
sdcanta,  sdcanta,  sapanta,  sAdhanta ,  stdvanta ,  smayanta ,  hdvanta. 

* 

Present  Optative. 

425.  Active.  Sing.  1.  careya?n  (AV.),  bhaveyam  (TS.iv.  7.  i22),  vadheyam 
(AV.),  sikseyam.  • —  2.  tf'zw,  bhaves,  mades,  vanes.  —  3.  avet,  gdcchet  (AV.), 

taret,  patet,  bhavet  (AV.),  yacchet  (AV.),  Idbhet  (AV.),  vadet  (AV.), 
vaset 11  (AV.),  sravet,  haret  (AV.).  —  Du.  3.  grdsetam. 

Pi.  1.  kramema,  ksayema  (AV.),  khanema  (TS.  iv.  1.  24),  gacchema  (AV. 
TS.),  cayema,  carema ,  jayema ,  jlvema,  tdrerna ,  tisthema T,  dAsema,  patema  (TS. 
iv.  7.  1 3 ’),  bharema  (AV.  TS.),  bhdvema ,  bhUsema ,  mddema ,  mahema,  yate/na , 
rapema ,  rohema  (AV.),  vatema ,  vadema ,  siksema,  sapema,  side m a 1  (AV.), 
harema  (AV.).  —  3.  tdreyur ,  yAceyur  (AV.),  vaheyur,  saheyur  (SA.  xii.  32). 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  saceya.  —  3.  ajeta,  kalpeta  (SA.xrr.  20),  ksameta,  jareta, 
bhikseta,  yajeta,  vadeta,  \ sdmseta  (AV.),  saceta,  saheta  (SA.  xii.  20),  staveta. 

Du.  1.  sacevahi  (AV.). 

PI.  1.  gahemahi,  bhajemahi ,  bharemahi ,  ydtemahi ,  rabhemahi ,  sdeemahi.  — 

3.  With  ending  -rata:  bharerata. 

Present  Imperative. 

426.  Active.  Sing.  2.  0^7,  aja ,  inva 2,  uha  (AV.),  cVz, 

karsa,  kranda ,  krama ,  ksara,  khada  (AV.  TS.),  gdccha,  gada  (AV.),  zV/tz, 


1  Transfer  form  from  the  reduplicating  class. 

2  A  transfer  from  the  class. 

3  AV.  x.  41,  some  Mss.  risat\  see  Whit¬ 
ney’s  note  in  his  Translation. 

4  Emendation  for  ksamat,  AV.  VII.  631  : 
see  Whitney’s  Translation. 

5  11  307,  perhaps  to  be  emended  to  landat. 

6  AV.  XX.  492  emendation  for  viada. 

1  Delbruck  56  (top)  adds  rciksat. 


8  Delbruck,  Verbum  89  (p.  63),  takes 
haran  as  an  unaugmented  imperfect,  but  it 
seems  to  occur  only  as  a  N.  sing.  m.  parti- 

j  ciple. 

9  According  to  Delbruck  113  for  *ran- 
anla;  Whitney,  Roots, r-anta.  Cp.  p.322,  note  2. 

10  Delbruck  1.  c.,  for  *van-anla. 

11  AV.  xii.  427:  should  probably  be  vaset. 

|  Cp.  p.  324,  note  3. 


21* 


3  24 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


coda ,  jay  a,  jinva z,  jlva ,  jicrva,  jdsa,  tap  a ,  tar  a,  t  Id  ha 2,  (AV.), 

drmha  (AV.),  drava ,  dhanva ,  dhama ,  dhdva,  nama ,  nay  a,  niksa  (AV.),  pata, 
pava, pinra1,  piba2,  protha,  bbdha,  bhdja ,  bhara ,  bhdva,  bhusa ,  mada ,  mantha 
(AV.),  manda ,  myaksa ,  mrada,  ydccha,  ydja, ydbha  (AV .),yoja,  rdksa ,  rana ,  rdda , 
raja  (AV.),  rdha ,  vada ,  vadha  (AV.),  vapa ,  vdrdha ,  vasa*  (AV.),  vasa{ AV.), 
vdha,  vdhcha 4  (AV.),  samsa ,  sdrdha ,  siksa,  sumbha ,  AVtf,  sraya  (AV.  TS.), 
sarpa,  saha  (SA.  xii.  31),  sddha ,  sida2,  sedha ,  skanda  (AV.),  sta?ia  (KN .), 
srava ,  svada ,  svapa ,  svara ,  hara,  hinva  \  —  With  ending  -faG  avatat , 
osatat,  gacchatat  (AV.),  j ini’ at  at 1  (AV.),  dahatat ,  dhavatat  (AV.)  ‘run’,  bhavatat , 
yacchatat ,  yacatat ,  rdksa  tat,  vahatat ,  sraya  tilt  (TS.  vii.  4.  192). 

3.  ajatu ,  ahcatu  (AV.),  arcatu ,  arsatu  (AV.),  dvatu ,  invatu T,  Tsatu  (AV.), 
ejatu ,  esatu  (AV.),  (AV.),  krandatu ,  kramatu  (TS.  vii.  3.  n1),  krosatu 

(AV.),  gacchatu,  caratu  (AV.),  jayatu,  j invatu  r,  jivatu  (AV.),  tapatu ,  tisthatu 2, 
dahatu  (AV.),  drinhatu  (AV.),  dravatu  (AV.),  dhavatu ,  naksatu  (AV.),  nayatu , 
patatu  (AV.),  pibatu 2,  bodhatu ,  bhavatu ,  bhusatu ,  manthatu  (AV.),  mandat u, 
yac chain,  yajatu ,  rdksatn,  rajatu  (AV.),  rohatu ,  vadatu  (AV.),  vapatu  (TS. 
AV.),  ■ vdrdhatu ,  varsatu  (Kh.11.136),  vasatu  (AV.),  vahatu ,  siksatu ,  socatu , 
sarpatu ,  sidatu2,  sedhatu ,  h invatu T.  —  With  ending  -faG  gacchatat , 
smaratat  (AV.). 

Du.  2.  ajatam,  avatam ,  invatam 1 ,  os  at  am,  gdcchatam ,  jay  at  am ,  jaratam, 
jinvatam2,  taksatam,  tdpatam,  tisthatam2,  tfcrvatam ,  dahatam  (AV.),  dhava- 
tam,  nayatam ,  patatam,  pinvatam,  pibatam 2,  bodhatam,  bhajatam ,  bharatam, 
bhdvatam,  bhusatam ,  mamhatam  (Kh.i.  io2),  yacchatam ,  ydtatam,  rdksatam , 
rohatam  (TS.  1.  8.  1 2^  vanatam ,  vardhatam ,  vdhatam ,  venatam ,  siksatam , 
sidatam 2,  sedhatam. 

3.  ayatam  (AV.),  avatam,  invatam l,  krosatam  (AV.),  gacchatdm ,  cetatdm, 
jayatdm  (AV.),  jivatam  (AV.),  dr  avatam ,  pibatam 2  (AV.),  bharatam  (AV.), 
bhavatdm ,  madata?n,  mehatdm  (AV.),  yacchatam,  raksatdm,  vdhatam ,  vestatdm 
(AV.),  sidatam2. 

PI.  2.  areata,  arsata 5,  avata,  gacchata,  guhata,  carata,  codata,  janata, 
jayata,  jinvata J,  jivata,  taksata,  tapata ,  tarata ,  tisthata l,  trasata,  daksata, 
drmhiata,  dhavata,  ndyata,  nmdata,  pdcata,  patata  (AV .),  pinvata z,  pibata2, 
bhdjata  (AV.),  bhdrata,  bhdvata,  bhusata,  madata ,  mantha ta,  ydcchata,  yajata, 
ydcata,  rdksata,  rohata,  vadata,  vanata,  vapata,  vardhata,  vahata,  vrajata 
(AV.),  samsata,  sundhata  (Kh.  ill.  166),  sumbhata ,  sbeata  (AV.),  sacata,  sarpata , 
sascata2,  sidata2,  sedhata ,  stobhata,  sredhata,  harata  (AV.).  —  With  ending 
-tana:  bhajatana. 

3.  dr cantu,  arsantu,  dv antic,  kasantu  (AV.),  krosantu  (AV.),  ksarantu, 
gacchantu,  carantu ,  jdyantu,  jlvantu,  taksantu,  tapantu  (AV.  TS.),  tisthantu 2, 
trasantu  (AV.),  dahantu,  drdvantu,  dhanvantu  (AV.),  dhavantu  (AV.),  dhurvantu , 
namantu  (AV.  TS.),  nay  antic,  pacantu ,  patantu,  pibantu2,  bbdha  ntu,  bhajantu 
(AV.),  bharantu  (AV.),  bhavantu,  mathantu  (AV.),  madantu,  manthantu  (AV.), 
mandantu,  ydcchantu,  yajantu,  yucchantu ,  rdksantu,  radantu,  rohantu,  lapantu 
(AV.),  vddantu,  vapantu,  vardhantu,  vdrsantu  (AV.;  Kh.  n.  5),  vasantu  (AV.), 
vdhantu ,  vdhehantu ,  sundhantu,  sumbhantu  (AV.),  srosantic,  saj antic  (AV.), 
sarpantu  (AV.),  sldantu  2 ,  sedhantu ,  stobhantu,  sravantu ,  svddantu ,  svarantu , 
harantu  (AV.). 

Middle.  Sing.  2.  dcasva  (AV.),  edhasva  (AV.),  kalpasva ,  kramasva, 
gacchasva  (AV.),  codasva ,  cyavasva  (AV.  TS.),  jdrasva,  tapasva,  dayasva  (AV.), 


1  Transfer  from  the  class. 

2  Transfer  from  the  reduplicating  class. 

3  AV.  ill.  47,  perhaps  to  be  read 


4  Avery  243  adds  venaj). 

5  The  form  arsata  in  AV.vi.  282  is  a  corrup¬ 
tion:  see  Whitney’s  note  in  his  Translation. 


VII.  Verb.  Present  System. 


325 


naZzsasva,  nabhasva  (AV.),  namasva ,  nayasva ,  pdvasva ,  pinvasva x,  pibasva1  2, 
pratZiasva,  plavasva 3  (Kh.  IE  16).  bddhasva ,  bhajasva ,  bZiarasva,  mddasva  (AV.), 
mandasva  4,  yajasva ,  yatasva,  raksasva ,  rabhasva ,  rarnasva,  vadasva ,  vdndasva , 
vdrtasva,  vdrdhasva ,  vdhasva,  socasva,  srayasva ,  svancasva ,  sdcasva,  sdhasva , 
sldasva 2,  sevasva  (AV.),  syandasva ,  svajasva  (AV.),  svddasva ,  hdrsasva. 

3.  edhatdm  (TS.vn. 4. 192),  kalpatdm  (AV.),  gacchatdm,  jaratdm,  tistZiatam2 
(AV.),  dadatam 2,  dayatdm  (AV.),  dyotatdm  (AV.),  71  ab  hat  dm.  (AV.),  pdvatam,p:nva- 
tdm l,  prat  hat  dm,  bddhatdm ,  bhayatdm  (AV.),  yajatdm,  rabhatdm  (AV.),  ramatdm 
(AV.),  rocatdm,  vanatdm,  variatdm ,  vardhatam,  s'r ay  at  dm  (AV.),  sacatdm,  sa/ia- 
tdm  (AV.). 

Du.  2.  kalpethdm  (TS.  iv.  2.  51),  gdhethd?n  (AV.),  cddetham ,  cyavetham 
(AV.),  jarethdm ,  bddhethdm ,  yajethdm ,  rabhethdm  (AV.),  vartethdm  (AV.), 
vardhetham,  vahethdm ,  srayethdm ,  sacethd??i  (AV.),  s?narethdm. 

3.  kalpetdm  (TS.  iv.  4.  n1),  srayetdm ,  sacetdm. 

FI.  2.  ajadhva7)i ,  ksdmadhva??i,  gacchadhva??i,  cyavadZivam  { TS.  iv.  7. 1 3*), 
tisthadZivam  2,  nayadhvaw ,  namadZivam ,  pavadZivam ,  pinvadhvam  T,  pibadhvam 2, 
bddhadhva7n ,  bhajadhva77i  (AV.),  bharadhvam,  77iodadhva77i ,  yacchadZivam, 
yajadhvam ,  rabhadZiva7n,  rdmadZivam,  vadadhvam,  vartadZivam,  srayadhvam, 
sacadhvam  (AV.),  sdhadhva7n,  syandadZivam  (AV.),  svajadhva77: ,  harsadhvani 
(AV.).  —  With  ending  - dhva :  ydjadhva. 

3.  ayantdm  (AV.),  kdlpantd77i  (TS.  iv.  4.  111),  jaya7itd77i ,  tisthantdm 2, 
namantdm,  pavantdm^,  bddha7itd77i  (TS.  iv.  2.  64),  bZiara7itdm  (AV.),  yajantam, 
yata7itd7?i ,  radantdm  (AV.),  7'abha7itd77i  (AV.),  ramantdm  (AV.),  layantdm , 
vartantam ,  vardha7itd77i ,  srayantd7n,  sacantd7n,  sddha7itd77i ,  sya7idantam , 
hdrsantdTn  (AV.). 


Present  Participle. 

427.  a.  The  active  form  made  with  the  suffix  is  very  common. 

Stems  of  forms  which  occur  are:  dja7it -,  dia7ii-,  dicant-,  arsant -,  dr  hand, 
dvant i 7  want- x,  iiksant-,  ejant -,  esant -,  odant-,  osant-  (AV.),  kdlpant-1  (AV.), 
Zzfijant-  (AV.),  krdndant-,  krdmant -,  Zzrllant -,  krosant -,  ksdyant- ,  ksdrant -, 
khanant-  (AV.),  khddant-  (AV.),  gdcchant-,  giihant -,  ghdsant -,  cat  ant-,  car  ant-, 
cetant-,  cestant-  (AV.),  jajhjhant-,  jdhja7it-,  jdyant-,  jarant-,  jinvant- l,  jivant-, 
jdrvant-,  taZzsant-,  tdpant-,  tdrant-,  tisthant-2,  tfirvant -8,  ddsant-,  ddhant -,  ddsant-, 
drdvant-,  dhamant-,  dhdvant-,  dZifirvant-,  dhrdjant-,  ndksant-,  nddant-  (AV.), 
7idyant-,  ndvant-,  pdcant-,  pdtant -,  pinvant-  \  pibant- 2,  prsant-,  prvthant-,  bhdjant-, 
bhdrant-,  bhdrvant-,  bhdvant-,  bhdsant-,  bhdsant-,  bhrdjant-,  mdda7it-,  mfvant- 
(AV.),  mehant-  (AV.),  7nrocant-,  ydksant-,  yacchant-,  ydjant-,  ydtant-,  ydcant-, 
yucchant-,  y esant-,  rdksant -,  rddant -,  rdpant-  (TS.vir.  1. 1 1 x),  rdjant-,  rebha7it- 9, 
rohant-,  lapant-  (AV.),  v diant-,  vadant-,  vdpant-,  vdrdhant -,  vdrsa7it-  (AV.), 
vacant -,  vdhant -,  ve'nant-,  vesant-,  vrdjant -,  vrddhant s'dinsant-,  sdpa7it~, 
sdrdhant-,  sdsant-,  siksant-,  sue  ant-,  svdyant-10,  s  an  ant-,  sap  ant-,  sdrjant-  (AV.), 
sarpa7it-,  sddhant-,  sdhant-  or  sdhant-,  sfda7it-2,  sedhant-,  skdndant-  (AV.), 
stdbhant -,  sravant-,  sredhant-,  hdyant hdra7it-,  hdrsant-,  hesant-. 

b.  The  middle  participles  almost  invariably  formed  with  the  suffix  -mana  are 
also  numerous:  ata7ndna~,  amanidna-(AV.),  dyamana-,  fksa7ndna-{ AV.),  isainana-, 
Zzdlpamd7ia-  (TS.iv.  2.  io2),  ZcrpamdTia-,  hrdZzsamdna-,  k7'dsamd7ia-,  ksennamana-, 


1  Transfer  from  the  -1111  class. 

2  Transfer  form  from  the  reduplicating 
class. 

3  Accented  plavasva. 

4  Avery  243  adds  yacchasva  (?). 

5  Avery  246  adds  pinvantam  (?). 

6  On  the  declension  of  these  stems  see  3 14. 


7  If  kalpat ,  AV.  xi.  526,  is  with  Whitney 
in  his  Translation  emended  to  kalpan. 

8  From  turv -  a  secondary  form  of  tur-. 

9  Fem.  rebhatyaic  (Kh.  I.  37). 

The  form  svayat,  vu.  501,  seems  to  be 
regarded  by  Delbruck  (p.  56,  middle)  as  an 
injunctive  of  AV-. 


326  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

khanamana -,  gdZiamana -,  gdZiamana cdyamana,  janamana jaramdna 
‘singing’  and  ‘approaching’,  jdsamana -,  jehamana -,  tunjamana -,  tejcimana 
tosamana-  (AY.),  ddksamana-  (AY.),  dasamana -,  dyotci?nana dZiavamana -, 
ndksamana -,  namamana -,  ndyamana -,  ndvamana -,  nadhcimana -,  pdvamana -, 
pinvamdna- \  pibdamana pratZiamdna-  (AV.  TS.),  prothamana -,  badhamana 
bZiandamana-,  bhdyamana -,  bhdramana-,  bhiksamana -,  bhrdjamana mdmZia- 
mana-,  mdndamana -,  meghamana-,  modamana yaccZiamana-,  ydjamana ydta- 
mana yticcimana-  (AV.),  yadamana rdmhamaiia -,  raksamana -,  rdbhamana 
rambamaiia rasamana -  (AV.),  rcjamana -,  rocamana -,  va?idamana -,  vartamana -, 
vdrdhamana -,  vd/iamana -,  vepamana-  (AV.),  zydthamana -,  siksamana -,  sumbha- 
manci -,  sobhamana -,  srdyamana-,  srosamana svdhcamana -,  sdcamana-,  sd/ia- 
mana -,  stdvamana -,  spdrdhamana -,  smdyamana -,  sydndamana -,  hdrsamaiia -, 
havamana -,  ZiCiscimana-. 

a.  A  few  middle  participles  in  -a/7Cf  instead  of  - mana ,  seem  to  be  formed  from 
present  stems  of  this  class:  thus  cyavana-,  prathana-,  yatana -  and yaldna-,  si'tmbkana-^  ;  but  it 
is  probably  better  to  class  them  as  somewhat  irregular  or  isolated  root  aorist  participles4. 

Imperfect  Indicative. 

428.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  longer  ending  of  the  2.  pi.  active  never 
occurs  in  the  imperfect  of  this  or  any  other  class  of  the  rz-  conjugation. 
Unaugmented  forms  are  fairly  common;  used  injunctively  they  are  in  the 
3.  sing,  very  nearly  as  frequent  (424)  as  the  regular  subjunctive5  (423). 

Active  sing.  1.  dgaccZiam  (AV.),  acaram ,  ataJzsam ,  atararn ,  anamam , 
a?iayam ,  apinvam  x,  abZiaram ,  abZiavam ,  abZiedam ,  arodZiam ,  aroham ,  asidam ; 
avam: ;  yama?n. 

2.  dZzrandas ,  aZzsaras ,  agaccZias ,  acaras,  d/anas ,  djayas,  dtaras ,  dtistZias1  2, 

ddaZias ,  adZiamas ,  dfiayas,  dpinvas r,  apibas 2 4,  dbZiajas ,  dbZiaras ,  dbZiaz'as,  dmadas , 
dyajas ,  dramZias ,  dradas ,  avadas ,  dvapas ,  dvaZias,  dsiksas ,  dsadas,  dsarpas 
(AV.),  asldas2,  asedZias ,  asravas\  ajas ,  iw;  (AV.),  bZidras . 

3.  dZzrcuidat ,  dkramat ,  dZzsarat ,  aZzZianat  (AV.),  dgaccZiat ,  aguZiat ,  d carat, 
acalat  (AV.),  acetat,  djanat ,  djayat ,  ajinvat r,  dtaZzsai ,  atapat ,  atarat ,  dtistZiat2, 
ddadat 2  (AV.),  ddaZiat ,  adasat,  adrmZiat  (AV.),  ddravat ,  adZiamat ,  anamat , 
dnayat,  dp  a  cat,  dpatat  (AV.),  dpinvat l,  dpibat2,  abZiajat,  abZiarat,  dbZiavat, 
dbZiusat,  dmadat ,  amantZiat ,  d mandat ,  dmurcZiat  (AV.),  dyaccZiat ,  araZzsat, 
arapat,  aroZiat,  dvapat,  dvasat,  dvasat,  dvaZiat ,  avenat ,  dsayat ,  dsasat 6  (Ivh. 
I.  94),  dsocat ,  asajat,  asadat,  dsldat2,  asedZiat ,  asZzandat  (AV.),  dZiarat  (AV.); 
y/h/,  arc  at,  dvat;  dir  at  (] fir-')1,  anZiat  ( uZi-  ‘push’);  Zzrdndat,  carat  (AV.), 
taZzsat,  tsdrat,  drinZiat,  ?iaZzsat,  nay  at,  pibat2,  bZidrat,  rebZiat,  vdhat. 

Du.  2.  djinvatam x,  dtaZzsatam  (AV.),  dpinvat  am  r,  dpratZiatam ,  dbZiavatam , 
amantZiatam,  aradatam,  dsiZzsatam,  dsascatam2,  asldatam2',  Cljaiam,  dvat  am ; 
air  at  am 7  (ir-  ‘set  in  motion’). 

3.  atistZiatam 2  (AV.),  dbZiavatam  (TS.  iv.  7.  1  56),  avardhatam ;  avatam; 
auhatam  (AV.  VS.  TS.). 

PI.  1.  ataZzsama ,  dbZiarama  (AV.).  —  2.  dtaZzsata,  dtistZiata2,  dnadata 
(TS.  v.  6.  i2),  dfiayata,  dpinvata1 ,  dbZiavata ,  avartata  (AV.),  dvaZgata  (TS.  v. 
6.  i2),  dsarpata ;  dvata\  auZiata  (AV.). 

3.  dZzasan  (AV.),  aZzraman 8  (AV.),  aksaran ,  akZianan  (AV.),  aguZian , 


1  Transfer  from  the  class.  5  See  Whitney  743. 

-  Transfer  form  from  the  reduplicating  5  Transfer  from  the  root  class, 

class.  7  Transfer  from  the  root  class,  in  which 

3  Cp.  Whitney  741  a,  and  Lindner,  the  verb  J>--  is  also  middle. 

Nominalbildung  54  (top)-  8  akramus  is  given  by  Avery  249  as  an 

4  Cp.  Root  Aorist  506.  impf.  of  this  class  with  -749  but  it  is  doubt- 


VII.  Verb.  Present  System.  327 

dear  an  (AV.),  aca/an  (AV.),  ajanan,  ajayan  (AV.),  dtaksan ,  ataran ,  atisthan*  l, 
at  rasa  n,  adasan ,  adravan ,  adhrajan ,  anaksan ,  dnaman  (AV.),  dnayan , 
apinvan 2,  apiban 1  (AV.),  dbharan ,  abhavan ,  dbhusan,  dm  a  dan,  amandan , 
ayacchan  (AV.),  dyacan  (AV.),  araksan ,  arajan  (AV.),  dvadan ,  avapan  (AV.), 
avardhan 3,  avahan ,  aresan  (\Pris-),  dsamsan ,  asiksan  (AV.),  as  ray  an  (AV.), 
dsthivan 4  (AV.),  dsred/ian ,  dsvaran ;  djan,  ayan  (AV.),  dr  can 3,  dvan5,  aijan 
(<?/-  ‘stir’),  auhaji 6  (AV.);  j. invan ,  tdksan ,  tsdran  (AV.),  dddan 1  (AV.),  bharan , 
bhusan ,  srosan ,  sfdan  1 . 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  atisihe 1  (AV.).  —  2.  dgahathas  (AV.),  dp  av  at  has, 
amandathas,  dr  0  cat  has  \  gdhathas  (AV.). 

3.  akalpata 8  (AV.),  ataksata ,  apinvata2,  abadhata ,  dmamhata 9,  dmanthata , 
dm  an  data,  aramhata,  araksata,  arocata,  av  art  at  a ,  avardhata ,  dualgata  (AV.), 
asapata ;  ajata,  dyata;  diksata 10  (AV.),  auhata  ( uh -  ‘remove’);  caksata,  janata , 
naksata ,  nimsata,  badhata,  rejata. 

Du.  2.  dbadhetham ,  drabhetham  (AV.).  —  3.  akr peta m ,  aprathettiin, 
abhyasetam  1 1 ,  drejetam ;  aiksetam 1  °. 

PL  3.  dkalpanta  (AV.),  akrpanta ,  dkhananta,  dgacchanta,  ajananta, 
atisthanta z,  ddadanta l,  adhavanta 1 2,  anamanta  (TS.iv.  6.  26),  dnayanta ,  dna- 
vanta,  apacafita,  aprathanta ,  dbhajanta,  abhayanta,  abharanta ,  dyajanta,  ara- 
manta ,  drejanta,  avadanta,  dvartanta ,  dvardhanta ,  avepanta  (AV.),  dvradanta , 
asamanta  (TS.  iv.  6.  32),  dsacanta,  dsapanta ,  as  a  Ji  ant  a ;  diksanta'10  (AV.  TS.); 
isanta ,  krpanta,  jananta ,  navanta ,  prathanta ,  bhdjanta  (AV.),  bhananta ,  mananta, 
vapanta. 

2.  The  suffixally  accented  a-  class  (tudd-)  x3. 

429.  Nearly  one  hundred  roots  belong  to  this  class.  The  radical  vowel 
is  almost  always  medial,  being  regularly  z,  zz  or  r.  If  the  vowel  is  final, 
which  is  very  rare,  it  is  almost  invariably  short.  As  the  -0  is  accented,  the 
radical  vowel  appears  in  its  weak  form;  e.  g.  huv-a-  (but  according  to  the 
radically  accented  class,  hdv-a-)  from  hn-  ‘call’. 

a.  There  are,  however,  some  irregularities  in  the  formation  of  the  present  stem. 
1.  Several  roots  instead  of  appearing  in  their  weak  form,  are  nasalized :  krl-  ‘cut’  :  krnta- ; 
‘be  pleased’  :  irmpa- ;  pis-  ‘adorn’  :  pirns  a- ;  nine-  ‘release’  :  muucd- ;  lip-  ‘smear’  :  limpa-  ; 
‘break’  :  lumpa-\  vid-  ‘find’:  vinda- ;  jzV-  ‘sprinkle’  :  sinca-,  A  few  other  roots  occasionally 
have  nasalized  forms  according  to  this  class:  thus  tundate ,  beside  the  regular  tudali  etc., 
from  tnd-  ‘thrust’;  drmhethe ,  beside  dfmhata ,  etc.,  from  drh-  ‘make  firm’;  sumbhdnte , 


less  an  aorist:  see  Whitney,  Roots,  under 

j//’7-tfZZZ. 

1  Transfer  form  from  the  reduplicating 
class. 

2  Transfer  from  the  -zzzz  class. 

3  dredn  (iv.  552  ;  v.  3i5)  and  vdrdhdn  are 
given  as  indicatives  by  Dei.bruck  91, 
followed  by  Avery  249.  Cp.  p.  322,  note  l0. 

4  From  sthiv-  ‘spue’,  originally  *sthiv-\  cp. 
v.  Negelein  24,  note  6:  the  root  is  there 
wrongly  given  as  j/zz/. 

5  asthan  (AV.  XIII.  Is)  is  given  by  v.  Nege- 
LEIN  18,  note  1  as  imperfect  of  zzj;  but  see 
Whitney’s  note  on  AV.  xm.  i5. 

6  akrpran  being  formed  with  the  ending 
•ran  (DELBRUCK  1 24)  is  doubtless  an  aorist; 
cp.  Whitney,  Roots  under  \krp-.  See 
below,  500. 

7  sran  (iv.  2T9)  according  to  DELBRUCK, 

Verbum  89  ^p.  63,  middle),  followed  by  Avery 

249,  for  *asara-n ;  but  avasran  is  3.  pi.  aor. 


of  ‘shine’  with  ending  -z'zzzz  (not  ava-sran : 
accent!).  Cp.  Whitney,  Roots,  under 
‘shine’. 

8  DELBRUCK  176  and  AVERY  247  give 
akrnvata  as  (once)  a  3.  sing.  If  this  is  correct, 
the  form  would  be  a  transfer  for  akrnnia . 

9  amala  is  given  by  Delbruck  101  and 
Avery  247  as  belonging  to  this  class 
(presumably  from  the  root  zzzzz-),  but  it  is 
doubtless  3.  sing.  mid.  aor.  of  zzzzzzz-  ‘think’; 
see  Whitney,  Roots,  under  j/wzzzz. 

10  From  z/bf-  ‘see’. 

11  From  bhyas-  ‘fear’. 

12  vii.  1 8 T5:  from  dhav-  ‘run’  —  dhanv-. 

J3  Cp.  E.  Leumann,  Die  Herkunft  der  6. 

Praesensklasse  im  Indischen  (Actes  du  x. 
Cong.  Intern.  Orient.  II.  1,  39 — 44;  IF.  5, 
Anz.  109;  KZ.  34,  587  ff.). 


328  1.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


beside  sumbhate  and  sobhate,  from  subh-  ‘shine’;  srnthati  (TS1 * *.),  beside  the  regular  srathnas 
etc.,  from  sralh -  ‘loosen’. —  2.  Four  roots  form  their  stem  with  the  suffix  -cha :  is-  ‘wish’: 
i-ccha- ;  r-  ‘go’  :  r-ccha- ;  pras- 1  ‘ask’  :  prccha- ;  vas-  ‘shine’  :  u-cchd-.  —  3.  Two  stems  are 
transfers  from  the  nasal  class  of  the  second  conjugation:  prnd-,  beside  pr-nd from  pr- 
‘fill’;  mrna -,  besid zmr-na-,  from  vir-  ‘crush’;  rnja-  ‘stretch’  has  become  the  regular  stem 
beside  3.  pi.  rPijate ;  and  2.  pi.  nmbha-ta  (AV.),  appears  beside  ubk-nd-,  from  ubh-  ‘confine’.  — 

4.  Beside  the  normal  -nu  stem  r-nu ,  the  root  r-  also  has  the  transfer  stem  rnv-d-.  — 

5.  While  roots  ending  in  i  or  u  change  these  vowels  into  iy  or  nv  before  -a  (e.  g.  ksiy-a-, 
from  ksi-  ‘dwell’,  yuv-d-  from  yu-  ‘join’),  the  TS.  has  ksy-dnt-  beside  RV.  ksiyant ■  ‘dwelling’. 

b.  The  present  stems  chya-  (AV.)  ‘cut  up’,  dya-  (AV.)  ‘divide’,  syd-  ‘sharpen’,  sya- 
‘bind’,  though  regarded  by  the  Indian  grammarians  as  belonging  to  the  -ya  class,  should 
most  probably  be  classified  here,  because  the  a  is  accented,  i  appears  beside  a  in  various 
forms  from  these  roots,  and  -yd  is  here  often  to  be  read  as  -ia,  while  this  is  never  the 
case  in  the  -ya  class. 

430.  The  inflexion  is  exactly  the  same  as  that  of  bZiava-.  The  forms 
which  actually  occur  are  the  following: 


Present  Indicative. 


Active.  Sing.  1.  iccZiAmi,  uksami  (AV.),  kir&mi  (AV.),  khidami  (AV.), 
g'irdmi 2  (AV.),  crtami  (AV.),  tirami ,  dyami  (AV.),  disami  (TS.  AV.),  dZiuvami 
(AV.),  prccZiAmi ,  muncami ,  rujdrni ,  limpdmi  (AV.),  vinddmi ,  vis  ami  (AV.), 
vrscami  (AV.),  vrhami ,  sine  Ami,  suldmi  (TS.  vii.4. 1 94),  suvami,  srjAmi,  sprsdmi , 


syami  (AV.  TS.). 

2.  icchasi  (AV.),  ucchasi  (TS.  iv.  3.  115),  tirasi,  ksipasi  (AV.),  trmpasi , 
prcchasi ,  mrnasi,  vindasi,  vrscasi ,  suvdsi . 

3.  anati  (AV.),  icchati ,  ucchati ,  rcchati  (AV.),  rnvati ,  krntdti  (AV.), 
krsati  (TS.  iv.  2.  56),  ksiyati  (AV.),  khiddti ,  gi?~ati  (AV.),  chyati  (TS.  v.  2.  121), 

(AV.),  pirns ati,  prcchati ,  prndti ,  misati ,  muncati  (AV.),  ynvdti ,  rujdti, 
ruvdti ,  vir/ddti,  visati  (AV.),  vrscati,  vrhati ,  sincati  (AV.),  suvdti,  srjdti, 
sphurdti  (AV.), 

Du.  2.  rnvathas ,  b/iasdt/ias ,  muncathas ,  visathas  (AV.),  vrhathas ,  srjdt/ias. 

3.  iccZiatas  (AV.),  muncatas  (AV.),  sincatas. 

PI.  1.  giramas  (AV.),  crtdmasi  (AV.),  tiramasi ,  dyamasi  (AV.),  nudamasi 
(AV.)  and  nuddmas  (AV.),  prccZidmas  (AV.),  mrsdmasi ,  vrZidmasi  (AV.)  and 
vrZilmas  (AV.),  suvamasi  (AV.),  srjdmasi  (AV.)  and  srjdmas  (AV.),  sprsdmasi. 

2.  muncatZia ,  sincdtZia  (TS.  AV.). 

3.  andnti  (AV.),  iccZidnti ,  uksdnti,  nccZidnti ,  rccZidnti,  rnjanti ,  rsdnti , 
ksiydnti  (AV.),  kZiiddnti  (AV.),  crtdnti,  tiranti ,  tuhjdnti ,  p rccZidnti,  misanti , 
muednti ,  muncanti ,  mrsdnti,  rujdnti ,  vindanti ,  visdnti,  vrscdnti ,  sumbZidnti, 


si Zic anti,  suvdnti,  srjdnti ,  sp rsdnti,  spZiurdnti,  syanti. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  ‘send’,  nude  (AV '.),  prccZie,  muhee  (AY.),  mrje,  znndZie, 
vise  (AV.),  /zzg^,  J7/5A?,  Ziuve. 

2.  iccZiase,  rnjdse,  jusdse  (AV.),  prccZiase,  mrsdse,  yuvase,  vinddse ,  sinedse. 

3.  iccZiate  (AV.),  uksdte,  rhjate,  kirate,  krsdte  (AV.),  tirdte ,  tundate,  turdte 
(TS.ri.  2. 1 24),  nn  date  (AV.),  pirns  ate,  prccZiate,  prncate,  muncate ,  mrsate,  yuvdte, 
vinddte,  vindZidte ,  visdte,  vrscate  (AV.),  srjate.  —  With  ending  -e:  /zzzzV. 

Du.  2.  drmZietZie,  nudetZie  (AV.  TS.),  yuvetZie,  vindetZie  (Kh.  1.  128). 


3.  tujete. 

PI.  1.  nudamaZie  (AV.),  yuvamaZie ,  risAmaZie,  sicamaZie,  ZiuvamaZie. 

3.  iccZiante  (AV.),  uksante,  tirdnte,  vijdntc  (AV.),  vindante  (AV.),  vis  ante , 
vrscante  (AV.),  srjante  (AV.). 


1  The  suffix  - cha  has  in  this  instance 

attached  itself  throughout  the  conjugation 

to  the  root,  which  thus  becomes  for  practical 


purposes  pracch-  (but pras-nd-  ‘question’); 
prec-or  and  posco  for  *porc-sco  in  Latin. 

2  From  ‘swallow’. 


cp. 


VII.  Verb.  Present  System.  329 


Present  Subjunctive. 

431*  Active.  Sing-.  1.  srjanv,  mrksd. —  2.  kirdsi,  muhcasi  (AV.),  rujdsi ; 
sincds.  —  3.  tirati,  bhrjjdti ,  mrlati,  mrdhati ,  vandti,  vidhdti ,  zy/j/z  (AV.), 
suvdti,  srjati  (AV.);  icehat,  ucchdt ,  rcc/iat,  nudat  (SA.  xii.  29),  prcchCit ,  prndt , 
mu  neat  (AV.),  mrldt,  mrsdt  (AV.),  vrsedt,  sine  at,  srjat ,  sprsat  (AV.). 

Du.  r.  visava  (AV.).  —  3.  mrlatas . 

PI.  2.  visatha  (AV.).  —  3.  ucchan ,  prechdn ,  sphurdn. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  preehai ,  zv'Afz  (TS.m.  5.61).  —  2.  yuvase.  —  3.  jus  ate, 
finite.  —  Du.  2.  prnaithe.  —  3.  yuvaite .  —  PI.  1.  siheamahai. 

Present  Injunctive. 

432.  Active.  Sing.  2.  icchas  (AV.),  guhas ,  rajas,  vrhas,  vrscas, 
sic  as,  srjds. 

3.  ucchat,  krntat,  ksipdt,  khidat ,  jus  at,  mrnat  (AV.),  rujdt,  rudhat , 
ruvdt,  vidhat,  visat,  vrhat,  sincat,  srjdt1,  sprsat  (AA.  v.  22),  sp/mrat,  huvat. 

PI.  3.  trpdn,  vidhdn ,  vindan. 

Middle.  Sing.  3.  jusata,  tirata.  —  PI.  3.  icc/idnta,  isanta,  jus  ant  a, 
tiranta ,  nuddnta,  bhurdnta,  yuvanta ,  vidhanta,  srjanta. 

Present  Optative. 

433.  Active.  Sing.  1.  udeyam  2  (AV.),  tireyam  (Kh.  1.  9s),  vindeyam  (Kh. 
IE  62). —  3.  icchet,  ucchet  (AV.),  khidet  (AV.),  prcchet,  lumpet  (AV.),  siiice't  ( AV.), 
srjet  (AV.).  —  Du.  1.  vrheva.  —  2.  tiretam .  —  PI.  1.  isema,  ksiyema  (AV.), 
rujema,  ruhema  (Kh.  11.  41),  vane'ma ,  vidhema,  visema,  huvema.  —  2.  tireta ; 
tiretana. 

Middle.  Sing  1.  huveya.  —  3.  iccheta  (AV.),  juseta. 

PI.  1.  va?ietna/ii,  vidhemahi.  —  3.  juserata . 

Present  Imperative. 

434.  Active.  Sing.  2.  icchd,  uccha ,  idja  (AV.),  kira ,  krnta  (AV.),  ksipa , 

(AV.),  khida  (AV.),  erta,  chya  (AV.),  A/yz,  iuda ,  trmpd ,  nuda  (AV.),  pimsa 

(AV.),  prccha,  prhea*  (AV .),  prna,  prusa,  munca,  mrnd,  mr/d,  mrs'a,  yuva, 
rikha,  ruja,  ruva,  visa,  vinda,  vrsed,  vrhd,  srna  (AV.),  sihea,  suva 4,  srja , 
sphura,  sya.  —  With  ending  AcA:  mrdatat  (AV.),  vrhat  at,  visatat 
(TS.  vii.  1.  66),  suvatat. 

3.  icchatu ,  uksatu  (AV.),  ucchatu,  ubjatu  (AV.);  rcchatu ,  kirdtu  (TS. 
ill.  3. 1 1 5),  krsatu  ( AV. ),  ertatu  { AV.),  tiratu  (Kh.11.  1 12),  trmpatu ,  disatu  (AV.), 
Artf/zz  (AV.),  nudatu  (AV.),  pimsatu,  muheatu  (AV.  TS.),  mrlatu,  visatu  (AV. 
TS.),  vindatu  (AV.),  vrscatu  (AV.),  siheatu,  suvatu,  syatu.  — With  visatat 
(Kh.  iv.  61 ;  83). 

Du.  2.  uksatam,  ubjdtam,  tiratam,  trmpatam ,  nudatam  (AV.),  brhatam 
(AV.),  muncata?n,  mrldtam,  visa  tarn  (AV.),  vrhat  am,  sihea  tarn ,  srjdtam , 
sphuratam  (AV.),  sy atari. 

3.  jusatam  (Kh.  1.  31),  trmpatam,  dyatam  (AV.),  muheatam,  visafam  (TS. 
vii.  3.  13V,  suvatdm  (AV.),  syatam. 


1  Avery  adds  srdkaj ?):  perhaps  the  aor. 
injunctive  S7'idhat  is  meant. 

2  With  Samprasarana.  This  verb  other¬ 
wise  follows  the  radically  accented  a-  class. 

3  Transfer  from  the  infixing  nasal  class 

(VA/v*) :  that  it  would  have  been  accented 


prhed  is  to  be  inferred  from  the  fern.  part. 
prhcat-i-  (RY.  AV.),  though  the  AV.  has  also 
pfncat-i 

4  In  AV.  vie  144  suva  appears  in  the  Pp. 
as  .tzyz. 


330  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


PI.  2.  icchata ,  uksata ,  ucchata ,  umbhata  (AV.),  rhjata ,  khudata ,  grndta 
(AV.),  tirata ,  tudata  (AV.),  nudata ,  pimsata,  prcchdta,  prnata,  muhcdta,  mrlata, 
mrndta  (AV.),  visata  (AY.),  vrhata ,  sundhata ,  sihcata ,  srjdta ,  sprsdta. 

3.  uksantu  (AV.),  ucchdntu ,  ubjatitu ,  rcchantu ,  rdantu ,  krsantu ,  chyantu 
(TS.v.  2. 121),  iirantu ,  tudimtu  (AV.  TS.),  disantu  (Kh.m.  io2),  jmdantu  (AV.), 
bhurantu ,  muncdntu ,  mrlantu ,  visantu,  sihcantu ,  suvantu ,  srjantu. 

Middle.  Sing.  2.  icchasva ,  krsasva ,  gurasva ,  jusdsva ,  nuddsva ,  prcchasva 
(Kh.  11.  131),  priidsva ,  mrsdsva ,  yuvdsva ,  vindasva  (AV.),  visasva ,  vrsasva, 
sihcasva ,  srjasva ,  sprsasva  (AV.),  .rjwz'tf. 

3.  icchatam  (AV.),  jus  at  am,  nudatam  (AN  SA.xir.  9),  prnatam,  muncatdm 
(AV.),  visatam ,  srjatam  (AV.). 

Du.  2.  uksethdm ,  jusethdm ,  nudcthdm ,  prnetham,  vr set  ham,  srjethdin  (AV. 
TS.).  —  3.  jusetam. 

PI.  2.  kramadhvam  (TS.  iv.  6.  51),  jusddkvam ,  tiradhvam ,  prnddhvam , 
visadhvam  (AV.),  sihcddhvam ,  srjddhvam ,  syadhvam. 

3.  jusantam ,  muhcantdiii  (AV.),  risantam ,  vijantam  (AV.),  vrscanta?n  (AV.), 
sprsantam  ( A  V . ) . 

Present  Participle. 


435.  Active,  ic chant-,  uksdnt-  (AV.),  ucchdnt -,  ubjdnt rsdnt -,  krntant 
krsdnt- ,  k  si  pant-,  ksiydnt -,  khiddnt-  (AV.),  guhdint -,  citdfit-,  jurdnt tirant -, 
tujdnt -,  tuddnt -,  trpant -,  disant -,  drmhdnt-  (AV.),  nuddnt -,  nuvant -,  prcchdnt -, 
prusdnt-  (AV.),  bhujant -,  mithdfit -,  misdnt -,  muhcdnt-  mrjdnt-,  mrsant -, 
risdnt -,  rujdnt -,  mdhdnt -,  ruvdnt -,  vidhdnt -,  vis  ant-,  vf scant- -,  si/cdnt -,  sumbhant -, 
susant-  and  svasant sine  ant-,  suvant-,  srjant-,  sphurdnt -,  huvdnt- 1  (7^7-  ‘call’  . 

Middle,  icchdmdna-,  uksamana-,  usamana-  ( ]V vas-),  usdmana-  (: vas - 
‘wear’),  guhamana-,  jus  dm  ana-,  dhrsamana-,  nrtdmdna-,  prcchdmdma-,  bhurd- 
mana-,  muheamana-  (AV.  TS.),  yuvamana-,  vijamdna-  (AV.),  suedmana-. 


Imperfect  Indicative. 

436.  Active.  Sing.  1.  atiram  (TS.  iv.  1.  103),  dprccham,  arujam . 

2.  dtiras,  anudas,  aprnas ,  amuheas ,  amrnas,  arujas,  avindas,  avrhas , 
asrjas ,  dsphuras,  dsyas  (AV.);  dicchas,  ducchas;  vindas ,  vrscas,  srjas. 

3.  akrntat ,  akhidat,  djusat ,  dtirat,  aduhat  (TS.  iv.  6.  54),  dpimsat, 
aprnat,  dmuheat ,  amrnat,  amrsat  (AV.),  arujat,  dvidhat ,  avindat,  dvisat, 
dvr  scat,  dsiheat ,  asuvat,  asrjat ,  asprsat,  asphurat,  asyat ;  dicchat  (AV.), 
duksat,  ducchat ,  aubjat ;  tudat,  trmhdt,  rujdt,  likhat  (AV.),  vindat,  vrsedt,  syat, 
siheat ,  srjdt. 

Du.  2.  atiratam,  amuheatam ,  dmrnatam ,  avindatam  (Kh.  1.  31),  asiheata ?n. 

3.  amuheatam ,  a  sine  at  am  (AV.). 

PI.  1.  diecha?na.  —  2.  d pints ata  (]/rpis-),  aprcchata,  dmuheata ,  asrjata.  — 
3.  dpimsan,  dplsan 2  (AV.  iv.  6 7),  dvindan ,  avis  an  (AV.),  dvr  sc  an  (AV.),  dsihean, 
dsyjan,  asprsan  (AV.);  dr  dan  (\Prd-);  duhsan;  uksan,  rujan. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  djuse  (AV.),  avije,  ahuve.  —  2.  amuheathas,  avisathas 
(AV.).  —  3.  ajusata ,  aitiuhcata,  asiheata  (AV.),  asrjata-,  drmhata. 

Du.  2.  anudetham,  dvindetham. 

Pi.  2.  ajusadhvam.  —  3.  djusanta,  atiranta,  atvisanta,  anudanta  (AV.), 
amuheanta  (AV.),  dyuvanta  (AV.),  avindanta ,  avisanta,  dsrjanta,  asprsanta 
(AV.),  dhuvanta ;  aisanta  (is-  ‘send’);  grnanta,  jusanta. 


1  The  fem.  is  regularly  formed  from  the  2  Anomalous  form  for  *apimsan ,  from /A 

strong  stem  in  but  the  weak  stem  in  ‘crush’. 

•a/  appears  in  sincat-l •,  beside  sin  cant-  7-. 


VII.  Verb.  Present  System.  331 


3.  The  ya-  class  x. 

437.  The  present  stems  formed  with  this  suffix  fall  into  two  groups. 
In  the  first,  consisting  of  about  70  transitive  or  intransitive  verbs,  the  suffix 
is  unaccented;  in  the  second,  consisting  of  rather  more  than  80  verbs  with 
a  passive  meaning,  the  suffix  is  accented.  In  all  probability  both  groups  were 
identical  in  origin,  with  the  accent  on  the  suffix.  This  is  indicated  by  the 
fact  that  the  root  though  accented  in  the  first  group  appears  in  its  weak 
form;  and  that  this  group  consists  largely  of  intransitive  verbs  and  to  some 
extent  of  verbs  with  a  passive  sense.  The  latter  are  manifestly  transfers  from 
the  -yd  or  passive  group  with  change  of  accent.  Thus  jdyate  ‘is  born’  is  an 
altered  passive  beside  the  active  janati  ‘begets’.  The  accent  moreover  occa¬ 
sionally  fluctuates.  Thus  the  passive  mucydte  ‘is  released’  once  or  twice  occurs  (in 
the  RV.  and  AV.)  accented  on  the  root;  and  there  is  no  appreciable  difference 
of  meaning  between  ksfyate  and  ksiyate  ‘is  destroyed’;  jlyate  and  jiydte  ‘is 
overcome’;  pdcyate  and  pacydte  ‘is  cooked’;  miyate  and  miyate  (AV.)  ‘is  in¬ 
fringed’  2. 

A.  The  radically  accented  ya-  class. 

438.  The  root  nearly  always  appears  in  a  weak  form.  Thus  roots  that 
otherwise  contain  a  nasal,  lose  it:  drmh-  ‘make  firm’  :  dfh-ya-.  The  root 
vyadh -  ‘pierce’  takes  Samprasarana:  vidh-ya-.  The  root  spas-  ‘see’  loses  its 
initial:  pds-ya-.  Several  roots  ending  in  a  shorten  the  vowel  before  the  suffix: 
dha-  ‘suck’  :  dhaya-\  ma-  ‘exchange’  :  may  a-)  va-  ‘weave’  :  vdya- ;  vyd-  ‘enve¬ 
lope’  :  vyaya-;  hva-  ‘call’  :  hvdya -h 

a.  Several  other  roots  usually  stated  as  ending  in  a  remain  unchanged:  ga-  ‘sing’  : 

gay  a-  ;  gld -  ‘be  weary’  \  g  lay  a-  (AV.);  trd-  ‘save’  :  tray  a- ;  pya-  ‘fill  up’  :  pydya-\  rd-  ‘bark’  : 

raya-\  va-  ‘blow’  :  vdya- ;  srd-  ‘boil’  :  srdya-^. 

b.  The  root  srarn-  ‘be  weary’  lengthens  its  vowel:  srdmya -5. 

c.  The  final  of  roots  in  -f  sometimes  becomes  both  Tr 6  and  iir\  thus  jf-  ‘waste 

away’  becomes  juiya-  and  jirya-  (AV.);  tr-  ‘cross’  :  turya-  and  tirya-1 2 3 4  (AV.).  The  root 
pf-  ‘fill’  because  of  its  initial  labial  becomes  purya-  only. 

43g.  The  forms  actually  occurring  in  this  class  are  the  following: 

Present  Indicative. 

Active.  Sing.  i.  asyami  (AV.),  isydmi ,  nahyami, pasyami  (AV 1),  vidhyami 
(AV.),  hvayami. 

2.  asyasi,  isyasi,  ucyasi  ( ]/" uc-) ,  gay  a  si,  ndsyasi,  pdsyasi,  pusyasi,  ranyasi, 
rayasi ,  risyasi,  haryasi. 

3.  dsyati ,  iyati  (RV1.),  isyati ,  krudhyati  (AV.),  gayati,  jlryati  (AV.), 
juryati ,  tanyati ,  ddsyati,  ddhyati  (AV.),  diyati ,  divyati  (AV.),  dusyati  (SA. 
xii.  23),  dhayati ,  nasyati ,  nrtyati  (AV.),  p dsyati,  pusyati ,  ranyati ,  risyati,  vayati 
(AV.),  vayati ,  vidhyati ,  vyayati ,  simyati  (TS.  v.  2.  121),  susyati  (Kh.  iv.  538), 
sidhyati ,  haryati ,  hrsyati ,  hvdyati. 

Du.  2.  dlyathas ,  ranyathas.  — -  3.  asyatas  (AV.),  nasyatas ,  pdsyatas , 
pusyatas ,  risyatas  (AV.),  vayatas  (AV.),  vayatas,  srdmyatas  (AV.). 

1  Cp.  Lorentz,  IF.  8,  68 — 122.  1  grammarians  as  ending  in  -ai  and  belonging 

2  Also  in  Brahmana  passages  of  the  TS.  to  the  a-  class.  The  latter  form  is  preferable 
ricyate  ‘is  left’  beside  ricydie  (V.),  lupyate  ‘is  from  the  point  of  view  of  gradation.  Cp. 
lost’  beside  lupyate  { AV.),  hiyate  ‘is  left’  beside  27,  a,  I  ;  BB.  19,  166. 

hiyate  (V.).  5  In  B.  this  analogy  is  followed  by  several 

3  These  are  reckoned  by  the  native  gram-  roots  in  -am. 

marians  as  ending  in  e  and  belonging  to  the  6  In  the  a -  class  -f  becomes  -ir,  e.  g. 
a-  class.  This  seems  preferable  from  the  if-  :  lira-. 

point  of  view  of  vowel  gradation:  see  27,  a,  3.  7  Only  in  an  emendation  ava-tiryatl  jAV. 

4  Such  roots  are  reckoned  by  the  native  XIX.  98)  for  avatlryatis,  Pada  avail h  yatih. 


332 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


PI.  1.  asyamasi ,  pdsyamasi  and  pasydmas  (AV.),  vidhydmas  (AY.), 

vyayamasi  (AV.TS.),  harydmasi ,  hvayamasi. 

2.  dsyatha ,  pdsyatha ,  pusyatha ,  risyatha ,  hdryatha. 

3.  asyanti  (AV.),  dry  anti ,  gdyanti ,  jury  anti,  dasyanti ,  diyanti ,  dhayanti 
(AV.),  nasyanti  (AV.),  ndhyanti ,  nrtyanti  (AV.),  p  asyanti ,  pusyanti ,  r  any  anti , 
risyanti ,  v  ay  anti ,  v  ay  anti,  vidhyanti  (AV.  TS.),  srdniyanti ,  hdryanti ,  hvdyanti. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  zVy*?,  padye  (AV.),  £v7y<?,  nahye  (TS.  1.  1.  101),  mdnye, 
mrsye ,  vyaye  (AV.),  hvaye . 

2.  (z-  ‘go’),  jdyase,  trdyase,  ddyase ,  pdtyase ,  pydyase ,  manyase,  mfyase, 
mucyase . 

3.  isyate,  Zyate,  rjyate,  kslyate,  jdyate,  jiyate,  trsyate  (AV.),  day  ate,  dipyate 
(AV.),  pdcyate,  pdtyate,  pddyate,  pasyate,  pusyate  (AV.),  buddy  ate  (AV.),  many  ate , 
miyate ,  mrsyate,  riyate ,  haryate. 

Du.  3.  jdyete  (AV.),  hvayete. 

PI.  1.  hvdydmahe .  —  2.  trayadhve.  —  3.  Zyante ,  ksiyante,  jay  ante,  trayante, 
pddyante ,  manyante  (AV.),  may  ante,  mrsyante ,  yiidhyante,  rtyante,  hvdyante. 

Present  Subjunctive. 

440.  Active.  Sing.  1.  pasydni  (AV.).  —  2.  pasydsi,  harydsi  (AV.); 
pasyds  (AV.) ;  risyds ,  hdryas. —  3.  risydti;  pdsydt,  pusydt ,  risydt  (TS.i.  6.  21). 

PL  1.  pasydma  (AV.).  —  3.  pdsydn. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  yudhyai .  —  2.  pasydsai  (AV.).  —  3.  many  ate,  mucydtai 
(AV.).  —  PI.  1.  hvaydmahai  (AV.). 

Present  Injunctive. 

Active.  Sing.  2.  divyas.  —  3.  gdyat,  dlyat,  pasyat,  vidhyat.  —  PL  3 .pasyan. 

Middle.  Sing.  2.  manyathds.  —  3.  jay  at  a,  manyata.  —  PL  3.  ddyanta. 

* 

Present  Optative. 

Active.  Sing.  1.  vyayeyam.  —  2.  pasyes.  —  3.  dasyet ,  dhayet  (AV.), 
risyet.  —  Du.  3.  hvayetam  (TS.  in.  2.  4’).  —  PL  1.  pasyema,  pusyema, 

buddy ema  (AV.),  risyema. 

Middle.  Sing.  3.  pas) eta,  ma?iyeta  (AV.),  miyeta  (SA.  xir.  20).  —  Pl.  1. 
jdyemabi. 

Present  Imperative. 

441.  Active.  Sing.  2.  <7^77,  dfhya,  nasya,  nahya  (AV.), 

(AV.),  pdsya ,  yuddya,  ray  a,  znddya,  susya  (AV.),  (AV.),  darya , 

hvaya.  —  With  ending  -faf:  asyatdt  (AV.). 

3.  asyatu,  ucyatu  (AV.),  trpyatu  (AV.),  nasyatu,  nrtyatu  (AV.),  rddhyatu 
(AV.),  vidhyatu  (AV.),  susyatu ,  sivyatu,  hvayatu  (AV.). 

Du.  2.  asyatam ,  isyatam  (AV.),  diyatam,  nadyatam  (AV.),  pusyatam  (AV.), 
vidhyatam,  haryatam.  —  3.  asyatam  (AV.TS.),  nadyatam  (SA.xii. 32),  vidhyatam. 

Pl.  2.  isyata ,  gdyata,  jasyata ,  ndsyata  (AV.),  nahyata  (AV.),  pdsyata , 
pusyata ,  mudyata  (AV.),  v  ay  at  a,  viadyata,  haryata.  —  With  ending  -tana: 
nahyatana. 

3.  gdyantu  (AV.),  trpyantu  (AV.),  nasyantu  (AV.),  pusyantu,  mithyantu , 
medyantu ,  vyayantu (AV.),  simyantu  (TS.v.  2. 1 11),  haryantu  (AV.),  hvdyantu  ( AV.). 

Middle.  Sing.  2.  jdyasva ,  trdyasva ,  dayasva ,  drdyasva ,  nadyasva  (AV.), 
padyasva,  pasyasva,  pydyasva,  bnddyasva  (TS.  AV.),  manyasva  (TS.  AV.), 
vyayasva ,  hvayasva  (AV.). 

3.  rdhyatam,  jdyatdm,  trdyatdm,  ddpyatdm  { TS.iv.  7. 134),  padyatdm  (AV.), 
pydyatdm  (TS.  AV.),  manyatam  (TS.  AV.),  medyatam  (AV.),  rddbyatam  (AV.), 
szyatdm  (AV.)  die’,  hvayatdm  (AV.). 


VII.  Verb.  Present  System. 


Du.  2.  trayetham ,  manyetham ,  hvayetham  (AY.).  —  3.  trayetam . 

PL  2.  asyadhvam ,  jayadhvam  (AV.),  trdyadhvam,  dayadhvam ,  nahya- 
dhvam  (AV.),  budhyadhvam ,  slvyadhvam. —  3.  jay  ant  am,  trdyantam,  padyantam 
(AV.),  pydyantam,  many  ant  dm  (AV.  TS.),  vyayantdm  (TS.m.  3. 1 13),  hvayantam 

(TS.  hi.  2.  41). 

Present  Participle. 

442.  Active,  dsyant -,  isyant -,  fjyant -,  (d.-)kupyant-  (AV.),  ksudyant -, 
gdyant-,  grdhyant -1,  thy  ant -,  diyant-,  nrtyant -,  p  dsyant-,  ply  ant-,  pusyant-, 
y dsyant-, yudhyant-,  rdyant-,  (d-)lubhyant-  (AV.),  vayant-,  vidhyant-  ( A V. ) ,  vy diyant-, 
simyant-  (TS.  v.  2.  121),  shy  ant-,  hdryant-',  and  the  compound  an-ava-gldyant- 
(AV.)  ‘not  relaxing’. 

Middle.  tyamana-,  kayamana cdyamana-,  jayamana-,  trayamana-, 
day  am  ana-,  ndhyamana-,  pdtyamana-,  pddyamdna -,  pasyamdna-,  pdryamana-, 
pydyamana-,  budhyamdna -,  manyamdna-,  y ndhyamana-,  rddhyamana-  (AV.), 
vdsyamdna-  (AV.),  hdryamana-,  hvdyamana-. 

Imperfect  Indicative. 

443.  Active.  Sing.  1.  adlyam ,  dpasyam,  avyayam. —  2.  apasyas ,  dyudhyas. — 
3.  agdyat,  adhayat ,  anrtyat  (AV.),  dpasyat,  ayudhyat ,  avayat  (AV.),  dvidhyat , 
avyayat,  aharyat ,  dhvayat;  dsyat. 

Du.  3.  dpasyatam . 

PI.  1.  dpasydma.  —  3.  aj Bryan 2,  dpasyan,  dvayan  (AV.),  ahvayan( AV.); 
dsyan  (AV.). 

Middle.  Sing.  2.  djayathas,  aharyathds ;  jdyathds.  — 3.  ajdyata ,  apatyata, 
amanyata ,  arajyata  (AV.);  jayata. 

Du.  2.  ahvayetham  (AV.).  —  3.  dkvayetam. 

PL  3.  djayanta ,  dnahyanta  (AV.),  apadyanta  (AV.),  dpasyanta,  diman- 
yanta,  aha  ay  ant  a ;  jayanta ,  ddyanta. 


B.  The  suffixally  accented  /c-  class  (passive). 

Delbruck,  Verbum  184  (p.  166  —  169).  —  Avery,  Verb-Inflection  274 — 275.  — 
Whitney,  Sanskrit  Grammar  768 — 774;  Roots  230—231.  —  v.  Negelein  38 — 40. 

444.  Any  root  that  requires  a  passive  forms  its  present  stem  by  adding 
accented  -y#  (which  never  needs  to  be  pronounced  -70).  The  root  appears  in  its 
weak  form,  losing  a  nasal  and  taking  Samprasarana;  thus  ahj-  ‘anoint’:  aj-yd- 
be  anointed’;  zw-  ‘speak’  :  uc-ya-  ‘be  spoken’.  Final  vowels  undergo  the 
changes  usual  before  -_y<2  in  verbal  forms:  final  7  and  77  being  lengthened, 
5  mostly  becoming  f,  r  being  generally  changed  to  rz',  and  r  becoming  z/T 
Thus  z;zz-  ‘fix’  :  mTya-;  su-  ‘press’  :  suya-;  da-  ‘give’  :  df-yd-  (but  jhd-  ‘know’  : 
pia-yd-) ;  kr-  ‘make’  :  kri-yd-;  sr-  ‘crush’  :  slrya-. 

a.  The  root  tan -  ‘stretch’  forms  its  passive  from  Za-  :  ta-ya-.  Similarly  jan-  ‘beget’ 
makes  its  present  stem  from  ja-  :  jdya-te ,  which  has,  however,  been  transferred  to  the 
radically  accented  class,  mri-ya-te  ‘dies’  (|/wr-) 4  and  dhriyate  (j tdhr-)  ‘is  steadfast’, 
though  passives  in  form,  are  not  so  in  sense  L 

445.  The  inflexion  is  identical  with  that  of  the  radically  accented  rtf- 
class  in  the  middle,  differing  from  it  irf  accent  only.  No  forms  of  the  optative 
are  found  in  the  RV.  or  AV.  The  forms  actually  occurring  are  the  following: 


1  avatlryatfs { AV.  XIX.  9s)  is  a  corrupt  reading : 
see  Whitney’s  Translation;  cp.  p.  331,  note  ' . 

2  Avery  249  adds  adhayang ). 

3  No  example  of  iir  seems  to  occur  in 

in  the  Samhitas,  but  piir-ya -  from  pf-  ‘fill’ 
is  found  in  the  -ya  class. 


4  This  root  has  a  transitive  sense  (‘crush’) 
only  in  its  secondary  form  mrn -,  and  in  the 
AV.  in  the  imperative  forms  rnrnihi  and 
mrnita. 

5  Cp.  above  437. 


334 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


Present  Indicative. 

Sing.  1.  hiye  (ha-  ‘leave’).  —  2.  acyase  (ahc-  ‘bend’,  AY.),  ajyase  (Y  ad~ 
and  Y ahj-),  idhyase,  ucydse  (] fvac-),  tilyase,  puyase ,  badhydse  (AV.),  mucydse 
(AY.),  mrjydse ,  y ajyase ,  ricyase,  rudhyase  ( nidh -  ‘hinder’,),  sasydse  ( j/ satns-), 
sicyase ,  stuyase ,  huyase  (ha-  ‘call’).  —  3.  ajydte  (Y aj-  and  j/ ahjj,  as v ate 
(AY.),  idhydte ,  ucydte  ( j/V^r-),  ndyate  (ud-  ‘wet’  and  z/aY-  ‘speak’),  upydte 
(YvaP')’>  uhyate  (Yvah-),  rcydte  (arc-  ‘praise’),  kriydte ,  ksiydte  ‘is  destroyed’, 
gamy  ate  ( AV .),  grhyate  (AV.),  chidyate  (AY.),  jlydte  (AV.)1,  tapyate , 
tdyate ,  tujydte ,  dab hy ate ,  diydte  ‘is  given’  (AV.),  dlyate  ‘is  divided’  (AV.), 
duhyate ,  drsyate ,  d/iamyate ,  dhlyate  (dha-  ‘put’),  d/iriyate ,  tuyate ,  pacydte ,  pjyate 
‘is  drunk’  (AY.),  pay  ate,  prey  cite,  badhydte  (Y  bandh-)  2,  mathydte  (AY.),  mucyate, 
mrjydte ,  mriydte ,  j yujydte,  ricyate ,  ribhyate 3,  lupyate  (AV.),  vacydte  (Yvahc-), 
vidydte  ‘is  found’,  vrjydte 4 *,  sasydte  (Yearns-),  sisyate ,  siryate ,  sruyate,  sicydte, 
say  ate  ‘is  pressed’,  (j/V&-),  srjydte ,  hanydte ,  huyate  ‘is  called’. 

Du.  3.  acyete  ( (/  zw-). 

Pi.  1.  tapyamahe  (AV.),  pa?iydmaZie.  —  3.  upyante  (YvaP~\  rcydnte , 
rdhyatite  (AV.),  kriyante,  j hay  ante,  trhyante  (AV.),  dahyante  (AV.),  duhydnte 
(AV.),  bhriyante ,  miyante  ‘are  fixed’  ( j/  mi-,  AV.),  mriyante  (AV.),  yujyante, 
vacydjite  ( ]/ 7) ahc-,  AV.),  vTyante  ( ]/ z/f-,  AV.),  sasyante  ( Y dams-),  sir y ante  (AV.), 
srjyante  (AV.),  hanydnte,  huyante. 

Present  Subjunctive. 

446.  Sing.  3.  uhydte ,  bhriyate ,  sisyatai 5  (AV.). 

Du.  2.  uhydthe6. 

Present  Injunctive. 

Sing.  3.  suyata  (  Y su-). 

Present  Imperative. 

Sing.  2.  idhyasva  (AV.  TS.),  dhiyasva  (AV.),  dhriyasva  (AV.),  mucyasva 
(Kh.  11.  114),  mriydsva  (AV.),  vacyasva  (Yvahc-). 

3.  rdhyatam  (AV.),  tayatam  (AV.),  dhlyatam  (AV.),  dhuyatam  (AV.), 
dhriyatam  (AV.),  prcyatdm ,  badhyatdm  (AV.),  mucyatdm  (AV.),  hanyatam  (AV.), 
hlyatdm. 

PI.  2.  prey  ad  In' a  771  (AV.  TS.),  yujyadhvam ,  vicyadhvam  (AV.). 

3.  tapyantdm  (AV.),  trhyantdm  (AV.),  preyantam  (AV.),  badhyantam, 
bhajyantam  ( ]/ bhahj-,  AV.),  vacyantdm ,  vrscyantam ,  hanyantdm  (AV.). 

Present  Participle. 

447.  acyamana-  (AV ),  ajydmana -,  idhyamana -,  udyamana-  ( ]/ vad-, 
AV.),  upyarnana-  ( ]/ vap-,  AV.),  uhydmana -,  rcyamdna-,  krtydmana-  (AV.), 
kriyamana-,  (d-)ksjyamana-,  glydtnana -,  guhyamatia -,  tapyamcLna-,  tayamana-, 
tujyamana -,  trhyamana -,  dadyamana-1 ,  dlyamana-  (AV.),  duhyamana-  (AV.), 
dhlyd?nana-,  nahyamdna-  (AV.),  nidydmana -,  nly  amdna- ,  pacy  attidna-,  pisy  amana- 
( AV.),  puyanidfia-,  preyamana-,  badhyamana -,  bhajyartidna-,  771  a  thy  dm  ana-,  madyd- 
77iana~,  nnyatnana-  (mi-  ‘fix’),  tnrjy  amana -,  yamyamdna -,  vacyamana-  ( ]/ vatic-), 

1  From  or  ]/V  ‘scathe’.  1  5  Emendation  in  AV.  II.  31  ^  for  uchisatai, 

2  bhidyate ,  AV.XX.1311,  is  an  emendation,  j  the  reading  of  the  text. 

3  llyate ,  AV.  XX.  1343  4,  is  an  emendation.  [  6  A  3.  pi.  mid.  in  -anted  once  occurs  in 

4  The  forms  vr  scale,  vrscante,  vr scant  am  i  the  TS.  in  the  form  jdyantai :  Whitney  760  a. 

appear  occasionally  to  stand  for  vrscyate,  J  7  From  the  weak  present  stem  of 

vrscyante,  vrscyantam  in  the  AV.  See  v.  Nege-  :  A7-  ‘give’. 

lein  40;  Bloomfield,  SBE.  42,  418. 


VII.  Verb.  Present  System. 


viyamdna-  (AV.),  sasyamdna sicyamdna srjyamana stuyamana-,  hanyamdna- 
(AV.),  himsyamdna huydmana -  (/z/7-  ‘call’);  from  the  causative  of  ]/ bhaj-\bhljyd- 
mdna-  (AV.  xii.  428). 

Imperfect  Indicative. 

448.  Sing.  3.  amyata,  amucyata ,  aricyata.  —  PI.  3.  atapyanta  (AV.  TS.)? 
apacyanta ,  aprcyanta ,  asicyanta  (AV.);  acyanta. 

b.  The  second  or  graded  conjugation. 

449.  The  chief  characteristic  of  this  conjugation  is  vowel  gradation 

in  the  base 1  consequent  on  shift  of  accent.  The  base  has  a  strong  grade 
vowel  in  the  singular  indicative  (present  and  imperfect)  active,  throughout  the 
subjunctive,  and  in  the  3.  sing,  imperative  active.  Minor  peculiarities  are: 
1.  loss  of  n  in  the  endings  of  the  3.  pi.  mid.  (-<?/<?,  -#/#,  -at  7m) ;  2.  formation 
of  the  2.  sing,  imperative  active  with  a  suffix,  generally  -dhi ;  3.  vowel 

gradation  in  the  modal  suffix  of  the  optative  (act.  -yd;  mid.  -1);  4.  formation 
of  the  middle  participle  with  -ana. 

a.  The  second  conjugation  comprises  five  distinct  classes  falling  into 
two  main  groups  in  which  a)  the  vowel  of  the  root  (simple  or  reduplicated) 
is  graded;  (?)  the  vowel  of  the  suffix  (nearly  always  containing  a  nasal)  is 
graded. 

a.  1.  The  root  class. 

450.  The  base  is  formed  by  the  root  itself,  to  which  the  personal 
endings  are  directly  attached  (in  the  subjunctive  and  optative  with  the  inter¬ 
vening  modal  suffix).  The  radical  vowel  is  accented  and  takes  Guna  in  the 
strong  forms.  More  than  a  hundred  roots  are  comprised  in  this  class2 3. 

a.  A  good  many  irregularities  are  met  with  in  this  class,  with  regard  to  both  the 
base  and  the  endings.  1.  Vrddhi  is  taken  in  the  strong  forms  by  mrj-  ‘wipe’  (e.  g. 
mdrj-mi),  and  before  consonants  by  roots  ending  in  -u,  i.  e.  by  ksnu-  ‘whet’,  nu-  ‘praise’, 
yu-  ‘unite’  (AV.),  stu-  ‘praise’;  e.  g.  stau-mi \  a-stau-t 4,  but  d-stav-am.  —  2.  The  Guna 
vowel,  along  with  the  accent,  is  retained  in  the  root  of  si-  ‘lie’  (middle)  throughout  the 
weak  forms;  e.  g.  sing.  I.  sdy-e ,  2.  se-se.  In  the  3.  pi.  this  verb  at  the  same  time  inserts 
r  before  the  endings:  se-raie,  se-re  (AV.),  se-ratam ,  a-se-raia,  a-se-ran 5.  —  3.  Several  roots 
form  a  base  with  the  connecting  vowel  /  or  /' 6 *  before  consonant  endings.  The  roots 
an-1  ‘breathe’,  rud- 8  ‘weep’,  vam  ‘vomit’,  svas-  ‘blow’,  svap -9  ‘sleep’  insert  i  before  all 
terminations  beginning  with  a  consonant,  except  in  2.  3.  impf.,  where  they  insert  X :  e.  g. 
dni-fi,  ani-i ;  avanii-t\  svasi-ii.  The  roots  id-  ‘praise’  and  is-  ‘rule’  add  i  in  some  forms 
of  the  2.  pers.  middle:  Xdi-sva ;  Xsi-se  (beside  Xk-se ),  Xsi-dbve .  The  3.  pi.  isi-re  is,  owing  to 
its  accent10,  probably  to  be  accounted  a  present  rather  than  a  perfect11.  Occasional 
(imperative  sing.)  forms  with  connecting  I  from  other  roots  also  occur:  jani-sva  ‘be  born’, 
vasi-sva  ‘clothe’,  snathi-hi  ‘pierce’,  slani-hi  ‘thunder’.  The  root  bru-  ‘speak’  regularly 
inserts  1  in  the  strong  forms  before  terminations  beginning  with  consonants ;  e.  g. 
bi'dv'i-mi.  The  same  X  also  appears  in  the  form  iavX-ti  from  tu-  ‘be  strong’;  in  amX-si  and 
in  the  TS. 12  ami-ti ,  aml-sva,  dmX-t  from  am-  ‘injure’;  and  in  sami-$va  (VS.),  from  sam- 


1  Cp.  Brugmann,  KG.  2 1 1. 

2  Several  roots  of  this  class  show  transfers 
to  the  a-  conjugation:  cp.  WHITNEY  625a. 

3  The  RV.  has  once  2.  sing,  sio-si  (X.  224), 
a  form  which  Avery  275  takes  to  be  a 
3.  sing.  aor.  pass,  injunctive. 

4  Vrddhi  on  the  other  hand  once  appears 
even  in  the  weak  form  3.  pi.  impf.  andvan. 
On  the  Vrddhi  in  these  verbs,  cp.  V.  Nege- 
LEIN  10  a. 

5  There  are  some  transfer  forms  according 

to  the  a-  conjugation  from  the  stem  say-a- , 

including  the  isolated  active  form  dsayal, 

which  is  common.  IN’early  a  dozen  roots 


besides  si-  retain  the  accent  on  the  radical 
syllable  throughout.  See  97,  2  a. 

6  This  X  is,  however,  in  reality  originally 
part  of  a  dissyllabic  base:  cp.  Brugmann, 
KG.  212,  2. 

7  The  AV.  has  also  forms  according  to 
the  a-  conjugation  :  ana-ii ,  etc. 

8  The  RV.  has  no  such  forms  from  rud- 
and  svap-. 

9  The  AV.,  however,  has  the  form  svap-iu. 

10  See  97,  2  a  and  484. 

11  The  3.  sing.  impf.  of  this  verb  is  in  the 
MS.  aisa  (like  aduha),  cp.  Whitney  630. 

12  Whitney  634. 


336  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

‘labour’.  —  4.  A  few  roots  undergo  peculiar  shortenings  in  the  weak  forms:  as-  ‘be’ 
loses  its  vowel1  (except  where  protected  by  the  augment)2,  e.  g.  s-mas  ‘we  are’;  hart-* 
‘slay’  in  the  weak  forms  loses  its  n  before  terminations  beginning  with  consonants  (ex¬ 
cept  in,  y  or  v),  but  syncopates  its  a  before  terminations  beginning  with  vowels,  when  h 
reverts  to  the  original  guttural  gk- ;  e.  g.  ha-thd ,  but  han-ydma ;  ghn-dnti,  part.  ghn-ant-\ 
the  root  vas-  ‘be  eager’,  takes  Samprasarana;  e.  g.  1.  pi.  us-masi,  part,  us-dna-  4,  but  i.sing. 
vas-mi.  The  root  vas-  ‘clothe’  similarly  takes  Samprasarana  once  in  the  participle  us-dna- 
(beside  the  usual  vasdna-).  —  5.  With  regard  to  endings,  the  root  sds-  ‘order’  loses  the 
n  in  the  3.  pi.  active  (as  well  as  middle)  and  in  the  participle,  being  treated  like  roots 
of  the  reduplicating  class  (457)5:  3.  pi.  impv.  sds-atu  (TS.),  part,  sas-al-6.  The  root  duh- 
‘milk’  is  very  anomalous  in  its  endings:  middle  impv.  3.  sing,  duh-dm ,  3.  pi.  duh-rdm  and 
duh-ratdm ;  ind.  3.  pi.  mid.  duh-re  and  duh-rate  beside  the  regular  duh- ate  (with  irregular 
accent)  ‘  ;  active  imperf.  3.  sing,  a-duh-a-t 5  beside  a-ahok,  3.  pi.  a-duh-ran  beside  a-duh-an 
and  duh-ur9 ;  and  in  the  3.  opt.  the  entirely  anomalous  sing,  duh-i-yat  (RV.)  and  pi.  duh- 
lydn  (RV.)  (for  duh-ydt  and  duh-yur). 

Present  Indicative. 

451.  A  final  or  prosodically  short  medial  radical  vowel  takes  Guna  in 
the  singular;  elsewhere  it  remains  unchanged,  excepting  the  changes  of  final 
vowels  required  by  internal  Sandhi,  and  the  irregular  shortenings  mentioned 
above  (450,  a  4).  The  ordinary  endings  are  added  directly10  to  the  root.  But 
the  3.  sing.  mid.  ends  in  -e  nearly  as  often  as  in  -te\  and  anomalous  endings 
appear  in  the  3.  persons  of  the  roots  is-,  duh-,  sds-,  si-11. 

The  forms  actually  occurring  would,  if  made  from  i-  ‘go’  and  bru-  £speak’, 
be  as  follows: 

Active.  Sing.  1.  e-mi.  2.  e-si.  3.  e-ti.  —  Du.  2.  i-thds.  3.  i-tds.  — 
PI.  1.  i-mdsi  and  i-mds.  2,  i-thd  and  i-thd?ia.  3.  y-atiti. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  bruv-e.  2.  bru-se.  3.  bru-te  and  bruv-e.  —  Du.  2. 
bruv-dthe.  3.  bruv-dte .  —  PI.  1.  bru-mdhe.  2.  bru-dhve.  3.  bruv-dte. 

The  forms  which  actually  occur  are  the  following: 

Active.  Sing.  1.  ddmi ,  as  mi,  dm  i,  ksnaumi ,  dvesmi  (AYS',  pdmi  ‘protect’, 
marjmi,  ydmi,  yaumi  (AY.)  ‘join’,  vasmi,  vdmi ,  sdsmi  (A V.),  staumi  (AV.  TS.), 
hanmi ,  harmi.  —  With  connecting  T- :  brdvTmi. 

2.  dtsi,  dsi,  esi,  kdrsi  (AY.),  caksi  {==  *caks-si),  chantsi  (  \d chand-),  ddrsi 
(dr-  ‘pierce’),  par  si  ( pr-  ‘pass’),  pdsi  (‘protect’),  bhdsi ,  ydsi,  vaksi  (vas-  ‘desire’), 
vesi  (YvT‘),  sdssi,  sdtsi ,  stosi 1 2,  hdmsi.  —  With  imperative  sense13:  ksdsi 
(ksi-  ‘dwell’),  jesi,  jdsi  (=  *jos-si  :  jus-  ‘enjoy’),  ddrsi ,  dhaksi  (dah-  ‘burn’), 
naksi  ( nas -  ‘attain’),  nesi,  pdrsi ,  prdsi,  bhaksi  (bhaj-  ‘divide’),  mat  si,  ?ndsi, 
ydksi  (yaj-  ‘sacrifice’),  ydmsi  (yam-  ‘reach’),  ydsi,  yotsi  (yudh-  ‘fight’),  rdtsi 
(rad-  ‘dig’),  rdsi,  vaksi  (vah-  ‘carry’),  vesi  ( ]T vi-),  srdsi,  saksi  (sah-  ‘prevail’), 
sdtsi,  hosi  (hit-  ‘sacrifice’).  —  With  connecting  T-:  amJsi,  brdzusi. 

1  It  is,  however,  preserved  in  an  altered  8  Transfer  to  the  a-  conjugation, 
form  in  the  2.  sing.  impv.  act. :  e-dhi  for  9  The  MS.  has  further  anomalous  end- 
*az-dhi  (62,  4,  6,  p.  57).  This  verb  has  the  ings  in  the  imperf.  mid.:  3.  sing,  a-duh-a 
further  anomalies  of  losing  its  s  in  the  and  3.  pi.  a-duh-ra,  probably  as  parallel  to 
2.  sing.  pres,  a-si,  and  in  inserting  t  in  the  the  present  duhe  and  duhre :  Whitney  635. 
2.  3.  sing.  impf.  dsJ-s,  dsl-t.  It  has  no  middle.  I  10  Excepting  the  few  forms  of  roots  which 

may  take  connecting  i  or  1  (450,  a  3). 

11  See  above  450,  a  2,  3,  5  ;  cp.  Johansson, 
IvZ.  32,  512;  Neisser,  BB.  20,  74. 

12  See  450,  a  I,  note  3. 

Some  of  these  have  no  corresponding 

root  present  or  root  aorist ;  cp.  Whitney, 
Sanskrit  Grammar  624;  Bartholomae,  IF. 
2,271;  Neisser,  BB.  7,  230 ff.,  20,  70 ff. ;  Brug- 
mann,  IF.  18,  72;  Delbrucic,  Verbum  30; 
Syntaktische  Forschungen  5,  209. 


“  ^p.  V.  iNEGELEIN  £0 ;  VAN  VV IJK,  IT . 

13,  59; 

3  Limited  to  the  active  in  this  conjugation 
in  the  RV. 

4  The  only  middle  form. 

5  There  are  also  some  transfer  forms 
according  to  the  a-  conjugation:  3.  sing. 
sasati. 

6  Similarly  from  das-  ‘worship’  the  part. 
dds-al-. 

7  In  the  middle  participle  the  h  of  the 
root  reverts  to  the  guttural  gh:  dugh-dna-. 


VII.  Verb.  Present  System 


337 


3.  dtti,  dsti ,  eti,  kseti,  takti  ( tak -  ‘rush’),  dati  (da-  ‘share’),  dasti  (das- 
‘worship’),  dve'sti,  pdti ,  bharti ,  bhati ,  mdrsti  (SA.  xii.  9),  jyzi/'z,  rz£r/z  (rV/-  ‘rule’), 
relhi  (rih-  ‘lick’),  vasii  (vas-  ‘desire’),  vdti,  veti,  stauti  (A V.;  Kh.  v.  31 2), 
hanti.  — With  connecting  -/-  or  zzzzzVz,  svasiti ;  amlti  (TS.  VS.),  tavlti 
(ta-  ‘be  strong’),  brdvlti. 

Du.  2.  it  has,  krthas ,  pathds ,  b  hut  has,  yathds ,  v  it  has ,  JTVhA  (ai-  ‘be’), 
hathds  (Y han-). 

3.  zzzAw,  zAzt1  (AV.),  ksitds,  dvistas  (AV.),  patas ,  psatds  (AV.),  bhutas , 
ydtas,  vdtas ,  /Aw,  sndtas ,  hatds ,  hnutas. 

PI.  1.  admasi  (AV.),  imdsi ,  usmdsi2  ( |AW-),  stumdsi ,  smasi ,  hanmasi 
(AV.);  dvismds ,  br umds  (AV.),  tnrjmas  (AV.),  yamas,  rudhmas  (AV.),  vidmas 
(Kh.  iv.  5^3)}  stumas  (AV.),  hanmas. 

2.  itha ,  krtha ,  gathd  (RV1.)3,  ?iethd 4,  patha  ‘protect’5,  yathd,  stha , 
hatha;  path  ana,  yathdna,  sthdna. 

3.  ad  anti,  am  anti,  us  anti,  ksiydnti,  ghnanti  (Y  han-),  ddnti  (da-  ‘cut’), 
duhanti ,  dvisdnti  (AV.),  panti 6 7,  bruvdnti,  b hanti ,  mrjdnti,  ydnti ,  ydnti ,  rihanti, 
ruddnti,  vanti ,  vydnti  (}/W-),  /vz/zA’. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  zp?  (z-  ‘go’),  lie,  lie,  uve1 ,  duhe,  bruve,  mrje  (AV.), 
jyzz/4  jrzzz^  (_^zz-  ‘join’),  suve  (sfi-  ‘beget’)8,  hnuve. 

2.  //£/•<?,  krse ,  cakse  (=  *cahs-se),  dhukse  (AV.),  bruse,  vitse  (vid-  ‘find’), 
/wz?.  —  With  connecting  //z><?. 

3.  dste ;  itte  ( Y td-),  Jrte,  iste  (j/z"/-),  zrzzV/^  ( j/zvzAs'-))  brute,  vdste,  saste, 
sihkte 9  ( Y sihj-),  side,  hate  (SA.  xn.  27).  —  With  ending  -e:  Ab10,  zrzV/  (<r/A 
‘perceive’),  duhe,  bruve,  vide  (‘finds’),  /zzyz?11. 

Du.  2.  dsathe,  isdthe,  caksdthe,  vasdthe.  —  3.  asate,  iydte,  duhate,  bruvdte ; 
sayate,  siivate. 

PI.  1.  dsmahe  (AV.),  imahe,  ismahe  (AV.),  mrjmdhe  (AV.),  yujmahe, 
sasmahe,  se'mahe  (AV.),  humdhe.  —  2.  With  connecting  isidhve  (AV.). 
—  3.  Asate,  irate ,  ilate,  is  ate,  ohate  (Y  tlh-),  grhate12,  cdksate,  duhate'lt>,  dvisdte 
(AV.),  nimsate,  bruvdte,  rihaten ,  v asate,  sdsate,  suvate.  —  With  ending  -re: 
duhre,  sere  (AV.);  with  -rate',  duhrate,  derate  (AV.  TS.). 

Present  Subjunctive. 

452.  In  the  AV.  several  forms  are  irregularly  made  with  <z,  as  if  following 
the  conjugation.  No  examples  of  the  2.  du.  and  pi.  mid.  are  found.  The 
forms  which  actually  occur,  if  made  from  bru-  ‘speak’,  would  be: 

Active.  Sing.  1.  brdvani,  brdva.  2.  brdvad,  brdvas.  3.  brdvati ,  brdvat.  — 
Du.  1.  brdvava.  2.  brdvathas.  3.  bravatas.  —  PI.  1.  brdvama.  2.  bravatha. 
3.  br avail. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  brave.  2.  bravase.  3.  brdvate.  —  Du.  1.  bravdvahai. 
3.  brdvaite.  —  PI.  1.  brdvamahai,  bravdmahe.  3.  brdvanta. 

The  forms  which  actually  occur  are  the  following: 

Active.  Sing.  1.  asdni  (AV.),  brdvani;  ay  a,  brand,  stand. 


1  With  irregular  strong  radical  vowel. 

2  Once  anomalously  smasi. 

3  With  loss  of  nasal  as  in  |//za«-. 

4  With  irregular  strong  radical  vowel : 
cp.  v.  Negelein  33. 

5  Once  from  /a-  ‘drink’,  in  I.  861? 

6  Thirteen  times  from  /i-  ‘protect’,  once 
(II.  1 1  m)  from  /a-  ‘drink’  (probably  subj.  aor.). 

7  This  form  occurring  only  once  in  the 
RV.  seems  to  be  formed  from  a  doubtful  root 
u  ‘proclaim’;  cp.  Whitney,  Roots,  under  u. 

8  huve ,  sing.  1.  and  3.,  should  perhaps  be 

Indo-arische  Philologie.  I.  4. 


placed  here  rather  than  in  the  a -  class ;  on 
this  form  cp.  Oldenberg,  ZDMG.  59,  355  ff.; 
Neisser,  BB.  25,  315  ff. 

9  sinie  (AV.). 

10  Avery  234  gives  tse  only,  apparently 
instead  of  ise.  The  form  Jse  would  be  3.  sing, 
mid.  perfect. 

11  On  these  forms  cp.  v.  Negelein  102; 
Neisser,  BB.  20,  74. 

12  Placed  by  Whitney,  Roots,  doubtfully 
under  the  aorist  of  \grah-. 

With  irregular  accent. 


22 


338  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

2.  ayasi  (AV.)/  asasi,  bravcisi ;  dyas  (AY.),  asas,  ksayas  ( ksi -  ‘dwell’), 
ghdsas ,  ddnas ,  p  areas,  bravas ,  vedas,  sdkas ,  hdnas ;  with  zzpYr  (AY.). 

3.  dyad,  dsati ,  vayati  ( ]V zV-),  vedati,  hanati;  adat  (AV.),  zAzzz1, 

irat 1 ,  ksayat ,  ghasat ,  cay  at,  dehat ,  dohat  (1.  16420),  dve'sat  (AY.),  pat  (‘pro¬ 
tect’),  brdvat,  vedat  {2nd-  ‘know’),  stdvat,  hdnat  (AY.  TS.);  with  -Y-: 

(Kh.  hi.  i8),  tf^zz1  (AV.),  rodat  (Kh.  2.  nT). 

Du.  1.  handva.  —  2.  dsathas,  vedathas.  —  3.  pdtas  ‘protect’  (iv.  557). 

PI.  1.  ayama ,  dsama ,  ksayama,  dvesama  (AV.),  brdvama,  stavama,  hdnama. 
—  2.  dsatha2,  stavatha\  with-#-:  bravatha  (AV.),  hanatha{ AV.). —  3. 
br dvan ,  y avail  (‘join’,  AY. in.  1 7 2),  hdnan  (AY.);  with  -#-:  adan  (AV.),  #y#zz  (AV.). 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  stasis.  —  2.  asase.  —  3.  asate,  idhate 4,  do  hate,  dvesate 
(TS.  iv.  1.  103),  varjate;  with  -fa/:  dyatai  (AV.),  dsatai  (AV.);  with  secondary 
ending  -/# :  is  at  a.  —  Du.  1.  bravavahai.  —  3.  brdvaite.  —  PI.  1.  ilamahai ,  brdva- 
mahai ;  ilamahe.  —  3.  hdnanta. 

Present  Injunctive. 

Active.  Sing.  2.  ves.  —  3.  vet  (x.  539),  staut \  without  ending:  dan , 
rat ,  hail.  —  PI.  3.  jwj. 

Middle.  Sing.  3.  vast  a,  suta.  —  PI.  3.  z/tfAr,  vasata. 

Present  Optative. 

453.  Active.  Sing.  1.  iydrn,  yayam,  vidyam ,  syfim.  —  2.  — * 

3.  adyat  (AV.),  iydt,  bruydt ,  vidydt,  sydt ,  hanydt  (AV.). 

Du.  2.  bruydtam  (TS.  iv.  7.  156),  vidyatam ,  syatam.  —  3.  sydtdin. 

PI.  1.  iyama,  t ary  dm  a,  vidyam  a,  sydma,  hanydma.  —  2.  sydta ;  syatana.  — 
3.  adydr,  vidyur ,  jry  ur. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  isiya,  sdyiya  (AV.).  —  3.  asita,  ilita ,  z/z/tf,  duhita, 
bruvTta ,  say  it  a,  stuvTtd.  —  PI.  1.  bruvimahi ,  vasimahi,  stuvlmahi. 

Present  Imperative. 

454.  The  endings  are  added  directly  to  the  root,  which  appears  in  its- 
weak  form  except  in  the  3.  sing,  act.,  where  it  is  strong  and  accented5.  In 
the  2.  sing,  act.,  -dhi  is  added  to  a  final  consonant,  -hi  to  a  vowel;  -tat, 
which  occurs  only  three  times,  may  be  added  to  either  a  consonant  or 
a  vowel.  In  the  mid.,  -dm  3.  sing.,  -ram  and  -ratam  3.  pi.,  occasionally  appear 
for  -tain  and  - at  dm 6. 

Active.  Sing.  2.  addhi,  edhi  {as-  ‘be’),  tdlhi  {ytaks-),  psdhi  (AV.), 
mrddhi  (AV.),  viddhi  (‘find’  and  ‘know’),  s'adhi  ( sds-) ;  ihi,  jahi1 ,  pdhi 
‘protect’,  brdhi,  bhdhi ,  yd  hi ,  vdhi ,  vihi 6,  vihi ,  stuhi,  sndhi  (AV.);  with 
connecting  anihi  (VS.  iv.  25),  ’  snathihi,  svasihi  (AV.),  stanihi;  with 

-tat:  bratdt  (TS.  1.  6.43),  vittdt ,  vltdt. —  3.  Ar/zz,  eta,  dvestu  (AV.),  patit 

‘protect’,  psatu  (AV.),  mdrstu  (AV.  TS.),  jY/zz,  z'zzy/zz  ( yYtfy-),  vdtu,  vetu ,  vettu 
(AV.),  sastu,  staatu  (AV.),  snauta  (TS.  111.  5.  52),  svdpta  (AV.),  hdntn;  with 
connecting  braintu. 


1  Avery  230  here  adds  rdhat,  which  I 
regard  as  a  root  aor.  subjunctive. 

2  vidatha,  AV.  I.  32T,  seems  to  be  a  cor¬ 
ruption  for  vidatha ;  cp.  Whitney’s  note. 

3  For  stus-a-i :  cp.  Avery  238;  Delbruck, 
Verbum  p.  iSij;  Neisser,  BB. 27,262 — 280; 
Oldenberg,  ZDMG.  55,  39. 

4  With  irregular  accent  and  weak  root 

(VII.  I8)  for  *indhate,  beside  inadhate  formed 

from  yidh-  according  to  the  infixing  nasal 

class. 


5  This  is  also  irregularly  the  case  in  six 
or  seven  forms  of  the  2.  pi.,  before  both  -ta 
and  - tana  :  eta,  neta,  stota ;  etana ,  bravTtana , 
so  tana,  hantana. 

5  In  duham,  vidam  (AV.),  saydm  (AV.); 
duhrdm  (AV.),  duhratdm  (AV.). 

7  For  *jha-hi,  from  han-  ‘slay’:  see  32,  2  c, 
and  cp.  v.  Negelein,  Zur  Sprachgeschichte  S2. 

8  Metrically  shortened  for  vihi,  from  \ivl-. 


VII.  Verb.  Present  System.  339 

Du.  2.  attam  (AY.),  itam  (AV.  TS.),  patdm  ‘protect’,  brutarn  (AV.), 
yatdm ,  vittdm ,  vitdm ,  jz'zz/zz  (<?x-  ‘be’),  stutam ,  hatdm.  —  3.  itam,  dugdham 
( Y  duh-),  patdm  ‘protect’,  sastdm,  stdm  (AV.),  hatam  (AV.). 

PI.  2.  zzz'zVz,  z'Az  and  dta,  paid  ‘protect’,  brut  a,  yatd ,  jWta  (Azt-  ‘cut'), 
jAz  (VS.  AV.),  jAzz1#,  ^zz/#;  with  -tana:  attana ,  itana  and  etana ,  yatdna , 
sastdna,  sotana  (sit-  ‘press’),  hantana;  with  connecting  -7"-:  bravltana . 

3.  adantu ,  ghnantu ,  dr  ant u ,  pdntu  ‘protect’,  bruvantu ,  yantu ,  yantu , 
vdntu  (AV.),  z ’yantu  ( ]V zV-)  and  viyantu  (TS.),  sasatu  (TS. v.  2. 1 21),  svasantu 
(AV.),  santu,  svdpantu  (AV.). 

Middle.  Sing.  2.  irsva ,  caksva  (=  *caks-sva),  trasva ,  dhuksva x,  mrksva 
( Vmrh  AV.),  stusva  (AV.);  with  connecting  ilisva,  jdnisva,  vdsisva. 

3.  astdm ,  yutam  (AV.),  vast  dm,  setdm  (AV.);  with  -dm :  duhdm ,  vidam 
(vid-  ‘find’,  AV.),  sayam  (AV.). 

Du.  2.  Trdthdm ,  caksdthdm  (TS.),  duhdtham  (AV.),  vasdthdm  (TS.).  — 
3.  duhditdm  (AV.).  —  PI.  2.  adhvam 2  (Y  ds-),  Trdhvam ,  trddhvam ,  mrddhvam 
(AV.).  —  3.  Tratam ,  stuvatdm  (AV.);  with  -ram:  duhrdm  (AV.);  with 
-rat am :  duhratam  (AV.). 


Present  Participle. 

455.  The  active  participle  is  formed  by  adding  -i/z/3  to  the  weak  root; 
thus  y-dnt-  from  z‘-  ‘go’;  duh-dnt-  from  dull-  ‘milk’;  s-ant-  from  ‘be’.  The 
strong  stems  of  the  participles  of  das-  ‘worship’  and  ‘order’  lose  the  n\ 
dds-at -4  and  sds-at-5.  The  middle  participle  is  formed  by  adding  the  suffix 
to  the  weak  form  of  the  root;  thus  iy-dnd-  from  |/7-;  us-and-  from 
]/ zW-;  ghn-and-  (AV.)  from  j/Vm/z-.  In  a  few  examples,  however,  the  radical 
vowel  takes  Guna;  thus  oh-and-  from  uh-  ‘consider’;  yodh-and-  from  yudh- 
‘fight’;  say-ana-  from  /f-  ‘lie’;  stav-and-  from  j/zz-  ‘praise’.  The  final  of  1 fduh- 
reverts  to  the  original  guttural  in  dugh-ana-  beside  the  regular  duhana-.  The 
root  <2^-  ‘sit’  has  the  anomalous  suffix  -fzzzz  in  ds-Tna-  beside  the  regular 
ds-dna-.  Several  of  these  participles  in  -czzzzz  alternatively  accent  the  radical 
vowel  instead  of  the  final  vowel  of  the  suffix;  thus  vid-ana-  beside  vid-and- 
‘finding’. 

Active,  addnt -,  an  ant-,  us  ant-,  ksiydni- 6  ‘dwelling’,  ghndnt-  ( y/ian-), 
duhdnt-,  dvisdnt -,  dhrsant-,  pdnt-  ‘protecting’,  bruv-ant-,  bhdnt-,  ydnt-,  ydnt -, 
rihant -,  ruddnt-,  vdnt-1 *  (AV.),  z ydnt-  (] fvT-),  sdnt-,  sasdnt-,  stuvdnt -,  sndnt -, 
svapdnt-",  with  loss  of  ddsat -,  sdsat-. 

Middle,  adana-,  dsdna-  and  dslna-,  indhana -,  iyand-  (VS.  x.  19;  TS.  1. 
8.  142),  liana-,  irdna-,  is  ana-  and  (once)  Tsana-,  us  and- 8,  usand-9  (vas-  ‘wear’), 
bhdna-  and  ohand-  (]Puh-),  ksnuvand- Ic,  g/inand-  (AV.),  dihdna-,  dughana-  and 
duhand-  and  diihana-,  dhrsand-  (AV.),  nijand-,  bruvdna -,  mrjana-,  yuvana-  (yu- 


1  Delbruck  61  and  Avery  242  wrongly 
give  this  form  as  duksva. 

2  In  AV.  (iv.  142)  and  TS.  (iv.  6.  51)  some 
Mss.  read  addhvam.  VS.  xvn.  65  has  adhvam. 

3  The  feminine  is  formed  with  -z  from 
the  weak  stem;  thus  ghnal-t-,  duhat-t-,  yat-i-, 
yat-l bhat-i-,  rudat-i sat-l-  (AV.),  snat-i-. 
But  the  AV.  has  yanti '•  (beside  yati-)  and 
svapantl •;  see  Whitney,  Index  Verborum 
3744* 

4  The  verb  afoi-  may  have  lost  its  nasal 

in  the  3.  pi.  act.,  but  there  is  no  evidence 

of  this,  as  the  only  form  preserved  according 

to  the  root  class  is  3.  sing,  dds/i. 


5  As  in  3.  pi. 

6  ksyantam  TS.  IV.  I.  2s. 

7  apa-vdn  AV.xix.504  is  probably  N.  sing, 
of  this  part.;  see  Whitney’s  note  and  cp. 
Lanman  4842. 

8  The  RV.  has  once  the  transfer  form 

usdmana-. 

9  Once,  beside  the  regular  vasana-.  The 
RV.  has  also  once  the  transfer  form 

usdmana-. 

Jo  The  form  grhdna  (x.  10312),  doubtless 
2.  sing.  impv.  of  the  nd-  class,  is  regarded 
by  Grassmann  as  a  participle. 


340  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

‘join *),  yodhana-j  rihana -,  vasana-  ‘wearing’,  vidana-  and  vidana-,  vyand-  (  \f  vl-), 
sdyana-,  sdsana-  (AY.  TS.),  suvana-  { su -  ‘bring  forth’,  AY.),  stuvana -  and 
stavana -,  svand-  {su-  ‘press’,  SV.)1. 

Imperfect  Indicative. 

456.  Active.  Sing.  1.  adoham  (Kh.  v.  1514),  apdm  (‘protect’),  dbravam , 
avedam ,  cihanam ;  adam  (VS.  xn.  105),  dyam,  asam ,  air  am  (]Pir-). 

2.  dpas,  dyas;  dis  (A V.);  ves  ( ]/ ZV-) ;  with  connecting  abravls 

(AV.);  without  ending:  ahan;  ha?i. 

3.  d.pat ,  ay  at ,  avdt  (AV.),  astaut;  ait2;  with  connecting  -7-:  dbravTt , 

avamit;  dritt ,  ^tz/3;  without  ending:  adhok ,  (AV.),  dhan;  as  (=  *ds-t, 

from  zzt-  ‘be’);  /’zzzzz4. 

Du.  2.  ayatam ,  ahatam;  dstam ,  ditam;  ydtani  { AV.).  —  3.  abrutdm  (AV.); 
attain  (VS.  xxi.  43),  dstam,  aitdm  (AV.  VS.). 

PI.  1.  ataksma ,  dpdma.  —  2.  atasta;  dita;  abravTta;  aydtana,  dsastana; 
ditan  a;  abravltana .  —  3.  ddihan  (AY.),  andvan ,  abruvan ,  avyan  (  ]/  z'Z-) ;  ijwz 
(z-  ‘go’),  ^Wzz;  asan$  {as-  ‘throw’),  (Kh.1.22);  with  ending  -z/r:  atvisur , 

apur  {pd-  ‘protect’);  asur  {as-  ‘throw’,  1.  1792);  cdksur ,  duhur. 

Middle.  Sing.  3.  acasta ,  atakta ,  dvasta  (AV.),  asuta;  aitta  { \P id-) ; 
mrsta  (1.  1744),  w7/<z. 

PI.  2.  dr  ad hv  am.  —  3.  aghnata  (AV.),  acaksata ,  ajanata,  dmrjata  (AV.), 
asdsata;  dsata ,  dirata.  With  ending  -ran :  aduhran  (AV.),  dseran. 


a.  2.  The  Reduplicating  Class. 

457.  This  class  is  less  than  half  as  frequent  as  the  root  class,  comprising 
fewer  than  50  verbs.  The  endings  are  here  added  to  the  reduplicated  root, 
which  is  treated  as  in  the  root  class,  taking  Guna  in  the  strong  forms.  The 
stem  shows  the  same  peculiarity  as  the  desiderative  in  reduplicating  r  (=  #r) 
and  J  with  i.  Here,  however,  this  rule  is  not  invariable.  All  the  roots  with 
/•  except  one  reduplicate  with  z.  They  are  r-  ‘go’ :  i-y-ar-^;  ghr-  ‘(dxvy‘\jighar-; 
tr-  ‘cross’  :  titr-;  pr-  ‘fill’  and  pr-  ‘pass’  :  pipar-;  bhr-  ‘bear’  :  bibhar-;  sr-  ‘run’  : 
sisar-;  prc-  ‘mix’  :  piprc-;  but  vrt-  ‘turn’  :  vavart-.  While  nine  roots  redupli¬ 
cate  a  with  a,  thirteen  do  so  with  i.  The  latter  are:  gd-  ‘go’  :  jig  a-;  ghrd- 
‘smell’  :  jighra-;  pa-  ‘drink’  :  piba-;  tnd-  ‘measure’  :  mimd-;  ma-  ‘bellow’ :  mimd-; 
sd-  ‘sharpen’  :  sis  a- ;  sthd-  ‘stand’  :  tistha-;  /id-  ‘go  forth’  :  jihi-1 ;  vac-  ‘speak’  : 
vivac-;  vas-  ‘desire’  :  vivas-s ;  vyac-  ‘extend’  :  vivyac-;  sac-  ‘accompany’  :  sisac-9; 
han-  ‘strike’  :  jighna-.  Three  of  these,  however,  pd-,  sthd-,  han have  per¬ 
manently  gone  over  to  the  a-  conjugation,  while  a  fourth,  ghrd-,  is  beginning 
to  do  so.  Contrary  to  analogy  the  accent  is  not,  in  the  majority  of  verbs 
belonging  to  this  class,  on  the  root  in  the  strong  forms,  but  on  the  redupli¬ 
cative  syllable.  The  latter  is  further  accented  in  the  3.  pi.  act.  and  mid.,  as 
well  as  in  the  1.  du.  and  pi.  mid.  Doubtless  as  a  result  of  this  accentuation, 
the  verbs  of  this  class  lose  the  n  of  the  endings  in  the  3.  pi.  act.  and  mid. ; 
e.  g.  bibhr-ati 10  and  jihate. 


1  To  be  pronounced  thus  in  the  RV., 
though  always  written  siivana-. 

2  The  form  aitat  (AV.  xvm.  34°)  seems  to 
be  a  corruption  of  ait;  see  Whitney’s  note  in 
his  Translation. 

3  Cp.  v.  Negelein  81 ;  Reichelt  BB.  27, 
89.  VS.  viii.  46  has  the  transfer  form  dsat. 

4  arudat  (AV.)  is  a  transfer  to  the  a-  con¬ 

jugation.  In  I.  772  ves,  3.  sing.,  seems  to  be 

an  aor.  form  =  *ve-s-t. 


5  Unaugmented  form  IV.  31. 

6  With  -y-  interposed  between  redupli¬ 
cation  and  root. 

7  With  T  for  a;  inflected  in  the  middle 
only. 

8  Also  vavas-. 

9  Also  sasc-. 

i°  That  is,  a  replaces  the  sonant  nasal. 


VII.  Verb.  Present  System. 


34i 


a.  There  are  a  number  of  irregularities  chiefly  in  the  direction  of  shortening  the 
root  in  weak  forms.  1.  Roots  ending  in  a  drop  their  vowel  before  terminations  beginning 
with  vowels  1 :  e.  g.  ]/md :  mim-e,  3.  pi.  mim-aie.  ~\/da-  and  ydhd-,  the  two  commonest  verbs 
in  this  class,  drop  the  a  in  all  weak  forms.  —  2.  The  root  vyac •  takes  Samprasarana; 
e.  g.  3.  du.  viviktas ;  analogously  hvar -  ‘be  crooked’,  makes  some  forms  with  Samprasarana, 
when  it  reduplicates  with  u;  e.  g.  juhurthas ,  2.  sing.  mid.  injunctive.  —  3.  The  verbs 
bhas-  ‘chew’,  sac-  ‘accompany’,  has-  ‘laugh’,  syncopate  the  radical  vowel;  thus  babhas-at, 
3.  sing,  subj.,  but  haps-ati,  3.  pi.  ind. ;  scisc-ati ,  3.  pi.  ind.  pres.,  sasc-ata ,  3.  pi.  inj . ;  jdks-at-, 
pres.  part.  —  4  The  a  of  sd-  ‘sharpen’,  md-  ‘measure’,  via-  ‘bellow’,  ra-  ‘give’,  ha-  ‘go 
away’  (mid.),  and  (in  AV.)  hd-  ‘leave’  (act.) 2 3 4,  is  usually  changed  to  7  before  consonants; 
e.  g.  si  dm  a  si,  mimite,  rarithds  5,  jihiie,  jahiia  (AV.);  while  the  roots  da-  ‘give’  and  dha- 
‘pui’  dr  op  their  vowel  even  here  4;  e.  g.  ddd-mahe,  dadh-masi.  —  5.  The  initial  of  ci- 
‘observe’  reverts  to  the  original  guttural  throughout;  e.  g.  cikesi  (AV.).  —  6.  When  the 
aspiration  of  dadh-,  the  weak  base  of  dhd-,  is  lost  before  t,  th ,  j,  or  dhv,  it  is  thrown 
back  on  the  initial;  e.  g.  dhat-sva.  ■ —  7.  The  roots  dT-  ‘shine’,  dhl-  ‘think’,  pi-  ‘swell’, 
reduplicate  with  7;  e.  g.  adidet’  adidhet ;  dpipet.  —  8.  There  are  a  number  of  transfers 
from  this  to  other  classes.  Thus  caks-  ‘see’,  originally  a  syncopated  reduplicative  base 
(=  *cakds-),  has  become  a  root  inflected  according  to  the  root  class;  jaks-  ‘eat’,  also 
originally  a  reduplicated  base  ( jaghas -),  has  become  a  root  from  which  is  formed  the 
past  passive  participle  jag-dhd-,  and  which  in  the  later  language  is  inflected  both  in  the 
root  class  and  the  a-  class.  The  weak  bases  dad-  and  dadh-  show  an  incipient  tendency 
to  become  roots5,  from  which  a  number  of  transfer  forms  according  to  the  a-  conjugation 
are  made,  such  as  3.  sing.  mid.  dada-te,  3.  pi.  ind.  act.  dadhanti ,  3.  pi.  impv.  act.  dadha-ntu , 
3.  sing.  mid.  dadha-ie,  2.  du.  dadhethe  (AV.).  The  roots  pd-  ‘drink’,  sthd-,  han -,  form  only 
transfer  stems  according  to  the  a-  class:  piba-,  iistha-,  jighna-;  while  ghrd-,  via-  ‘bellow’, 
ra-,  bhas-,  sac-  make  occasional  forms  from  transfer  stems  according  to  the  a-  class : 
jig  hr  a-,  mini  a-,  rara-,  bapsa-,  sdsca-. 

Inflexion. 

458.  The  forms  actually  occurring  would,  if  made  from  bhr-  ‘bear’,  be 
the  following: 

Active.  Sing.  1.  bibharmi.  2.  bibharsi.  3.  bibharti.  —  Du.  2.  bibhrthas . 
3.  bibhrtds.  —  PI.  1.  bibhrmasi  and  bib  hr  mas.  2.  bibhrthd.  3.  bibhrati. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  bibhre.  2.  bibhrse.  3.  bibhrte.  —  Du.  1.  bibhrvahe. 
2.  bibhrdthe.  3.  bibhrdte.  —  PL  1.  bibhrmahe.  2.  bibhrdhve.  3.  bibhrate. 

The  forms  which  actually  occur  are  the  following: 

Present  Indicative. 

Active.  Sing.  1.  zyar?ni ,  jahami ,  jigharmi,  juhdmi ,  dddami ,  dddhami , 
piparvii  (‘fill’,  AV.),  bibharmi ,  via  ah  mi  (Y  vac-),  sisdmi. 

2.  iydrsi cikesi  (AV i),jahasi  (AN.),j/gdsi,  dddasi ,  dddhasi,  piparsi,  bibharsi , 
mamatsi,  vavaksi  (j/vas-),  viveksi 7  (vis-  ‘be  active’),  sisaksi  (Y sac-),  sisarsi 8. 

3.  iyarti,  jahati,  jigdti,  jigharti ,  juhoti,  dddati 9,  dddhati,  piparti  ‘fills’  and 
‘passes’,  bdbhasti  (AV.),  bibharti  and  (once)  bibharti ,  mimdti  ‘bellows’,  mimeti 
(md-  ‘bellow’,  SV.),  ynyoti  ‘separates’,  vavarti  (=  vavart-ti,  11.  3S6),  vivakti , 
vivasti  ( Y vas-),  vivesti  (vis-  ‘be  active’),  sdsasti  (VS.)  and  sasdsti  (TS.vn.  4.191), 
sisakti  (  Y sac~)->  sisarti. 

Du.  2.  dhatthds,  nimthas ,  piprthas ,  bibhrthas.  —  3.  dattds  (AV.),  dadhatas 10 
(AV.),  bib  hit  as  (AV.),  bibhrtds ,  mimitas,  viviktas  (Y  vyac-),  vivistas. 

PI.  1.  juhutnasi,  dadmasi ,  dadhmdsi,  bibhrmasi ,  sislmdsi;  jahimas 11  (AV.), 
juhumas,  dad  mas  (AV.),  dadhmas,  bibhrmas  (AV.),  vivismas.  —  2.  dhatthd, 


1  This  of  course  does  not  take  place  in  the 
transfer  verbs  according  to  the  a-  conjugation. 

2  In  the  RV.  hd-  ‘leave’,  has  only  forms 
with  a  (never  i\ 

3  But  rarasva  (AV.). 

4  The  vowel  of  hd-  ‘leave’  is  also  dropped 
in  the  3.  pi.  opt.  act.  jahyur  (AV.). 

5  From  the  former  is  made  the  past 

passive  participle  dat-tci-  ‘given’. 


6  This  is  the  accentuation  in  Max  Muller’s 
and  Aufrecht’s  editions,  both  in  Samhita 
and  Padapatha. 

7  Cp.  Neisser,  BB.  30,  303. 

8  YVith  imperative  sense. 

9  Also  the  transfer  form  dadali. 

10  With  strong  base,  for  dhatias. 

11  With  base  weakened  to  jahi -  for  jahi-. 


342  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

piprtha ,  bibhrthd.  —  3.  jahati ,  jighrati  (AY.),  juhvati ,  dddati ,  dadhati \  dldyati1 2 
(AV.),  piprati,  bapsati  (  ]/ bhasj,  bibhrati 3 ,  sdscati. 

Middle.  Sing.  1 .  juhve,  dade  (AV.  TS.),  dadhe \  mime.  —  2.  datse  (AV.), 
dhatse.  —  3 .  jihlte,  jnhute,  datte 4,  d/uitte 5,  minute,  sisite 6 7;  with  -e:  dadhe 

(+AV.).  ^ 

Du.  1.  dddvahe.  —  2.  dadhdthe.  —  3.  jihate ,  dadhdte ",  mimate 8  (v.  826). 

PI.  1.  dadmahe ,  mimimahe  (AV.).  —  2.  jihidhve  (AV.).  —  3.  jihate , 
dadhate 9,  mimate  (‘measure’),  sisrate. 

Present  Subjunctive. 

459.  Active.  Sing.  1.  dadhani ,  bibharani  (TS.  1.  5.  io1).  —  2.  juhuras , 
dddas ,  dadhas ,  dfdhyas  (AV.),  vivesas.  —  3.  piprati ;  dadat ,  dddhat,  diday  at, 
dtdayat 10  (AV.),  babhasat,  bibharat  (AV.),  yuyavat  ‘separate’. 

Du.  2.  dddhathas ,  bapsathas  (Kh.  1.  n1). 

PI.  1.  jahama,  juhavama,  dadhama.  —  3.  dddan  ( AV.),  dddhan,  yuyavan. 

Middle.  Sing.11  2.  dddhase.  —  3.  dddhate;  with  -tar  dadatai  (AV.).  — 
Du.  1.  dadhavahai  (TS.  1.  5.  io1).  —  PI.  1.  dadamahe.  —  3.  juhuranta'12 . 

Present  Injunctive. 

Active.  Sing.  2.  dadas  (AV.),  bibhes  (AV.).  —  3.  jigat,  dadat  (AV.), 
vivyak. 

PI.  1.  yuyoma T3  (AV.). 

Middle.  Sing.  2.  jnhurthas  ( j/Vrv--).  3 .  jihita. 

PI.  3.  sascata. 


Present  Optative14. 

Active.  Sing.  2.  minuyds  (x.  562).  —  3.  jahyat ’ 5  (SA.  xii.  11);  juhuydt 
(AV.),  dadyat  (AV.),  bibhiydt ,  bib  hr y  at ,  mamanyat,  minuydt  (md-  ‘measure’).  — 
Du.  3.  yuyuydtdm.  —  PI.  1.  juhuydma.  —  3.  jahyurxS  (AV.). 

Middle.  Sing.  3.  dddhita  and  dadhitd.  —  PI.  1.  dadimahi,  dadhimahi. 
—  3.  dadlran. 

Present  Imperative. 

460.  Active.  Sing.  1.  jdhani  (AV.).  —  2.  daddhi,  piprgdhi  ( Yprc-), 
??iamaddhi,  mamandhi,  yuyodhi,  vividdhi  (Y  visj,  sisddhi. — With  -/?/ :  cikihi 
(ci-  ‘note’,  AV.),  didlhi  and  dldihi  (  J/  <2r),  dehi  ( yhta-),  dhehi,  piprh'i,  bibhrhi 
(AV.  TS.),  mimJhi  {md-  ‘measure’),  rirlhilb  (  j/Vta-),  sislhi.  —  With  -fata  jahitdt 
(AV.),  dattat ,  dhattat,  piprtat  (TS.  IV.  4. 1 2 T).  —  3.  ciketu  (TS.iii. 3. 1  Is),  jdhatu, 
jigatu ,  juhotu  (TS.  111.  3.  io1),  dddatu ,  dddhatu,  pipartu  (‘fill’  and ‘pass’),  bibhartu 
(AV.TS.),  mimdtn,  yayastu ,  yuyotu ,  sisdtu ,  sisaktu. 


1  Also  the  transfer  form  dadhanti. 

2  Regarded  by  Delbruck,  Verbum  p.  1333, 
as  an  intensive. 

3  There  is  also  a  transfer  form  mimanti 
‘bellow’. 

4  Also  the  transfer  form  dadate. 

5  Also  the  transfer  form  dadhate. 

6  There  is  also  the  transfer  form  rarate 
from  pV<5-. 

7  Also  the  transfer  form  dadhele  (AV.). 

8  By  Avery  2374  given  as  3.  sing,  sub- 
unctive  middle. 

9  TS.  I.  5.  io4,  III.  1.  82  has  the  transfer 

form  dddante. 

10  Pp.  dtdayat ;  see  Whitney’s  note  on 

AV.  in.  S3. 


11  sasvacai  (RV.  ill.  3310)  is  probably  sing.  I 
perfect  subj.  (p.  361);  but  occurring  beside  the 
aorist  form  namsai ,  it  may  be  an  aorist,  to 
which  tense  Whitney,  Roots,  doubtfully 
assigns  it. 

12  dtdayanie  (AV.  XVIII.  373)  is  perhaps  a 
subjunctive. 

13  With  the  strong  base  yuyo-  for  yuyu-. 
x4  Avery  241  gives  here  several  forms 

which  it  is  better  to  class  as  optatives  per¬ 
fect. 

*5  With  weak  base  jah -,  for  jaht-,  which 
here  loses  its  final  vowel  like  dadd-  and 

dadhd-. 

16  The  only  form  in  which  j /ra-  reduplicates 
j  with  i. 


VII.  Verb.  Present  System. 


343 


Du.  2.  jahltam  (AV.),  jigatam ,  dattdm ,  dhattdm ,  piprtdm ,  mimTtdm, 
yuyutdm  and  yuyotam r,  sisltdm,  sisrtam.  —  3.  cikitam  (ci-  ‘note’,  AV.),  dattam , 
dhattdm ,  piprtdm ,  bibhrtdm ,  mimTtdm ,  sisltdm. 

PI.  2.  iyarta1 2,  jahlta  (AV.),  jigdta,  juhuta  and  juhdta 3,  dattd  and  dddata 4, 
dhattd  and  dddhata 5,  ninikta  (]A zzz/-),  piprkta ,  piprtd ,  bibhita  (AV.),  bibhrtd 
(TS.  iv.  2. 32 7),  yuyota T,  s'isTta,  sisakta]  jigatana,  juhbtana8,  dadatana  *,  dhattana 
and  dadhatana 5,  pipartatia 6,  bib  Jut  ana,  mamattdna,  yuyJtana1,  vivaktana.  — 
3.  dadatu  (AV.),  dadhatu1 . 

Middle.  Sing.  2.  jihisva ,  datsva  (AV.),  dhatsva ,  mimlsva  (AV.), 
rarasva  (AV.).  —  3.  jihitdm 8. 

Du.  2 .  jihdthdm  (TS.  1.  1.  121),  dldhJtham  (AV.),  mimatham ,  rardtham. 

PI.  2.  juhudhvam  (TS.  iv.  6.  15),  raridhvam.  —  3.  jihatam,  dadhatam , 

sisratd?n  (Kh.  1.  36). 


Present  Participle. 

461.  Active.  As  the  suffix  -ant  drops  its  zz  (like  the  endings  of  the 
3.  pi.  act.)  strong  and  weak  stem  are  not  distinguished.  The  feminine  stem  of 
course  lacks  zz  also;  e.  g.  bibhrat-l-.  Stems  occurring  are:  c  iky  at-  (ci- 1  note’)9, 
j dhat -,  jigat-,  juhvat -,  titrat -  ( tr -  ‘cross’),  dddat -,  dddhat-,  didyat -,  didhyat -, 
bdpsat -,  bibhyat -,  bibhrat -,  sas'cdt-  (‘pursuer’)  and  sdscat-10  (‘helping’),  sisrat-11. 

Middle,  jihdna -,  juhvana -,  dddana -,  dddhana -,  didyana -,  dtdhyana -, 
pip  ana-  (pd-  ‘drink’,  AV.)  and  pipand-12,  pfpydna-13  (\PpT-),  mimdna -,  rdrana -14, 
sis  ana-. 


Imperfect  Indicative. 

462.  All  the  verbs  of  this  class  occurring  in  the  3.  pi.  act.  take  the 
ending  -zzr  except  bhr-,  which  has  the  normal  -#/z.  The  verbs  <Vz-,  dha hd- 
show  the  irregularity  (appearing  elsewhere  also)  of  using  the  strong  instead  of 
the  weak  base  in  the  2.  pi.  act. 

Active.  Sing.  1.  adadam ,  adadham.  —  2.  ddadas ,  ddadhas  Ts,  ddides, 
avires  (\Pvis-);  bibhes  (AV.),  vines  (j/VzV)>  sisds.  —  3.  aciket  (j /Vz’-),  djahdt \ 
ajigdt ,  ddadat l6,  ddadhat ,  ddtdet,  dbibhar,  abibhet,  avivyak 17 ,  as'isdt;  vines  (Y  vis-). 

Du.  2.  adattam ,  adhattam.  —  3.  aviviktdm ,  amimdtdm  (AV.)lS. 

Pi.  2.  ddadata I9,  ddadhata 19  and  adhatta ;  djahatana  lv,  ddattana.  — 
3.  ah  ib  hr  an ;  ajahur ,  djuhavur ,  adadur ,  adadhur ,  amamadur ,  avivyacur ;  jahur , 
dadur.  dldhyur  (AV.),  vivyacur. 

Middle.  Sing.  2.  ddhatthas ,  dmimithas ;  didithas  (AV.).  —  3.  djihita , 
adatta ,  adhatta ,  dpiprata20,  dmimtta ;  sisita.  —  PI.  3.  ajihata ,  ajuhvata- 


,  2 1 


1  With  strong  base  yuyo-  for  yuyu-. 

2  With  strong  base  y/a7'*  for  *iyr-;  cp. 
v.  Negelein  65H. 

3  With  strong  base  for  weak. 

4  Strong  base  dadd-  for  oW-. 

5  Strong  base  dadhd-  for  dadh-. 

6  Strong  base  pipar-  for  pip r-. 

7  Also  the  transfer  form  dadhantu. 

8  There  is  also  the  3.  sing,  transfer  form 
dadatdm. 

9  cikyat  (iv.  38  nom.  sing,  m.,  is  given 
by  v.  Negelein  772  as  cikyat  and  explained 
as  a  pluperfect  form. 

10  When  compounded  with  the  negative 
particle,  sascat-  remains  unchanged  in  the 
fern,  if  accented  a-sascat-,  but  has  «  if 
accented  on  the  prefix:  a-sascant-T-. 

11  For  inflected  forms  of  these  stems  see 

312. 


12  With  irregular  accent. 

The  anomalous  transfer  form  btbhra • 
man  a-  takes  the  place  of  *bibhrdna-. 

H  But  perfect  rarana-. 

There  is  no  sufficient  reason  for  regarding 
ddadhas  in  X.  739,  as  a  3.  sing.  (Avery  248; 
Delbruck,  Verbum  50,  59). 

16  There  is  also  the  transfer  form  dddat. 
v.  Negelein  672  gives  dadhdt  (RV.  AV.)  which 
seems  a  misprint  for  dddhat. 

17  There  is  also  the  unaugmented  transfer 
form  vivyacat. 

18  Whitney,  Sanskrit  Grammar  665,  quotes 
ajahiidm  from  the  TS.  (mantra?). 

T9  With  strong  base  instead  of  weak. 

20  Anomalous  form  instead  of  *dpiprla. 

21  Also  the  transfer  form  adadanta.  Whitney 
658  also  mentions  the  unaugmented  3.  pi. 
jihata. 


344  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


(?.  1.  The  infixing  nasal  class. 

463-  This  class,  which  includes  fewer  than  30  verbs,  is  characterized  by 
the  accented  syllable  nd  preceding  the  final  consonant  of  the  root  in  the 
strong  forms.  That  syllable  in  the  weak  forms  becomes  a  simple  nasal  varying 
according  to  the  class  to  which  the  following  consonant  belongs. 

1.  The  infix,  appearing  in  forms  outside  the  limits  of  the  present  stem,  has  become 
part  of  the  root  in  ahj -  ‘anoint’,  bhahj-  ‘break’,  and  kirns-  ‘injure’.  —  2.  There  are  a  few 
transfers  to  the  a-  class,  in  which  some  of  these  verbs  come  to  be  inflected  in  the 
later  laoguage1,  and  in  which  several  verbs  are  regularly  nasalized  in  the  present  stem 
(429,  a,  l).  —  3.  Instead  of  the  regular  - nd -,  the  root  trh-  ‘crush’  infixes  -ne-  in  the 
strong  forms;  thus  3.  sing,  trne-dhi.  —  4.  In  the  3.  pi.  ind.  mid.  irregular  accentuation  of 
the  final  syllable  occurs  exceptionally  in  each  of  the  forms  ahjate ,  indhate,  bhuhjate 2 *. 

Present  Indicative. 

464.  The  forms  actually  occurring,  if  made  from  yuj-  ‘join’,  would  be 
the  following: 

Active.  Sing.  1.  yunajmi.  2.  yundksi.  3.  yundkti.  —  PI.  1.  yunjmas . 
3.  yunjdnti. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  yunje.  2.  yufikse.  3.  yuhkte.  —  Du.  2.  yuhjdthe . 
3.  yunjdte.  —  PI.  2.  yuhgdhve.  3.  yunjdte. 

The  forms  which  actually  occur  are  the  following: 

Active.  Sing.  1.  anajmi  (AY.),  chinadmi  (AV.),  trnadmi{  Y trd-),  bhinddmi , 
yunajmi ,  runadhmi  ( rudh -  ‘obstruct’).  —  2.  prndksi  ( Yprc-),  bhindtsi ,  yunaksi, 
vfnaksi  {vrj-  ‘twist’).  —  3.  anakti ,  unatti  {Yud-),  krnatti  ( krt -  ‘spin’),  grnatti^ 
(AY.x.  743),  chindtti  (AV.),  trnatti ,  pindsti  (  Y pis-),  bhandkti  ( j/ bhahj-),  bhindtti , 
yundkti  (AV.),  rindkti  (Yric-),  rundddhi ,  vrndkti ,  hindsti  ( }/ hi/ns-,  AV.  SA.). 

PI.  1.  anjrnas.  —  3.  ahj  anti ,  undanti ,  pirns  anti,  pr  he  anti,  b  hind  anti, 
yunjdnti,  viheanti  {vie-  ‘sift’),  vrhjanti. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  ahje ,  rhje  {rj-  ‘direct’),  prhee  (AV.),  yunje,  vrhje.  — 
2.  yufikse  (AV.).  —  3.  aiikte 4,  indhe  (=  ind-dhe,  Y idhj,  prhkte,  yuhkte*,  rundhe 
(=  rund-dhe,  AV.),  vrhkte ,  himste 6  (AV.).  —  With  ending  -e:  vrhje. 

Du.  2.  ahjathe  (Kh.  v.  64;  VS.  xxxm.  33),  yunjdthe.  —  3.  ahjate  (VS. 

xx.  61),  tuhjdte,  vrhjate  (AV.). 

PL  2.  ahgdhve.  —  3.  ahjate  and  ahjate,  indhate  and  indhate,  rhjate , 

tuhjdte,  prhcdte,  bhuhjdte  and  bhuhjate,  yunjdte,  rundhate  (AV.),  vrhjate. 

Present  Subjunctive. 

465.  T  he  weak  base  is  once  used  instead  of  the  strong  in  the  form 
ahj-a-tas  for  *anaj-a-tas‘,  and  the  AV.  has  once  the  double  modal  sign  a  in 
the  form  trndh-an. 

Active.  Sing.  2.  bhinadas.  —  3.  rnadhat,  bhinddat,  yundjat.  —  Du.  1. 
rinacava.  —  3.  ahjatas.  —  PI.  3.  andjan,  yundjan,  vrnajan ;  trndhdn  (AV.). 

Middle.  Sing.  3.  inddhate,  yundjate.  —  PI.  1.  bhundjamahai ,  runadha- 
mahai. 

Present  Injunctive. 

Active.  Sing.  2.  pindk  (V/A-),  bhindt.  —  3.  pinak,  prnak,  bhindt , 
rinak  ( Y >'iej. 

Middle.  PI.  3.  yuhjata. 


1  Thus  ud -  ‘wet’  :  unatti  is  inflected  as 
unda-ti  in  B.  and  S. ;  and  yuj-  ‘join’  -.yundkti 
as yunja-ti  in  U.  and  E.,  beside  the  old  forms. 

2  In  the  RV.  anjate  occurs  once,  ahjate 

12  times,  indhate  4  times,  indhate  15  times, 

while  bhuhjate  and  bhuhjdte  occur  once  each. 


3  ud  grnatti  ‘ties  up’,  is  here  only  a  cor¬ 
ruption  of  the  corresponding  ut  krnatti  of 
RV.x.  1302,  seemingly  a  form  oi grath-  ‘tie’. 

4  AV.  ante. 

5  AV.  yuhte. 

6  With  irregular  accent. 


VII.  Verb.  Present  System. 


345 


Present  Optative. 

Active.  Sing.  3.  bhindyat  (A V.).  —  Middle.  Sing.  3.  prhcTtd. 

Present  Imperative. 

466.  The  only  ending  of  the  2.  sing.  act.  is  dhi ,  no  form  with  -tat 
having  been  met  with.  As  usual,  the  strong  base  sometimes  appears  in  the 

2.  pi.  act.:  unatta ,  yunakta ;  anaktana ,  pinasiana. 

Active.  Sing.  2.  a  fid  hi 1  ( Y  ahj-),  undhi  (=  unddhi ),  chindhi  (=  chind- 
dhi ),  trtidhi  (=  trnddhi),  prhdhi  (= prfigdhi ),  bhaiidhi  (=  bhangdhi ),  bhindhi 
(=  bhinddhi ),  yuhdhi  (=  yufigdhi,  AV.),  rundhi  (=  runddhi,  A V.),  vrfidhi 
(=  vfhgdhi). —  3.  andktu ,  chindttu  (AV.),  trnedhu2  (AV.),  prnaktu ,  bhanaktu 
(AV.),  bhinattu  (AV.),  yundktu  (AV.),  vinaktu  ( ]/VzV-,  AV.),  vrnaktu ,  hinastu 
(Kh.  iv.  5«). 

Du.  2.  ahtam  (—  afiktam ,  AV.),  chintdm  (=  c hint t dm,  AV.),  prfiktdm.  — 

3.  afiktam  (VS.  II.  22). 

PI.  2.  unatta 3,  bhintta  (TS.  iv.  7.  132),  yundkta ,  vrhkta ;  ana k tana,  pinas- 
tana.  —  3.  ahjantu,  undantu  (AV.),  yuhjdntu  (AV.),  vrhjantu  (AV.). 

Middle.  Sing.  2.  afiksva 4  (AV.),  yuhksvd,  vrhksva  (AV.).  —  3.  indham 5 
(=  inddham ,  AV.),  yuhtain  (=  yuhktam,  AV.),  rundham  (=  runddham,  AV.). 
—  Du.  2.  yuhjdtham.  —  PI.  2.  indhvam  (=  inddhvam),  yufigdhvdm.  — 
3.  indhatam. 

Present  Participle. 

467.  Active,  aujdnt-,  unddnt-  and  udat-t-  (AV.),  rhjdnt-,  rndhdnt-,  krntati- 
(AV.),  pimsati-,  prhcdnt-  and prhcati -6,  bhahjdnt-  and  bhanjati -,  bhinddnt-  and 
bhindatl-  (AV.),  bhuhjati-,  yuhjati-,  vihcdnt-,  ( d-)himsant 

Middle.  ahjand indhana-,  tuhjand-,  tundand -7  (AV.),  prhcand bhindana-, 
yuhjana-  (TS.  iv.  1.  i1),  rundhand-,  sumbhand- s,  himsana-. 

Imperfect  Indicative. 

468.  Active.  Sing.  2.  dtrnat9  (AV.),  abhanas 10  (AV.),  dbhinat,  arinak 
(l h ric-),  avrnak ;  unap  ( }V ubh-),  rnak  (Kh.  iv.  69),  pinak,  bhindt.  —  3.  dtrnat , 
aprnak  ( l/ pf'C-),  dbhinat ,  ayunak  and  ayunak,  avinak  ( ]/ zrV-,  AV.),  avrnak 
(Vwf-h  dtrnat  (y ltd-) ;  bhindt,  rindk,  vrndk.  —  Du.  2.  atrntam  (=  atrnttam).  — 
PL  3.  dtrndan,  dbhindan,  avrhjan ;  ahjan,  ayuhjan  (TS.  1.  7.  72). 

Middle.  Sing.  3.  ainddha  (\h idh-,  AV.).  —  PL  3.  ayunjata ,  arundhata 
(AV.);  unaugmented:  ahjata. 


(?.  2.  The  class. 

Delbruck,  Verbum  p.  154 — 157.  —  Avery,  Verb-Inflection  232  ff.  —  Whitney, 
Sanskrit  Grammar  p.254 — 260;  Roots  213. —  v.  NegeleiN,  Zur  Sprachgeschichte  57  —  60; 
63-64;  94- 

469.  More  than  thirty  verbs  follow  this  class  in  the  Samhitas.  The  stem 
is  formed  by  adding  to  the  root,  in  the  strong  forms,  the  accented  syllable 
-;^J,  which  in  the  weak  forms  is  reduced  to  -/zz*. 


1  For  ahg-dhi.  The  final  consonant  of 
the  root  is  regularly  dropped  before  the 
ending  -dhi. 

2  Cp.  v.  Negelein,  Zur  Sprachgeschichte 
613. 

3  The  AV.  has  the  transfer  form  umbhala 
(\tubh-)  according  to  the  c-  class. 

4  AV. xix. 455:  dksva  emended  to  ci-ahksva ; 
see  Whitney’s  note  on  the  passage. 

5  v.  Negelein  63,  note  I,  thinks  this  form 

may  be  the  starting  point  of  the  ending  -aw 


in  the  imperatives  3.  sing,  vid-dm  and 
duh-am. 

6  AV.  also  prhcati-. 

7  ]flud-  otherwise  follows  the  a-  class. 

8  otherwise  follows  the  a-  or  a- 
class. 

9  From  ]//rV.  The  MSS.  have  atrinat : 
see  Whitney’s  note  on  AV.  xix.  32L 

xo  For  see  Whitney, 

Grammar  555,  and  his  note  on  AV.  III.  63. 
Cp.  above  66,  c,  /8  2  (p.  61). 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


a.  Several  irregularities  occur  with  regard  to  root,  suffix,  and  ending.  1.  The  root 
sru-  ‘hear’  is  dissimilated  to  sr- 1  before  the  suffix:  sr-mi-,  sr-no-.  —  2.  The  root  vr- 
‘cover’  assumes  the  anomalous  form  of  fir-  (with  interchange  of  vowel  and  semivowel  : 
fir -mi beside  the  regular  vr-nu-2.  —  3.  Four  roots  ending  in  - n ,  tan-  ‘stretch’,  man- 
‘think’,  van-  ‘win’,  san-  ‘gain’,  seem  to  form  their  stem  with  the  suffix  -2 1 ,  being  assigned 
by  the  Indian  grammarians  to  a  separate  class,  the  eighth;  but  this  appearance  has 
probably  been  brought  about  by  the  -aft  of  the  root  having  originally  been  reduced  to 
the  nasal  sonant:  ta-nii-  for *  *tn-nu-  J.  —  4.  In  place  of  the  regular  and  very  frequent 
kr-nu -,  there  appears  in  the  tenth  book  of  the  RV.  the  anomalous  stem  kuru-,  once  in 
the  form  kur-mas  (X.  5I7\  I.  pi.  pres,  ind.,  and  twice  in  the  form  kuru  (x.  192,  1452), 

2.  sing.  impv.  act.  The  strong  form  of  this  stem,  karo- 4,  which  has  the  additional  anomaly 
of  Guna  in  the  root,  appears  in  the  AV.,  where  however  the  forms  made  from  krno-, 
krnu-  are  still  upwards  of  six  times  as  common  as  those  from  karo-,  kuru-5.  The  isolated 
form  iarti-te  ‘attains’,  which  occurs  once  in  the  RV.  (x.  *]62),  seems  to  be  analogous  in 
formation  to  kard-ti ,  but  it  may  be  connected  with  the  somewhat  frequent  nominal  stem 
iartt -6.  —  5.  The  21  of  the  suffix  is  dropped,  in  all  the  few  forms  which  occur  in  the 
I.  pi.  ind.  act.  and  mid.,  before  terminations  beginning  with  m:  kur-mas,  krn-masi  (AV.), 
tan-fnasi  (TS.),  kin-mas  (AV.),  hin-masi  (AV.);  krn-mahe,  man-make"! .  When  the  -?iu  is 
preceded  by  a  consonant,  the  21  becomes  uv  before  vowel  endings;  e.  g.  asnuv-anti  (but 
sunv-dnti).  —  6.  In  the  3.  pi.  mid.,  six  verbs  of  this  class  take  the  ending  -re8  with 
connecting  vowel  -i- :  inv-ire,  rnv-ire,  pinv-ire 9,  srnv-ire ,  sunv-ire,  hinv-ire.  The  connecting 
vowel  -i-  is  also  taken  by  sni-  in  the  2.  sing.  mid.  srnv-i-se  (for  *srtni-se)  used  in  a 
passive  sense.  —  7.  Five  stems  of  this  class,  i-nu-,  r-mi-,  ji-nu-,  pi-nu-,  hi-fi2t -,  have  come 
to  be  used  frequently  even  in  the  RV.  as  secondary  roots  following  the  a-  conjugation. 
Of  these  pinv-a-  occurs  almost  exclusively  in  the  RV.  as  well  as  the  AV. ;  inv-a-  alone 
is  met  with  in  the  AV. ;  and  jiitv-a-  and  hinv-a-  are  commoner  in  the  RV.  than  ji-nu- 
and  hi-nu-. 

Present  Indicative. 

470.  The  forms  actually  occurring,  if  made  from  kr-  ‘make’,  would  be 
as  follows: 

Active.  Sing.  1.  krnomi.  2.  krnosi.  3.  krnoti.  —  Du.  2.  krnuthas . 

3.  krnutas.  —  PI.  1.  krnmasi  and  krnmas.  2.  krnutha.  3.  krnvanti. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  krnve.  2.  krnuse.  3.  krtiute  and  krnve'. —  Du.  2.  krnvathe . 
—  PI.  1.  krnmahe.  3.  krnvdte 1  °. 

The  forms  which  actually  occur  are  the  following: 

Active.  Sing.  1.  urnomi  (AV .),  rnomi,  krnomi ,  ksmomi  (AY.  TS.),  minomi 
(mi-  ‘fix’,  AY.),  vrnomi  (‘choose’,  Kh.  11.  6s),  saknomi  (AV.),  srnomi ,  hinomi.  — 
With  -u-:  karomi  (AV.  TS.),  tanomi. 

2.  ap/idsi  (AV.),  inosi,  krnosi ,  jinosi,  strndsi ,  hinosi ;  tanosi ,  vanosi. 

3.  ahioti  (as-  ‘attain’),  apncti  (VS.  AV.),  inoti,  unoti  (RV1.),  urnoti ,  rnoti, 
rdlmoti ,  krnoti ,  cinoti  ‘gathers’,  dasnoti ,  dimoti  (AV.),  dhunoti ,  minoti  (AV.), 
vrnoti ,  saknoti  (AV.),  srnoti,  sunuti ,  skunoti  (AV.),  hinoti ;  karoti  (AV.  TS.  VS.), 
tanoti ,  vanoti ,  sanoti. 

Du.  2.  asnuthas  (Kh.  1.  9*),  ur  nut  has ,  krnuthas ,  vanuthas.  —  3.  asnutds, 
urnutas ,  krnutas ,  sunutds ;  tanutas  (Kh.  in.  220). 

PI.  1.  krnmasi  (AV.),  hinmas  (AV.),  hintnasi  (AV.);  kurmds,  tanmasi 
(TS.  iv.  5.  111).  —  2.  asnutha ,  krnutha ,  dhunuthd ,  sunut/id.  —  3.  ahiuvanti , 


*  Cp.  Delbruck,  Verbum  p.  1 54 1. 

2  Cp.  Brugmann,  KG.  674. 

3  Cp.  Brugmann,  KZ.  24,259;  Delbruck 
p.  156. 

4  Perhaps  starting  from  the  aorist  d-kar 
and  following  the  analogy  of  krno -;  cp. 
Brugmann,  KG.  656,  3. 

5  Whitney  715. 

6  Occurring  in  taru-  ‘swift’ (?),  tarti-tf-  ‘con¬ 
queror’,  taru-tra-  ‘victorious’,  taru-sa-  ‘victor’, 
and  the  verbal  stem  tariisya-* cross’,  ‘overcome’. 

7  Thus  krn-mahe  is  not  the  only  example 


|  (Delbruck  174,  Brugmann,  KG.  673)  of  this 
phenomenon.  There  is  no  example  in  the 
Samhitas  of  the  1.  du.  in  -vas  and  • vahe\  but 

* krn-vas ,  * krn-vahe  must  be  presupposed  to 
account  for  the  loss  of  the  -21  before  -mas 
and  -make-.  Brugmann,  KG.  673. 

8  Like  d2ih-re  in  the  root  class. 

9  This  is  the  only  form  (besides  the 
participle pmv-dna-  and pinv-ant-, pinv-at-im  in 
AV.)in  which  the  stem pimi-  appears.  All  others 
are  made  from  the  transfer  stem  pinva-. 

10  Sometimes  accented  krtwate. 


347 


VII.  Verb.  Present  System. 


rnvdnti,  krnvanti 1,  cinvdnti  (TS.i.  i.  J2),  dabhnuvatiti ,  dunvanti  (AV.),  prusnuvanti, 
saknuvdtiti  (AV.),  s rnvdnti,  sunvdnti ,  hinvanti]  kurvanti  (AV.),  tanvdnti . 

Middle.  Sing.  i.  asnuve,  krnve \  hinve\  kurve  (AV.),  manve  (AV.),  vanve. 

2.  asnuse ,  urnuse ,  krnuse \  cinuse \  dhunuse ;  tatiuse  (AV.).  —  With 
connecting  vowel  -/-:  srnv-i-se. 

3.  a snute,  urnute,  krnute '  dhunnte ,  prustiute ,  srnute\  kurute  (AV.),  tanute , 
tarute ,  vanute.  —  With  ending  -e:  srnve \  sutwe,  hinve. 

Du.  2.  tanvdthe.  — ■  PI.  1.  krnmahe ,  manmahe.  —  3.  asnuvate,  krnvdte , 
vrnvdte  and  vrnvate \  sprnvate \  hinvdtc,  kurvate  (AV.),  tanvate  and  tanvdte 
(AV.).  —  With  ending  -re:  i?iv-i-re ,  rnv-i-re ,  pinv-i-re )  srnv-i-re \  sunv-i-re 
hinv-i-re. 

Present  Subjunctive. 

471.  Active.  Sing.  1.  krnava ,  hinava\  sandvani  (AV.).  —  2.  rndvas , 
krndvas ,  trpnavas ,  srnavas’,  karavas  (AV.).  —  3.  asnavat 2,  krndvat,  cinavat, 
d/iunavat,  prusndvat ,  srndvat ,  sundvat ;  vandvat.  —  With  double  modal 
sign  d:  karavat  (AV.),  kriiavat  (AV.  xx.  1325).  —  With  ending  -fa/: 
asnavatai 3  (AV.).  —  Du.  1.  asnavava ,  krnavdva. 

PI.  1.  asnavama ,  krndvatna ,  minavama ,  sakndvama ,  su?iavama ,  sprnavama. 
—  2.  sandvat/ia ;  with  double  modal  sign:  krnavatha  (Y S.).  —  3.  asnavan, 
krnavan ,  srnavan. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  ahiavai  (VS.  xix.  37),  krndvai ,  sundvai ;  manavai.  — 

2.  krnavasc ;  va?iavase.  —  3.  krndvate\  tncindvate. 

D  u.  1.  krnavavahai ;  ta?iavavahai.  —  2.  asndvaithe.  —  3.  krnvaite 4. 

PI.  1.  amavdmahai  (x.  97 17)5,  krndvamahai ,  strnavdmahai  (AV.).  — 

3.  asnavanta ,  krnavanta. 

Present  Injunctive. 

Active.  Sing.6  2.  —  3.  fir  not.  —  PI.  3.  rnvan,  minvdn ,  hinvan ; 

vanvan. 

Middle.  Sing.  2.  tanuthas.  —  3.  rnutd.  —  PI.  3.  krnvata ;  manvata. 


Present  Optative. 

Active.  Sing.  1.  sanuydtn.  —  3.  srnuydt  (AV.).  —  PI.  1.  cinuydina , 
srnuydma ;  vanuydma ,  sanuydma. 

Middle.  Sing.  3.  krnmta 7 ;  manvitci  (AV.). 


Present  Imperative. 

472.  Active.  Sing.  2.  srnudhi.  —  With  ending  -d/8:  aksnuhi  {aks- 
hnutilate’,  AV.),  asnuki ,  dpnuhi  (AV.),  inuhi ,  urnuhi ,  krnulii ,  c  inn  hi,  trpnuhi , 
dabhnuhi  (AV.),  dhunuhi ,  dhrsnuhi ,  srnuhi ,  sprnuhi ,  hinuhi\  tanuhi ,  sanuhi.  — 
With  ending  -fdf:  krnutdt,  hinutdt .  —  Without  ending:  inu ,  krnu , 

dhunu  (AV.),  srnu ,  snnu,  hinu ;  hum,  tanu.  —  3.  asnotu ,  ap?iotu  (AV.),  urnotu 
(AV.),  krnotu ,  cinotu ,  minotu,  srnotu ,  sunotu ;  karotu  (TS.  VS.),  tanotu  (AV.), 
sanotu. 

Du.  2.  asnutam ,  krnntdm ,  trpnutdm ,  srnutam ,  hi  not  am9.  —  3.  asnutdm 
(AV.  TS.),  krnutam  (AV.). 


1  skrnvanti  after jtorz- : pariskrnvanti  (ix.142), 
pari  skrnvanti  (ix.  6423). 

2  The  form  arnavat ,  AV.  v.  28  (]//'-),  is  a 
corruption  of  avrnot  in  RV. 

3  The  TS.  has  once  asnavatai  (Whitney 
7°i). 

4  Irregular  for  krndvaite. 

5  Omitted  by  Avery  238. 


6  The  injunctive  form  asnavam,  AV.  XIX. 
556,  is  a  conjecture;  see  Whitney’s  note 
on  the  passage. 

7  urnvita  occurs  in  TS.  VI.  I.3J  and  urnu* 
vita  in  K.  (Whitney  713). 

8  Cp.  Whitney  704. 

9  With  strong  stem. 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


343 

PI.  2.  Urnuta ,  krnuta  and  krnota J,  trpnuta ,  dhunuta ,  srnutd  and  srnota1, 
sunutd  and  sunota 1,  hinuta  (AV.)  and  hinota 1 ;  tanota 1  (AY.  TS.).  — 
With  ending  - tana :  kr  not  ana 2,  srnotana 2,  sun  d tan  a 2 ,  / 'linotana 2  (x.  307).  — 
3.  asnuvantu,  urnuvantu ,  krnvdntu ,  cinvantu  (TS.v.  2.  1 12),  srnvantu ,  hinvantu ; 
vanvdntu ,  sanvantu. 

Middle.  Sing.  2.  urnusva ,  krnusva ,  cinusva  (AV.),  dhunusva  (AV.), 
srnusvd ;  tanusva,  vanusva.  —  3.  asnutdm  (AV,),  krnutdm ;  tanutdm  (TS.  1. 
6.  33),  manutdm ,  vanutdm  (AV.). 

Du.  2.  krnvathdm  (AV.).  —  PI.  2.  krnudhvdm ,  sunudhvam ;  tanudhvam , 
vanudhvam  (AV.).  —  3.  rnvatam  (AV.) ;  kurvatam  (AV.),  tanvdtam  (AV.), 
vanvatam  (AV.). 

Present  Participle. 

473.  Active,  urnuvant-  and  urnvant-,  i.-vati -,  rnvdnt -,  krnvant-^,  f.-vatf-, 
cinvant -,  f.  - vati -,  dunvdnt-  (AV.),  dhunvdnt -,  pinvant-  (AV.),  minvdnt -,  vrnvdnt 
srnvdnt f.  -vati-,  sunvant-,  hinvdnt-,  f.  -vati-;  kurvdnt-  (AV.),  f.  -vati-  (AV.), 
tanvant-,  f.  -vati-  (AV.),  vanvdnt-. 

Middle.  urnvana- ,  krnvand-,  dnvana-  (TS.iv.  2.  io1),  dhunvand-,  pinvana-, 
sunvand-,  hinvana-;  kurvana-  (AV.),  tanvana-,  manvana -,  vanvdna-. 

Imperfect  Indicative. 

474.  Active.  Sing.  1.  asrnavam;  krnavam. —  2.  dkrnos,  avrnos,  dsrnos, 
dsaghnos ,  ainos,  durnos;  akaros  (AV.),  avanos ,  asanos.  —  3.  a  dr  not,  dd/iunot , 
avrnot,  dpnot  (AV.  TS.),  ardhnot  (AV.),  ainot,  durnot;  akarot  (VS.  AV.), 
ata?iot,  as  anot.  —  Du.  2.  a  kr  nut  am ,  adhunutam. 

PI.  2.  akrnuta  and  akrnota;  akrnotana.  —  3.  dkrnvan,  acinvan  (AV.), 
asaknuvan,  asrnvan  (AV.) ;  rnvan,  minvan;  akurvan  (AV),  avanvan ,  dsanvan. 

Middle.  Sing.  2.  adhunuthas;  kuruthas  (AV.). —  3.  akrnuta,  ddhunuta; 
krnuta ;  akuruta  (AV.),  atanuta  (AV.),  dmanuta. 

PI.  2.  dkrnudhvam.  —  3.  dkrnvata 4,  avrnvata;  akurvata  (AV.;  Kh.11  135 *),. 
dtanvata,  amanvata ,  avanvata  (AV.). 

3.  The  nd-  class. 

Delbruck,  Verbum  p.  151  — 153.  —  Avery,  Verb-Inflection  232  ff.  —  Whitney, 
Sanskrit  Grammar  p.  260 — 263;  Roots  214.  —  v.  Negelein,  Zur  Sprachgeschichte  49 — 
57.  —  Cp.  J.  Schmidt,  Fesigruss  an  Roth  179  ff.;  Bartholomae,  IF.  7,  50—81;  Brug- 
mann,  IF.  16,  509  ff. 

475.  Nearly  forty  verbs  belong  to  this  class  in  the  Samhitas.  The  stem 
is  formed  by  adding  to  the  root,  in  the  strong  forms,  the  accented  syllable 
-;/^5,  which  in  the  weak  forms  is  reduced  to  before  consonants  and 
before  vowels. 

a.  There  are  some  irregularities  with  regard  to  the  root,  the  suffix, 
and  the  endings.  1.  The  root  shows  a  tendency  to  be  reduced  in  various 
ways.  The  roots  jl-  ‘overpower’,  ju-  ‘hasten’,  pn-  ‘purify’,  are  shortened;  e.  g. 
jindmi,  junasi,  pundti.  The  root  grabh-  ‘seize’  and  its  later  form  grab-  take 


1  With  strong  stem  instead  of  weak.  Thus 
in  four  out  of  seven  verbs  there  is  an  alter¬ 
native  strong  form;  and  in  one  other  ( tanota ) 
the  strong  is  the  only  form  occurring. 

2  Thus  all  the  forms  occurring  with  -/a## 

have  a  strong  stem.  Whitney  704  also 

mentions  karota  besides  the  2.  du.  krnotam , 

but  I  do  not  know  whether  these  forms 

occur  in  mantra  passages. 


3  skrnva.nl-  in  pari-skrnvdn  (ix.  39?). 

4  In  x.  134  akrnvata  has  the  appearance 
of  being  used  for  the  3.  sing.  (=  akrnuta). 

5  The  suffix  may  originally  have  been 
of  which  would  be  the  weak  grade 

(27);  but  Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  597,  note, 
disagrees  with  this  view.  He  thinks  -nT  has 
displaced  earlier  -ni,  KG.  p.  512. 


VII.  Verb.  Present  System.  349 

Samprasarana;  e.  g.  grbhndmi  and  grhndmi  (AV.).  Four  roots  which,  in  forms 
outside  the  present  system  appear  with  a  nasal1,  drop  the  nasal  here;  thus 
bandh-  ‘bind’  :  badhndmi  (AV.);  manth-  ‘shake’  :  mathnami  (AV.);  skambh- 
‘make  firm’  :  skabhndti ;  stambh-  ‘prop’  :  stabhndti  (AV.).  The  root  jha-  ‘know’, 
also  loses  its  nasal;  e.  g.  jd-na-mi2.  —  2.  The  strong  form  of  the  suffix, 
-nd,  appears  in  certain  2.  persons  impv.  act.,  which  should  have  the  weak 
form  -nl;  e.  g.  2.  pi.  pund-ta  for  punl-td .  On  the  other  hand  -nl  appears 
once  instead  of  -nd  in  3.  sing.  injv.  mintt 3  (AV.).  —  3.  A  few  roots  ending 
in  consonants  take  the  peculiar  ending  -ana  in  the  2.  sing.  impv.  act.;  e.  g. 
grh-ana 4.  —  4.  Transfers  to  the  a-  conjugation  are  made  from  five  roots. 
These  are  rare  in  the  case  of  gr-  ‘sing’  :  grnd-ta  2.  pi.  ind.,  grna-nta  3.  pi.  impf.; 
mi-  ‘damage’  :  mina-t  3.  sing,  injv.,  amina-nta  3.  pi.  impf.;  sr-  ‘crush’  only  srna 
(AV.)  2.  sing.  impv.  But  pr-  ‘fill’  and  mr-  ‘crush’  form  the  regular  d-  stems 
prnd-  and  mrnd-  (beside  prnd -  and  mrnd -),  ten  forms  being  made  from  the 
former,  and  five  from  the  latter  in  the  RV. 5 6 

Present  Indicative. 

476.  The  forms  actually  occurring,  if  made  from  grabh-  ‘seize’,  would  be 
the  following: 

Active.  Sing.  grbhndmi.  2.  grbhndsi.  3.  grbhndti. —  Du.  2.  grbhnit/ias. 
3.  grbhnltds. —  PI.  1.  grbhnlmdsi  and  grbhnimds.  2.  grbhnitha  and  grbhmthdna. 
3.  grbhndnti. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  grbhnJ.  2.  grbhnise.  3.  grbhnltd.  —  PI.  1.  grbhnlmdhe. 
3.  grbhnate. 

The  forms  which  actually  occur  are  the  following: 

Active.  Sing.  1.  asndmi  (‘eat’,  AV.  VS.),  isnami  (AV.),  ksindmi  (AV.), 
grnami  (gr-  ‘sing’),  grndmi  (AV.  vi.  7 1 3,  gr-  ‘swallow’),  grbhndmi ,  grhndmi 
(AV.  TS.),  jandmi ,  jindmi ,  punami ,  prnami  (AV.),  bad/mdmi 0  (bandh-  ‘bind’, 
AV.  TS.),  7nathnami  (AV.),  minami ,  rinajni  (AV.),  srndmi  (AV.),  sinami  (AV.), 
stabhnami ,  strnami  (AV.).  —  2.  asnasi  (AV.),  isnasi ,  jmiasi ,  prnasi ,  rinasi , 
srnasi.  —  3.  asndti,  krlnati,  ksinati  (ksi-  ‘destroy’),  grndti ,  grbhndti ,  grhndti 
(AV.),  jandti ,  jindti ,  junati ,  pundti ,  prnati ,  mindti ,  musnati  (AV.),  rinati , 
srndti ,  sinati ,  skabhndti ,  stabhndti  (AV.),  hrunati. 

Du.  2.  rz nit has.  —  3.  grnttas ,  prnitas. 

PI.  1 .  grnimasi,  jummdsi,  minim asi^  srnlmasi  (AV.);  jammds.  —  2.  janitha\ 
strnithdna  (AV.).  —  3.  asndnti  (AV.),  ksinanti ,  grndnti,  grbhndnti ,  grhnanti 
(AV.TS.),  jdn anti,  j inant i,  jundnti ,  pundnti ,  prndnti ,  prlnanti ,  badhndnti  (AV.), 
bhrinanti 7,  min  anti,  r in  anti,  sr  in  anti ,  strndnti. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  grne,  grbhne ,  grhne  (AV.),  vrne \  —  2.  grnisd8,  vrnise 
(AV.),  srlnise,  hrnise.  —  3.  krlnlte  (AV.),  ksinite  (AV.),  grnlte,  punlte ,  prlnite, 
rinlte ,  vrnite,  srathnlte,  strnlte,  hr  nit e.  —  With  -e  for  -te\  grne. 

PI.  1.  grhnimahe  (TS.  v.  7.  91),  punlmahe  (Kh.  hi.  io4),  vrnTmahe 9.  — 


1  Cp.  Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  627. 

2  Originally  *janci-  with  nasal  sonant,  *jn- 
na-;  see  Brugmann,  KG.  666  (p.  511). 

3  On  this  form  see  v.  Negelein  56,  note  E 

4  On  the  origin  of  this  ending  see  Brug¬ 
mann,  Grundriss  2,  p.  975. 

5  Beside  seven  present  stems  of  this  class 
there  appear  denominative  stems  in  -aya 
from  the  same  roots.  Cp.  v. Negelein  50 — 52* 

6  Given,  along  with  a  number  of  cognate 

forms,  as  from  the  root  badh-,  by  v.  Nege¬ 

lein  57. 


7  The  only  form  occurring  of  the  root 
bhrl -  ‘consume’. 

8  The  form  griuse  also  occurs  in  the  RV. 
as  a  I.  sing,  ind.,  ‘I  praise’,  being  formed 
from  an  anomalous  aorist  stem  gfnT- 

9  According  to  Whitney  719,  once 
vrntmahe ,  with  reference  doubtless  to  RV. 
V.  203,  where,  however,  vrmmahe  ’gne  is 
only  the  Sandhi  accentuation  for  vrmmahe 
agne  (see  above  108  and  p.  319,  note  I3). 


35° 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


3.  asnate I,  grbhnate ,  grhnate  (AY.),  janate,  punate  (AV.)  and  pun  ate,  badhndte , 
rinate \  vrnate. 

Present  Subjunctive. 

477.  In  the  2.  3.  sing.,  subjunctive  forms  are  indistinguishable  from  the 
indicative  present,  if  formed  with  primary  endings,  and  from  the  injunctive,  if 
formed  with  secondary  endings,  as  the  modal  sign  a  is  merged  in  the  strong 
stem;  thus  grbhndti  may  be  3.  sing,  indicative  or  subjunctive;  grbhnds  may  be 
2.  sing,  injunctive  or  subjunctive.  In  such  forms  therefore  the  sense  or  con¬ 
struction  of  the  sentence  can  alone  decide  their  value.  These  as  well  as  un¬ 
mistakable  subjunctives  are  rare  in  this  class. 

Active.  Sing.  2.  grbhnds,  junds. —  3.  prnati  (x.  24 *,  cp.  2  5),  pr?iat{KV.).  — 
PL  1.  junama ,  mindma. 

Middle  Du.  1.  krinavahai  (TS.  1.  8.  41).  —  PI.  1.  janamahai  (AV.). 

Present  Injunctive. 

Active.  Sing.  1.  ksindm.  —  2.  rinds  (AV.  xx.  13511).  —  3.  jdndt2, 

mimt 3  (AV.  vi.  no3).  —  PI.  3.  min  an ,  rindn  (vm.  728),  scamnan. 

Middle.  Sing.  2.  hrmthds.  —  3.  grnita ,  grbhnita ,  vrnlta.  —  PI.  1. 

strnimdhi 4. 

Present  Optative. 

In  the  middle  some  forms  of  the  optative  cannot  be  distinguished  from 
unaugmented  forms  of  the  imperfect,  as  the  modal  sign  -1  is  merged  in  the 
suffix  -m.  The  forms  actually  occurring  are  very  few,  being  found  in  the 
2.  3.  sing.  only. 

Active.  3.  asmydt  (AV.),  grhmydt  (AV.),  jiniydt  (AV.),  prniydt. 

Middle.  2 .jdnithas  (Kh.  iv.  530).  —  3.  vrnita  (TS.  1. 1. 21  =  vurita ,  VS.iv.  8). 

Present  Imperative. 

478.  The  regular  ending  of  the  2.  sing.  act.  is  -hi,  while  -dhi  never 
occurs.  Three  verbs  take  -tat  as  well.  One  of  these,  grab-,  and  three  others 
ending  in  a  consonant,  as-,  bandh-,  stambh-,  take  the  peculiar  ending  -and. 

Active.  Sing.  2.  grnahi 5  (TS.  iv.  4.  12$),  grnihi,  grbhmhi  (AV.),  grhndhi 5 
(AV.),  jam  hi ,  pundhi 6  (SV.),  punihi,  prmhi  (AV.),  mrnihi,  srnahi '6 *  (S  V.), 
sriiihi 7,  strmhi 8  (AV.).  —  With  -tat:  grhmitdt  (AV.j,  jdnitdt 9  (TS.  AV.), 
pujutdt.  —  With  -ana:  asana 10 ,  grhana 10  (x.  10312);  badhana  (AV.), 

stabhana  (AV.)  —  3.  grnatu,  grhndtu,  jdndtu  (AV.),  punatu,  prndtu  (AV.), 
badh?iatu  (AV.),  srndtu  (AV.),  sinatu  (AV.). 

Du.  2.  asmtdm ,  grnitam  (TS.  iv.  1.  82),  grhmtam  (AV.),  print  dm ,  snutam , 
strnitdm.  —  3.  grnitam,  pumtdm  (AV.). 


1  grnate  (AV.  iv.  212),  given  by  v.  Nege- 
LEIN  as  a  finite  form  grriate  (unaccented), 
is  the  dat.  sing,  of  the  participle. 

2  This  form  is  accented  janat  in  the  Khila 
(ill.  21)  after  RV.  X.  103  (Aufrecht’s  Rigveda2, 
682),  but  it  is  correct  in  the  corresponding 
passage  of  the  AV.  (ill.  26). 

3  For  minat. 

4  There  seems  to  be  no  certain  example 

of  a  3.  pi.  Avery  240  give i grbhnata,  but  this 

form  (ix.  147)  appears  to  have  an  imperf. 

sense;  he  adds  vrnata  with  a  query,  but  I 

cannot  trace  the  form. 


5  With  strong  base  instead  of  grnihi, 
grhnlhi. 

6  With  strong  base  and  irregular  accent. 

7  Also  the  transfer  form  srna  (AV.xix.  45 x). 

8  Whitney  723  quotes  strnahi  from  the 
TS.  [vi.  3.  1 »]. 

9  v.  NegeleiN  57,  line  6,  seems  to  regard 
jhatat  (AV.  xix.  156),  given  as  jhatdt  (un¬ 
accented),  as  an  anomalous  imperative;  but 
it  is  the  ablative  of  the  past  participle, 

10  Both  forms  are  omitted  by  Avery  243 ; 
the  latter  is  regarded  by  Grassmann  as  a 
participle. 


VII.  Verb.  Perfect  System. 


PI.  2.  grnita x,  grbhnita ,  panitd,  pumtd  and  punata1  2,  prnita ,  mathnita 
(AV.),  mrriita  (AV.),  strnlta  (AV.).  —  With  -tana:  pumtdna ,  prnitanay 
srlmtana.  — ■  3.  asnantu  (AV.),  gniantu  (AV.  TS.),  grhnantu  (AV.).  jdnantu 
(AV.),  punantu ,  mathnantu  (AV.),  badhnantu  (AV.),  srnantu,  srlnantu  (AV.), 
sinatitu  (AV.). 

Middle.  Sing.  2.  grbhnlsva  (Kh.  iv.  526),  prnlsva  (Kh.11.  81),  vrnisva.  — 
3.  strnltam,  hr  nit  am. 

PI.  2.  jdmdhvam  (AV.),  vrmdhvdm.  —  3.  jdnatdm 3,  vrnatdm  (AV.). 

Present  Participle. 

479-  Active,  asndnt -,  f.  -all-  (AV.),  isndnt -,  usnant-,  grndnt -,  grhnant- 
j  an  a  fit-,  f.  -<?//-,  jindnt-  (AV.),  pun  ant-,  f.  - atl -,  prnant- 4,  prlnant-,  mathnant- , 
mindnt-,  f.  -atl-,  musnant-,  mrnant rindnt-,  srlndnt-,  skabhnant-,  strnant-, 
f.  -atl-  (AV.). 

Middle,  dpnana -,  isnand-,  grnana -,  grhnana-  (AV.),  jandna-,  drunand-, 
pundna-,  prlndna rnindna-,  rindnd-,  vrndna-,  srnand-,  srathnana -  (AV.),. 
srlnand-j  strnana-,  hrndna-. 

Imperfect  Indicative. 

480.  Active.  Sing.  1.  ajandm ,  ahidm.  —  2.  dksinas,  agrbhnds,  aprnds , 
anunds,  amusnas,  aramnds,  arinds,  astab finds ;  ub/inds,  rinds,  srathnds.  — 
3.  agrbhndt,  agrhnat  (AV.),  ajdndt  (AV.),  aprnat,  aprlndt ,  dbadhnat amathndt , 
amindt,  amusnat,  dramnat ,  drinat,  asrndt ,  astabhndt ,  astrndt;  dsndt  (AV.), 
aubhndt ;  jdndt,  badhndt  (AV.). 

Du.  2.  dmusnitam,  arimtam ,  avrnitam.  —  PI.  2.  drimta .  —  3.  aknnan 
(AV.),  agrbhnan ,  agrhnan  (AV.  TS.),  ajdnan 5,  apunan ,  dbadhnan ,  asrathnan , 
dstrnan ;  ds'uan6  (AV.);  asnan  (x.  1 7 6 1),  rindn  (x.  138'). 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  dvrni.  —  3.  dbadhmta  (TS.i.  1.  io2),  dvrmta ,  asruuta. — 
PI.  1.  avrnimahi.  —  3.  agrbhnata 1 ,  djdnata  (TS.  11.  1.  n3);  grbhnata . 


II.  The  Perfect  System. 

Benfey,  Vollstandige  Grammatik  p.372 — 381.  —  Delbruck,  Verbum  1 12— 134.  — 
Avery,  Verb-Inflection  249—253.  —  Whitney,  Sanskrit  Grammar  p.  279— 296 ;  Roots  219  — 
221.  —  v.  Negelein,  Zur  Sprachgeschichte  70—78. 

481.  Like  the  present  system,  the  perfect  has,  besides  an  indicative,  the 
subjunctive,  optative  and  imperative  moods,  as  well  as  participles  and  an 
augmented  tense,  the  pluperfect.  It  is  of  very  frequent  occurrence,  being  taken 
by  nearly  300  verbs  in  the  Samhitas.  It  is  formed  in  essentially  the  same 
way  from  all  roots,  its  characteristic  feature  being  reduplication. 

1.  The  Reduplicative  Syllable8. 

482.  The  reduplicative  vowel  is  as  a  rule  short.  It  is,  however,  long  in. 
more  than  thirty  verbs.  These  are  kan-  ‘be  pleased’  :  ca-kan ;  kip-  ‘be  adapted’ 
:  cd-klp- ;  gr-  ‘wake’  :  jd-gr- ;  grdh-  ‘be  greedy’  :  jd-grdh-;  trp-  ‘be  pleased’  : 
ta-trp- ;  trs-  ‘be  thirsty’  :  td-trs- ;  dhr-  ‘hold’  :  da-dhr nam-  ‘bend’  :  nd-nam-\ 


1  Also  the  transfer  form  according  to  the 
a-  class,  grndta  (AV.  V.  279). 

2  With  strong  instead  of  weak  base. 

3  In  Ivhila  II.  IO6  wrongly  janitam. 

4  With  fern,  prndnti -,  a  transfer  to  the 
c-  class. 

5  v.  Negelein  57  also  gives  the  unaugmented 

form  jdnan  (RV.  AV.),  which  I  cannot  trace 


(the  participle  nom,  sing.  m.  jdnan  is 
common). 

6  In  prasnan  (AV.  XI.  332)  the  Pada  text 
reads  pra-asnan. 

7  Also  the  transfer  forms  aminanta  and 
grnanta  (vm.  37). 

8  On  the  reduplicative  syllable  see  v.  Nege- 
lein  70;  cp.  Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  846. 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


ma-mrs- ; 


inrs-  ‘touch’ 

rd-ran -;  rabh-  ‘grasp’  :  ra-rabh 
va-van-;  vas-  ‘desire’  :  va-vas ’-; 

^  v  rr  /  - 


mah -  ‘be  liberal’  :  via-maZi mrj wipe  :  ma-mry- ; 
radh-  ‘be  subject’  :  ra-radh -;  ran-  ‘rejoice’ 

‘be  crooked’  :  va-vak -;  van-  ‘win’  :  va-van -;  vas-  ‘desire'  :  va-vas-;  vas 
‘clothe’  :  va-vas-;  vas-  ‘roar’  :  va-vas-;  vrj-  ‘twist’  :  vd-vrj-;  vrt-  ‘turn’  :  va-vrt-; 
vrdh-  ‘grow’  :  va-vrdh-;  vrs-  ‘rain’  :  va-vrs-;  sad-  ‘prevail’  :  sa-sad-;  sa/i-  ‘prevail’ 
:  sd-sah-;  skambh-  ‘prop’  :  cd-skambh-;  dl-  ‘shine’  :  dl-dl-;  dhl-  ‘think’  :  di-dhT-; 
pT-  ‘swell’  : pT-pT-;  hid-  ‘be  hostile’  :  ji-hid-  (AY1.);  ju-  ‘be  swift’  \  ju-ju-;  tu- 
‘be  strong’  :  tu-tu-;  su-  ‘swell’  •  su-su-  1. 

a.  The  reduplication  of  r  (=  ar)  and  /  (=  al )  is  always  a2;  e.  g.  kr- 
‘make’  :  cakr-;  grdh-  ‘be  greedy’  :  ja-grdh-;  kip-  ‘be  adapted’  :  ca-klp-. 

b.  The  reduplication  of  a,  1,  fi  is  made  with  a,  i,  u  respectively;  e.  g. 
khad-  ‘chew’  :  ca-khad-;  bhl-  ‘fear’  :  bib  hi-;  budh-  ‘know’  :  bu-budh-. 

There  are,  however,  certain  exceptions  to  this  rule. 


1.  Roots  containing  ya  or  va  and  liable  to  Samprasarana  in  other  forms  (such  as 
the  past  passive  participle),  reduplicate  with  /  and  u  respectively3.  Those  with  ya  are: 
tyaj-  ‘forsake’  :  ti-tyaj-\  yaj-  ‘sacrifice’  :  i-yaj- ;  vyac-  ‘extend’  :  vi-vyac- ;  syand-  ‘move  on’  : 
si-syand -  (AV.).  Similarly  cyu-  ‘stir’  :  ci-cyu-^  (beside  cu-cyu -),  and  dyut-  ‘shine’  :  didyut - 4 *. 
Those  with  va-  are:  vac-  ‘speak’  :  u-vac- ;  vad-  ‘speak’  :  u-vad- ;  vap -  ‘strew’  :  u-vap- ;  vah- 
‘ carry’  :  u-vah--,  svap-  ‘sleep’  :  su-svap-.  The  three  roots  yam-  ‘reach’,  van-  ‘win’,  vas- 
‘wear’,  however,  have  the  full  reduplication:  ya-yam -,  va-van -,  vd-vas-;  and  vac-  ‘speak’ 
has  it  optionally:  va-vac-  beside  n-vac-$.  —  a.  The  roots  bhu-  ‘be’,  su-  ‘generate’,  and 
il-  ‘lie’,  reduplicate  with  a :  ba-bhu sa-sii-  (beside  su-su-,  AV.);  sa-si-  (in  the  participle 
sa-say-and-) 6. 


c.  In  roots  beginning  with  vowels,  the  reduplication  coalesces  with  the 
initial  of  the  root  to  a  long  vowel;  e.  g.  an-  ‘breathe’  :  an-;  av-  ‘favour’  :  av-; 
as-  ‘eat’  :  as- ;  as-  ‘be’  :  as-;  ah-  ‘say’  :  ah-;  r-  ‘go’  :  dr-  (=  a-arj;  dp-  ‘obtain’ 
:  dp-;  id-  ‘praise’  :  id-;  Jr-  ‘set  in  motion’  :  Jr-;  uh-  ‘consider’  :  uh-.  But  if  the 
root  begins  with  i  or  u ,  the  reduplicative  syllable  is  separated,  in  the  sing, 
act.,  from  the  strong  radical  syllable  by  its  own  semivowel:  i-  ‘go’  :  3.  pi. 
ly-ur,  but  2.  sing,  i-y-e-tha;  uc-  ‘be  pleased’:  2.  sing.  mid.  uc-i-se \  but  3.  sing, 
act.  u-v-bc-a1 . 


a.  Five  roots  beginning  with  prosodically  long  a,  reduplicate  not  with  a,  but  with 
the  syllable  an-.  Only  two  of  these,  both  containing  a  nasal,  viz.  ants-  ‘attain’  and  anj- 
‘anoint’,  make  several  forms;  the  former,  3.  sing,  dn-ams-a  and  an-ds-a,  pi.  I.  dn-as-ma, 
2.  dn-as-d,  3.  dn-as-ur ;  mid.  sing.  1.3.  dn-as-e;  subj.  pi.  I.  du-ds-a-mahai;  opt.  sing.  I.  dti-as- 
ydm8;  the  latter,  dn-ahja  (VS.  VIII.  29;  TS.  111.3.  io2);  mid.  sing.  I.  dn-aj-e,  pi.  3.  dn-aj-re ; 
subj.  sing.  I.  dnaj-d\  opt.  3.  sing,  an-aj-ydt.  The  root  rdh-  (reduced  from  ardh-)  ‘thrive’, 
which  has  a  nasalized  present  stem  9,  makes  the  forms  dn-rdh-ur  (AV.)  and  dn-rdh-e. 
Through  the  influence  of  these  nasalized  verbs,  their  method  of  reduplication  spread  to 
two  others  which  show  no  trace  of  a  nasal  anywhere.  Thus  from  arc-  ‘praise’  occur  the 
forms  dn-rc-ur  and  dn-rc-e\  and  from  arh-  ‘deserve’,  dn-rh-ur  (TS1.)  beside  arh-ire 
(RV1.).  There  are  besides  two  isolated  forms  of  doubtful  meaning,  probably  formed  from 


1  The  quantitative  form  of  the  stem  is 
governed  by  the  law  that  it  may  not  contain 
(except  in  the  I.  sing,  act.)  two  prosodically 
short  vowels;  the  only  exceptions  in  the 
weak  stem  being  the  two  irregular  forms 
tatane ,  1.  sing,  mid.,  and  jajanur ,  3.  pi.  act. 
Thus  sah -  reduplicates  sdsah -  and  once  sasdh- 
(weak).  Cp.  Benfey’s  articles  ‘Die  Quanti- 
tatsverschiebungen  in  den  Samhita-  und  Pada- 
Texten’,  GGA.  19  ff. 

2  In  most  of  the  forms  from  a-  and  r- 
roots,  the  Pada  text  has  a. 

3  These  verbs  originally  had  the  full  redu¬ 

plication  ya-  and  va-  as  is  shown  by  the 

evidence  of  the  Avesta,  which  has  this  only; 

cp.  Bartholomae,  IF.  3,  38  ($  59). 


4  Due  to  the  vocalic  pronunciation  of  the 
y :  ciu-  and  dint-. 

5  This  root  thus  shows  the  transition 
from  the  full  to  the  Samprasarana  redupli¬ 
cation. 

6  Cp.  Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  846. 

7  These  are  the  only  two  examples  to  be 
met  with  in  the  Samhitas  of  this  form  of 
reduplication. 

8  Beside  dsatur ,  as  at  he,  etc.,  from  as-,  the 
unnasalized  form  of  the  same  root.  Cp. 
Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  p.  12 n4. 

9  Thus  rnadhat,  rndhyam,  rndhant-,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  infixing  nasal  class. 


VII.  Verb.  Perfect  System. 


nasalized  roots:  an-rj-ur  (AV1.),  from  rj -  ‘attain’  (with  present  stem  rnj-')  *,  and  au-dh-a  2 3, 
2.  pi.  act.,  perhaps  from  amh-  ‘compress’  V 

This  form  of  reduplication  evidently  arose  from  a  radical  nasal  having  originally 
been  repeated  along  with  the  initial  vowel,  which  is  lengthened  as  in  many  other  stems 
(cJ-kan  ,  etc),  while  the  root  itself  is  shortened  by  dropping  the  nasal4.  In  the  modal 
forms  anaj-d,  dnaj-yat ,  dn-as-amahai  the  reduplicative  vowel  seems  to  have  been  shortened 
because  an-  came  to  be  regarded  as  containing  an  augment  (like  dnat,  aorist  of  nas- 
‘attain’) 5. 

d.  A  few  irregularities  in  regard  to  consonants  also  appear  in  the 
formation  of  the  reduplicative  stem.  i.  The  root  bhr-  ‘bear’  reduplicates 
with  j  (as  if  from  V hr-),  making  the  stem  ja-bhir -,  forms  from  which  occur 
nearly  thirty  times  in  the  RV.,  beside  only  two  forms  from  the  regular  stem 
ba-bhr -.  —  2.  In  forming  their  stem,  the  five  roots  ci-  ‘gather’,  ci-  ‘observe’, 
cit-  ‘perceive’,  ji-  ‘conquer’,  han -  ‘smite’,  revert  to  the  original  guttural  (as  in 
other  reduplicated  forms)  in  the  radical  syllable :  ci-ki -,  ci-kit -,  ji-gi ja-ghan-. 

e.  The  root  vid-  ‘know’  loses  its  reduplication  along  with  the  perfect 
sense6 7.  Thus  ved-a  ‘I  know’;  vid-vdms-  ‘knowing’.  Some  half  dozen  other 
roots  show  isolated  finite  forms  without  reduplication;  and  four  or  five  more 
have  unreduplicated  participial  forms.  Thus  taks-  ‘fashion’  makes  taks-athur 
and  taks-ur ;  yam-  ‘guide’  \yam-dtur\  skambh-  ‘prop’ :  skambh-dthur ,  skambh-ur1 ; 
nind-  ‘blame’  :  tiind-ima1 ;  arh-  ‘be  worthy’  :  arh-ire ;  cit-  ‘perceive’  :  cet-atur 
(AV.  VS.  SV.) 8.  Three  unreduplicated  participles  are  common :  das-vdms- 
and  das-i-vdms-  (SV.)  ‘worshipping’,  beside  the  rare  dadas-vdms -;  mldh-vdtns- 
‘bountiful’;  sah-vdms-  ‘conquering’,  beside  sasah-vdms-.  There  also  occurs  once 
the  unreduplicated  jani-vdms-  (in  the  form  vi-janus-a/i)  beside  jajhivdms- 
‘knowing’  (from  Yjha-) ;  and  the  isolated  vocative  khid-vas  may  be  the  equi¬ 
valent  of  *cikhid-vas ,  from  khid-  ‘oppress’9. 


2.  The  Root. 

483-  Like  the  present  and  imperfect,  the  perfect  is  strong  in  the 
sing.  act.  Here  the  root,  as  a  rule,  is  strengthened,  while  it  remains  un¬ 
changed  in  the  weak  forms.  But  if  it  contains  a  medial  a  or  a  final  a,  it 
remains  unchanged  in  the  strong  forms  (except  that  a  is  lengthened  in  the 
3.  sing.),  while  it  is  reduced  in  the  weak. 

In  the  strong  stem,  the  radical  vowel  takes  Guna,  but  in  the  3.  sing,  a 
final  vowel  takes  Vrddhi  instead  of  Guna10.  Thus  vis-  ‘enter’  makes  vives- ; 
druh-  ‘be  hostile’,  dudrdh- ;  krt-  ‘cut’,  cakdrt- ;  but  bhl-  ‘fear’,  1.  2.  bib  he- -, 
3.  bibhdi -;  sru-  ‘hear’,  1.  2.  susrd :-,  3.  susrdii -;  hr-  ‘make’,  1.  2.  cakdr -,  3.  cakdr- 1 ' . 
In  the  weak  stem,  on  the  other  hand,  the  root  remains  unchanged;  thus 
vivis -,  dudruh -,  cakrt-,  bib  hi-,  susru-,  cakr-. 

a.  Some  irregularities  occur  in  the  treatment  of  the  radical  vowel.  1.  The  verb 


1  According  to  both  the  infixing  nasal 
class,  3.  pi.  rhjate,  and  the  a-  class,  3.  sing. 
rnjati. 

2  Probably  for  *anaha\  cp.  the  weak  stem 
sasd/i-  beside  sasah-. 

3  Cp.  Delbruck,  Verbum  145,  and  Whitney, 
Roots,  under  anh  ‘be  narrow  or  distressing’. 

4  Except  in  the  form  an-amsa  (cp.  ijveyK- 
tcu )  beside  dn-dsa  (=  -rjvoK-e). 

5  Cp.  the  Greek  aor.  inf.  ev-eyK-elv  and  the 
perfect  ev-rjveyK-Tcu. 

6  Cp.  Bezzenberger,  GGA.  1879,  p.  818; 
J.  Schmidt,  IvZ.  25,  3;  Brugmann,  Grundriss 
2,  848. 

7  With  the  strong  (nasalized)  form  of  the 

Indo-arische  Philologie.  I.  4. 


!  root  beside  caskabh-dnd-  (AV.),  and  ninid-ur . 

8  With  strong  radical  syllable. 

9  Delbruck,  Verbum  14S,  adds  dabhur , 
but  this  is  rather  aorist  (beside  perf.  debhur ). 

10  On  the  origin  of  this  distinction  between 
the  I.  sing,  and  the  3.  sing.  cp.  J.  Schmidt, 
IvZ.  25,  8ff.  and  Streitberg,  IF.  3,  38 3—386. 

11  This  distinction  is  invariable  in  the  RV., 
and  the  rule  seems  to  be  the  same  in  the 
AV.  Whitney  793  d  mentions  cakdra  as  an 
exception,  but  this  form  is  3.  sing,  in  all 
the  passages  given  in  his  AV.  Index;  and 

\jagrdho{AV.lil.\&)  is  evidently  a  corruption; 
see  Whitney’s  note  and  cp.  p.  356,  note  9. 


23 


354 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

mrj-  ‘wipe’  takes  Vrddhi  instead  of  Guna  throughout  the  strong  stem:  mamdrj -1 2.  — 
2.  Two  instances  of  the  strong  stem  being  used  in  weak  forms  occur  in  the  RV. : 
pi.  1.  yuyopimd  and  3.  vivesur 2  beside  the  regular  vivisur.  —  3.  The  radical  vowel  of 
bhu-  remains  unchanged  in  the  strong  as  well  as  the  weak  forms,  interposing  v  before 
vowels;  thus  sing.  2 .  babhii-tha,  pi.  3,  babhii-v-ur. —  4.  The  weak  stem  of  tf-  ‘cross’  appears 
in  the  RV.  as  titir-  and  tutur-',  thus  sing.  3.  tatar-a,  but  pi.  3.  titir -ur,  part,  titir-vams-,  opt. 
sing.  3.  tutur-ydt  3. 

a.  Roots  containing  medial  a  leave  the  radical  syllable  unchanged  in 
sing.  1.  2.,  lengthening  the  vowel  in  sing.  3.;  they  reduce  it  in  the  weak  stem 
by  contraction,  syncopation,  or  loss  of  nasal. 

1.  The  roots  with  initial  ya-  and  va-,  which  reduplicate  with  the  vowels 
i  and  71 4  respectively,  take  Samprasarana,  the  result  being  contraction  to 
T  and  u.  Thus  from  yaj-  ‘sacrifice’:  strong  stem  i-ydj -,  weak  Tj-  (=  i-i/-)5; 
vac-  ‘speak’  :  u-vdc-  and  uc-  (=  u-uc-);  vad-  ‘speak’  :  11-vdd-  and  ud-;  vap- 
‘strew’  :  u-vap-  and  up -;  vas-  ‘dwell’  :  u-vas-  and  us-;  vah-  ‘carry’  :  u-vdh-  and 
uh-.  The  root  va-  ‘weave’  is  similarly  treated  in  the  form  pi.  3.  u-v-ur 
(=  u-u-v-ur).  Samprasarana  of  the  root  also  appears  in  the  weak  stem  of 
svap-  ‘sleep’  and  of  grabh-  and  grab-  ‘seize’  :  su-svap-  and  su-sup-;  ja-grabh -, 
ja-grah-  and  ja-grbh -,  ja-grh-.  The  roots  yam- 6 *,  van-,  vas-  ‘wear’  have  the  full 
reduplication  throughout;  yam -  taking  Samprasarana  and  contracting  in  the 
weak  stem,  van-  syncopating  its  a ,  and  vas-  retaining  it  throughout:  ya-yam- 
and  yem-  (=  ya-im);  va-vdn-  and  va-vn-;  vd-vas-  (both  strong  and  weak). 

2.  More  than  a  dozen  roots  containing  a  between  single  consonants  and 
reduplicating  their  initial  without  change,  contract  the  reduplication  and  root 
to  a  single  syllable  with  medial  e.  The  type  followed  by  these  verbs  was 
doubtless  furnished  by  sad-  ‘sit’,  which  forms  the  weak  stem  sed-  (=  *sazd-), 
beside  the  strong  sa-sdd-,  and  supported  by  yam-,  with  its  weak  stem  yem- 
(=  ya-im )  beside  the  strong  yayam- '.  The  other  stems  showing  this  contraction 
are  formed  from  tap-  ‘heat’,  dab/i-  ‘harm’,  nam-  ‘bend’,  pac-  ‘cook’,  pat-  ‘fall’, 
yat-  ‘stretch’,  yam -  ‘guide’,  rabh-  ‘seize’,  labh-  ‘take’,  sak-  ‘be  able’,  sap-  ‘curse’, 
sap-  ‘serve’.  The  roots  tan-  ‘stretch’  and  sac-  ‘follow’  also  belong  to  this  class 
in  the  AV.,  but  not  in  the  RV.  The  root  bhaj-  ‘divide’  though  not  redupli¬ 
cating  with  an  identical  consonant  in  its  strong  stem  ba-bhaj -,  follows  the 
analogy  of  this  group  in  forming  the  weak  stem  bhej- . 

3.  Four  roots  of  this  form,  however,  simply  syncopate  the  radical  a 
without  contracting.  These  are  jan-  ‘beget’  :  jajh -,  strong  jajdn-;  pan-  ‘admire’ 

:  papn-,  strong  pap  an- ;  man-  ‘think’  :  mamn-8;  van-  ‘win’  :  vav7i-,  strong  vavan-. 
Three  others  have  this  syncopated  as  well  as  the  contracted  form:  tan-  ‘stretch’ 
:  tatn-  and  ten-  (AV.);  pat-  ‘fall’  : p apt-  and  pet-;  sac-  ‘follow’  :  sasc-  and  sec- 
(AV.).  Syncopation  of  medial  a  also  takes  place  in  four  roots  with  initial 
guttural:  khan-  ‘dig’  :  cakhn-  (AV.),  strong  cakhan-;  gam-  ‘go’  :  jagm-,  strong 
jagdm-;  ghas-  ‘eat’  :  jaks-,  strong  jaghds-;  han-  ‘smite’  :  jaghn -,  strong  jaghan-. 

4.  In  a  few  roots  with  medial  a  and  a  penultimate  nasal,  the  latter 
is  lost  in  the  weak  stem9.  Thus  krand-  ‘cry  out’  :  cakrad-;  tarns-  ‘shake’  : 
tatas-;  skambh-  ‘prop’  :  caskabh-  (AV.),  strong  caskdmbh-;  stambh-  ‘prop’  : 


1  The  same  irregularity  appears  in  the 
present  stem. 

2  Cp.  Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  p.  12231. 

3  Cp.  v.  Negelein  741. 

4  But  they  had  the  full  reduplication  in 
the  Hr.  period;  cp.  Brugmann,  Grundriss  2, 
p.  12203. 

5  In  the  one  form  yeje  (beside  ijc\  yaj- 

follows  the  analogy  of  yam-,  preserving  a 

trace  of  the  old  reduplication  ya-. 


6  The  analogy  of  yam-  is  followed  by 
yaj-  in  the  one  form  yeje  (beside  Tje) ;  cp. 
note  5. 

7  See  Bartholomae,  Die  ai.  AFormen  im 
schwachen  Perfect,  KZ.  27,  337—366;  Brug¬ 
mann,  Grundriss  2,  p.  1222;  cp.  v.  Negelein 
713. 

8  The  strong  stem  does  not  occur. 

9  Cp.  Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  p.  121 74. 


VII.  Verb.  Perfect  System.  355 


tastabh -,  strong  tastdmbh -.  Similarly,  from  dambh -,  the  nasalized  form  of 
dabh-1 2  ‘harm’,  is  formed  dadabh -,  strong  dadambh-  (AV.) ;  and  from  rambh -,  the 
nasalized  form  of  rabh- 2  ‘seize’,  rarabh-.  From  dams-  ‘bite’,  only  the  participle 
dadasvdms-  occurs.  The  root  bandh-  ‘bind’,  both  loses  its  nasal  and  contracts, 
forming  the  weak  stem  bedh -  (AV.)  beside  the  strong  babdndh-  (AV.). 

b.  Roots  with  final  a  retain  that  vowel  in  the  strong  stem,  but  in  the 
weak  reduce  it  to  i 3  before  consonants  and  drop  it  before  vowels.  Thus  dha- 
‘put’  employs  dadhd-  in  the  strong  forms,  dad/ii-  and  dadh-  in  the  weak. 

3.  Endings. 

484.  The  endings  in  the  indicative  active  are  all  peculiar  (excepting 
the  secondary  - va 4  and  - ma ),  while  in  the  middle  they  are  identical  (excepting 
the  3.  sing,  -e  and  3.  pi.  -re)$  with  the  primary  middle  endings  of  the  present. 


They  are  the 

following: 

Active 

Middle 

sing. 

du. 

plq 

sing. 

du. 

plb 

1.  -a 

[-vd\ 

-ma 

1.  -e 

\-vdhe] 

-make 

2.  -tha 

-dthur  0 

f 

-a 

2.  -se 

-dthe 

-dhve 

3-  ~a 

- dtur 6 7 

- ur 7 

3-  -e 

-dte 

/ 

- re 

Roots  ending  in  -a  take 

the  anomalous  ending 

- au 5  in  the  1. 

and  3.  sing. 

act.;  e.  g.  dha-  ‘put’  :  da-dhdu.  The  only  exception  is  the  root  pra-  ‘fill’, 
which  once  forms  the  3.  sing,  pa-prd  (1.  691)  beside  the  usual  pa-prdu. 

a.  Consonant  endings.  These  are,  as  a  rule,  added  directly  to  the 
stem.  No  forms  with  -va  or  -vdhe  occur  in  the  Samhitas;  -make  is  always  added 
direct,  as  is  also  -dhve  in  the  only  form  in  which  it  occurs,  dadhi-dhve.  The 
remaining  consonant  endings,  - tha ,  - ma ,  -se,  -re,  are  nearly  always  added  direct 
to  stems  ending  in  vowels,  but  frequently  with  the  connecting  vowel  -i-  to 
stems  ending  in  consonants. 

1.  Roots  with  final  a.  always  add  the  endings  directly  to  the  stem, 
which  reduces  the  radical  vowel  to  i 9  in  the  weak  forms;  e.  g.  dadd-tha ; 
dadhi-md ,  dadhi-se \  dadhi-re10 . 

2.  Roots  with  final  /  and  u  also  always  add  these  endings  direct  to 
the  stem;  e.  g.ji-  ‘conquer’  :  jige-tha\  ?u-  ‘lead’  :  ninedha ;  su-  ‘press’  :  susu-ma; 
cyu-  ‘move’  :  cicyu-se\  Ziu -  ‘sacrifice’  :  juhu-re ;  hu-  ‘call’  :  juhu-re.  The  only 
exception  is  bhu -,  which  (doubtless  owing  to  the  fondness  of  this  verb  for 
-uv-)  forms  babhdv-i-tha  twice  in  the  RV.  beside  the  usual  babhn-tha ,  and 
babhuv-i-ma  once  in  the  AV. 


1  From  which  is  formed  the  weak  stem 

debh -. 

2  From  which  is  formed  the  weak  stem 

rebh-. 

3  See  Delbruck,  Verbum  147  (p.  120); 
Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  844  (p.  1206 — 8); 
cp.  v.  Bradke,  IF.  8,  123  — 137;  156 — 160; 
Reichelt,  BB.  27,  94. 

4  No  perfect  form  with  - va  is,  however, 
found  in  the  Samhitas. 

5  Both  of  these,  however,  occasionally 
appear  in  the  present  ind.  mid. 

6  The  a  is  here  probably  not  connecting 
vowel  but  identical  with  the  a  of  the  2.  pi.; 
a-tur  getting  its  r  from  the  3.  pi.  -ur,  and 
- a-thur  being  then  formed  like  - thas  beside 
•/as:  cp.  Brugmann,  KG.  p.  597. 

7  That  r  (and  not  s)  is  here  original  is 


shown  by  the  evidence  of  the  Avesta;  cp. 
Brugmann,  KG.  797  (p.  597). 

8  This  has  not  been  satisfactorily  explained ; 
cp.  Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  p.  12233. 

9  This  i  as  the  reduced  form  of  d  (cp. 
hi- id-  etc.,  from  dha -),  occurring  in  such  very 
common  verbs  as  dd-  ‘give’  and  dhd-  ‘put’, 
was  probably  the  starting  point  for  the  use 
of  i  as  a  connecting  vowel  in  other  verbs; 
but  cp.  Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  p.  12081; 
cp.  also  IF.  8,  123 — 160. 

10  The  vowel  is  dropped  before  -re  in 
dadh-re ,  which  occurs  once  beside  the  very 
common  dadhi-re.  Similarly  the  stem  of  dd- 
‘give’,  is  shortened  before  the  ending  -rire 
in  dad-rire,  which  occurs  once  (with  passive 
sense). 


23* 


>56 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


3.  Roots  with  final  -r  add  the  endings  - tha ,  -ma,  and  -se  direct  (ex¬ 
cepting  two  or  three  forms),  but  -re  always  with  connecting  thus  kr-  ‘do’ 

:  cakar-tha ,  cakr-ma ,  cakr-se '  but  cakr-i-re.  Connecting  -i-  before  the  other 
endings  appears  in  dr-i-tha ,  ar-i-ma  (r-  ‘go’);  and  in  jabhr-i-se  ( bhr -  ‘bear’). 

4.  Roots  with  final  consonant  add  -tha,  -ma;  se,  -re  direct  if  the 
last  syllable  of  the  stem  is  prosodically  short,  but  with  the  connecting  vowel 
-i-  if  that  syllable  is  long1.  Thus  tatdn-tha;  jagan-ina,  jagrbh-ma,  yuyuj-ma; 
dadrk-se ,  vivit-se;  cdklp-re \  taias-re,  duduh-re,  pasprdh-re,  yuyuj-re,  vivid-re  and 
others;  but  as-i-tha ,  uvoc-i-tha,  vived-i-tha;  uc-i-md ,  papt-i-ma ,  sed-i-ma ; 
tatn-i-se;  ij-i-re,  jagm-i-re,  tataks-i-re 2,  yet-i-re.  The  only  exception  is  vet-tha, 
which  as  an  old  form  inherited  from  the  IE.  period  (Greek  oia-ha)  without 
reduplication,  remained  unaffected  by  the  influence  of  reduplicated  forms. 

a.  Six  roots  ending  in  consonants  add  rire 3  instead  of  -re:  cikit-rire  (beside  the 
more  usual  cikit-re),  j  agrbh-rire  (once  beside  the  usual  j  agrbh-re),  bubhuj -rire  (once),  vivid- 
rire  (once  beside  vivid-re),  sasrj-rire  (once),  and  duduh-rire  (once  in  the  SV.  for  the 
common  duduh-re  of  the  RV.) 4. 

b.  Vowel  endings.  Before  terminations  beginning  with  vowels  final 
radical  vowels  are  variously  treated.  1.  1,  if  preceded  by  one  consonant, 
becomes  y,  if  preceded  by  more  than  one,  iy:  e.  g.  from  bin-  ‘fear’,  bibhy- 
atur ,  bibhy-ur;  but  from  sri-  ‘resort’,  sisriy-e .  —  2.  Final  u  ordinarily  becomes 
uv ;  e.  g.  yu-  ‘join’  :  yuyuv-e;  sru-  ‘hear’  :  susruv-e ;  su-  ‘swell’  :  susuve.  But 
u  becomes  v  in  hu-  ‘call’,  e.  g.  ju-hv-e ;  and  uv  in  bhu-  ‘be’  and  su-  ‘bring 
forth’,  even  in  strong  forms5;  e.  g.  3.  sing,  ba-bhuv-a ,  sasuv-a 6.  —  3.  Final  -r 
becomes  r;  e.  g.  from  kr-  ‘make’,  cakr-d ,  cab'-e.  But  -f  becomes  ir  in  titir-ur 
from  tr-  ‘cross’,  and  in  3.  sing,  tistir-e ,  part,  tistir-and from  sir-  ‘strew’  (the 
only  root  with  a  r  vowel  preceded  by  two  consonants  that  occurs  in  the 
perfect). 

Perfect  Indicative. 

485.  T  he  forms  actually  occurring,  if  made  from  kr-  ‘make’,  would  be 
the  following: 


Active.  Sing.  1.  cakdra 7.  2.  cakdrtha. 

2 .  cakrd.  ' 

2.  cakrse. 


3.  cakdra. 
cakrur. 

2 .  cakre. 


Du.  2.  cakrdthur. 


—  Du.  2.  cak rathe. 


2.  cakrdhve.  3.  cakrire s. 


3.  cakrdtur.  —  PI.  1.  cakrmd. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  cakre. 

3.  cakrdte.  —  PI.  1.  cakrmdhe. 

The  forms  which  actually  occur  are  the  following: 

Active.  Sing.  1.  dsa,  uvdpa  (TS.  1.  5.  3s),  cakara,  ciketa  ( cit -  ‘observe’), 
jagama,  jagrabha,  jagrdha  (AV.) 9,  jaghdsa  (AV.  vi.  1172)10,  jihila 11 ,  tatdpa , 
dudroha ,  papana ,  babhuva ,  bibhdya ,  mi  may  a  {mi-  ‘diminish’),  rarana ,  rirebha , 
vivesa ,  veda 12 ,  sisraya,  susrdva.  The  TS.  (111. 5.5')  has  the  Vrddhi  form  vavara 
(vr-  ‘cover’). 


1  This  is  in  accordance  with  the  rhythmic 
rule  that  the  stem  may  not  have  two  proso¬ 
dically  short  vowels  in  successive  syllables. 

2  The  strength  of  this  rhythmic  rule  is 
well  illustrated  by  the  same  root  vac-  having 
the  two  collateral  forms  vavak-se  and  fic-i-se ; 
cp.  also  the  unique  lengthening,  in  a  weak 
form,  of  the  radical  a  in  sa-sah-i-se  (beside 
the  usual  sasah-)  and  the  Guna  in  yuyop-i-ma. 

3  The  additional  r  may  have  come  into 
use  under  the  influence  of  forms  from  roots 
in  r,  like  dadhr-ire  from  \/dhr-. 

4  The  ending  -rire  is  once  also  added  to 
a  root  ending  in  a  vowel:  dad-rire,  from 
\dd-. 


5  Instead  of  the  normal  civ. 

6  This  is  the  only  perfect  form  of  \sii- 
occurring. 

7  The  I.  and  3.  of  dhd-  ‘put’  would  both 
be  dadhdu ;  of  vid-  ‘find’,  both  viveda. 

8  The  3.  pi.  of  vid-  ‘find’  would  be  vividre. 

9  AV.  HI.  183  reads  jagrdha,  but  this  must 
be  emended  to  jagrdha ;  see  Whitney’s 
note. 

10  jaghdsa  here  is  a  misprint  for  jaghdsa: 
see  Whitney’s  note  on  the  passage. 

11  Also  in  AV.  iv.  32  s,  but  written  jihida 
in  the  Samhita  text,  but  ji-  in  Pada.  See 
Whitney’s  note. 

12  Unreduplicated  form. 


VII.  Verb.  Perfect  System. 


357 


2.  iyatha 1  and  iyetha ,  cakdrtha ,  jagdntha  (gam-  ‘go’),  jaghantha, jabhartha, 
jigetha  ( ji -  ‘conquer’),  tat  ant  ha,  dadatha ,  dadhartha  (dhr-  ‘hold’),  dadhdtha , 
ninetha ,  papatha  ( pa-  ‘drink’),  paprdtha  2,  babhntha ,  yayantha  (yam-  ‘guide’), 
y  ay  At  ha,  vavdntha,  vavdrtha  (yr-  ‘cover’),  vivydktha  (vyac-  ‘extend’),  vettha  IO, 
sasdttha  (sad-  ‘sit’).  —  With  connecting  -/- :  dpitha  (AV.),  dritha  (r-  ‘go’), 
dvitha  (av-  ‘favour’),  dsitha  (as-  ‘be’),  uvccitha  (uc-  ‘be  pleased’),  cakartitha 
(krt-  ‘cut.’),  tatdrditha  (trd-  ‘split’),  dudohitha ,  dudrdhitha  (AV.),  babhdvitha, 
rurojitha,  rurodhitha ,  rurbhitha  (AV.),  vavdksitha ,  viveditha  (yid-  ‘find’),  vivesitha. 

3.  ana,  anamsa  and  anasa  (ants'-  ‘attain’);  dpa,  ara  (r-  ‘go’),  ava ,  dsa 

(as-  ‘eat’),  dsa  (as-  ‘be’  and  as-  ‘throw’),  dha  (ah-  ‘say’),  iydya  (i-  ‘go’),  uvdca 
(vac-  ‘speak’),  uvdsa  (vas-  ‘shine’),  uvaha,  uvdca  (uc-  ‘be  pleased’),  cakarta 
(krt-  ‘cut’),  cakdrsa  (krs-  ‘be  lean’,  AV.),  cakdra,  cakrama,  cakhdda,  cakhdna 
(VS.v.  23),  cacdksa,  cacarta  (crt-  ‘bind’ ,  AV.),  cacdr a  (AV .),  cacchanda,  caskanda, 
caskdmbha ,  cikdya  (ci-  ‘gather’),  cikdya  (ci-  ‘observe’),  cikcta 3  (crt-  ‘perceive’), 
jagdma,  jagrdha ,  jaghdna,  jaghdsa,  jajdna,  jajdra  (AV.),  jabhdra 4,  jigdya 
(ji-  ‘conquer’),  jujdsa ,  juhdva  (hit-  ‘call’),  tatdksa ,  tatarda ,  tatarha  (AV.), 
tatdna,  tatdpa,  tatara,  tatsdra  (tsar-  ‘approach  stealthily’),  tastdmbha,  tdtdna 
(RV1.),  titydja,  tutdva  (tu-  ‘be  strong’),  tutoda ,  daddmbha  (dambh-  ‘harm’, 
AV.),  daddrsa,  daddbha  (dabh-  ‘harm’),  daddra  (dr-  ‘split’),  daddsa  (das- 
‘ worship’),  dadharsa,  dadhdra,  dideva  (div-  ‘play’,  AV.),  didesa  (AV.),  did- 
ydta  (AV.),  diddya  (VS.  xir.  34),  nandsa  (nas-  ‘be  lost’),  nandha 5 *  (AV.), 
nanama ,  nindya ,  papdca  (AV.),  papdta  (AV.),  papada ,  paprd*0 ,  pipcsa,  pipesa, 
pipdya,  pupdsa,  babdndha  (VS.  AV.),  babarha  (brh-  ‘make  strong’,  AV.), 
babhdhja 7  (bhanj-  ‘break’),  babhdja,  babhfiva,  bib  hay  a ,  bibhcda,  mamanda  (mand- 
‘exhilarate’),  mamdrsa ,  mamdtha  (math-  ‘shake’,  AV.),  mamdda  (mad-  ‘exhilarate’), 
mamdra  (mr-  ‘die’),  mamdrja  (mrj-  ‘wipe’,  AV.),  1.  mimaya  (ma-  ‘bellow’), 

2.  mimdya  (mi-  ‘fix’),  3.  mimaya  (ml-  ‘damage’),  mimdya  (ml-  ‘damage’,  AV.), 
mimetha  (mith-  ‘alternate’),  mimydksa,  mumoda,  yaydma,  yuyoja  (AV.),  yuyddha, 
y  try  dpa ,  rardksa,  rardda ,  rarddha ,  rirc'ca ,  ruroca,  rurdja ,  ruroha  (AV.),  vavaksa, 
vavanda,  vavdrta,  vavdrdha,  vavarha,  vavaca 8  (vac-  ‘speak’),  vavara  (yr-  ‘cover’), 
vavrdja ,  vavdrta,  vavdna,  vivdya  (vT-  ‘be  eager’),  viveda ,  vivesa,  vivesa,  vivyaca, 
veda IO,  sasdka  (AV.),  sasdpa  (AV.),  sisrdya  (sri-  ‘resort’),  susoca,  susrava, 
sasarja,  sasdda,  sasdna,  sasdra,  sastiva,  s  as  dha ,  sis  edit  a,  si  say  a,  susdva  (su- 
‘press’).  —  With  the  ending  -au:  tasthdu,  daddu,  dadhdu,  papdu  ( pa - 
‘drink’),  paprdu ,  yaydu. 

Du.  2.  arathur,  avdthur,  asathur,  tyathur ,  isathur,  updthur  ( }d vapj, 
uhathur  (  \h vahj,  cakrathur,  cakhyathur  (khyd-  ‘see’),  jagrbhdthur ,  jagmdthur, 
jigyathur  (ji-  ‘conquer’),  jijinvdthur 9,  taksathur10,  tasthdthur ,  daddthur, 
dadhathur,  ninyathur,  papdthur  (pa-  ‘drink’),  paprathur, pipitivdthur 1 1,  pipyathur 
( pT-  ‘swell’),  petathur  (  Y pat j,  babhuvathur ,  mimiksdthur ,  yayathur,  yemdthur 
(  Yyam -),  riricdthur ,  viddthur IO,  vividdthur ,  vivydthur  (yyd-  or  vT-  ‘envelope’), 
seddthur  ( ]/ sad-),  skambhdthur io. 


1  The  irregularity  of  this  form  which 
occurs  once  in  the  RV.  and  once  in  the  AV. 
beside  the  regular  iyetha  is  hard  to  explain. 

2  In  VI.  17 7  this  form  stands  for  the  2.  sing, 
of  prath-  ‘extend’;  see  Neisser,  BB.  30, 302. 

3  Occurs  twice  in  the  RV.  also  with  the 
irregular  accent  ciketa. 

o  i  t 

4  It  is  very  doubtful  whether/u'/^d  viii.  4537 

is  3.  sing,  perfect  of  ha-  ‘leave’  (cp.  Delbruck, 

Verbum  p.  1 24),  like paprd.  Pischel,  Vedische 

Studien  1,  163  f.,  thinks  this  word  with  the 

following  ko  should  be  read  jahdko  ‘abandon¬ 

ing’.  Roth  thinks  (pw .]/aha  is  an  interjection. 


5  Overlooked  by  Whitney,  Roots,  under 
\nah-  :  AV.  VI.  1331. 

6  The  only  occurrence  of  d  for  ait  unless 
jaha  is  a  verbal  form. 

7  Omitted  by  Avery  250. 

8  RV1.  beside  the  ordinary  uvdca. 

9  From  jinv-  ‘quicken’,  a  secondary  root 
starting  from  the  present  stem  ji-nu-  of  ji- 
‘quicken’;  see  469,  a,  7. 

10  Unreduplicated  form. 

11  From  pinv-  ‘fatten’,  which  started  from 
a  present  stem  of  the  -nu  class;  see  469, 

a,  7  • 


35§ 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


Du.  3.  dpatur ,  dvatur ,  dsatiir  {as-  ‘attain’),  asatur,  Tydtur,  uhdtur  ( Y vahj, 
cakratur ,  cikyatur  (ci-  ‘observe’),  cetatur  T,  jagmatur ,  jajhdtur  ( jan -  ‘beget’), 
jahatur  {ha-1  leave’),  tataksdtur ,  tasthdtur ,  da  datin',  paprdtur  (pra-  ‘fill’),  petdtur, 
babhuvdtu r,  mamdtur  (md-  ‘measure’;,  mimiksdtur  ( miks -  ‘mix’),  yamatur 2, 
yematur  ( }/yain-),  vavaksdtur ,  vavrdhatur ,  sasratur 3  (j/br-,  AY.),  si  sic  at ur, 
seddtur  ( sad-). 

PI.  1.  anasma  (a ms-  ‘attain’);  cakrtnd ,  jaganma,  jagrbhma ,  tasthi-ma 
(| f  sthdj,  dadhi-md ,  yuyujma ,  rarabhmd ,  rari-md  (ra-  ‘give’;,  vavanmd ,  vidmd 4, 
susruma  (AV.),  susuma.  —  With  connecting  drimd ,  asimd  (as-  ‘be’, 

AV.),  ucimd(Y vac-),  udimd  ( Y  a  ad-),  usimd  (vas-  ‘dwell’,  AV.),  cerimd  (Y car-, 
AV.),  jaghnima  (Yhan-,  AV.),  jihimsimd  (AV.  TS.),  dadasimd ,  nindima* , 
ninima 6 7  (TS.m.  2.S3),  paptima ,  babhuvima  (AV.),  yuyopima 1 ,  yemimd,  vavandima , 
vidmd 8,  sekimd  (Y dak-,  AV.),  sascima,  susudima  (  |A  slid-),  sedima 5  (  ]/  sad-). 

2.  and  ha s  (RV1.),  anas  a  (a  ms-  ‘attain’);  ZFsY  (zw-  ‘shine’),  cabl'd,  jagmd10 
(AV.  TS.  VS.),  dada ,  babhuva,  yayd,  vidd 8,  dad as d ,  seka  (Y  sak  j,  seda  (V sad-). 

3.  anas  hr  (a ins-  ‘attain’),  anrcur  (Y  arc-),  dnrdhur  (AV.),  anrhur  (TS. 

hi.  2.  8>);  dpur ,  dr  hr ,  asur  (as-  ‘attain’),  as  hr  (as-  ‘be’),  dhhr ,  Fyvr,  F-svzr  (A- 
‘send’),  z7zv/r,  z7zA/r  (z/«*A  ‘wet’,  AV.),  zzz/zzr  (zkz-  ‘weave’),  ushr  (vas-  ‘shine’), 
uhur(Yvah-),  cakramur ,  cakrhr ,  cakhnur  (khan-,  AV.),  cdklpur  (AV ’.),  cikitur , 
cikyhr  (ci-  ‘perceive’),  ( ]/Azr-,  AV.),  jagrbhhr,  jagrhur  (AV.),  jagmhr, 

jaghnhr  (\hhan-,  AV.),  jajanur 11  and  jajiihr  ( jan-  ‘beget’),  jabhrur  (Y  bhrj, 
jahur  (ha-  ‘leave’),  jaharur 12  ( Y  hr-,  AV.),  jagrdhhr,  jigyur  (ji-  ‘conquer’), 
jugupur Ij,  jujus  dir,  jujuvur  ( ]/" /V),  taksur M,  tatakshr,  tastabhur ,  tasthhr,  tdtrpur 
(AV.),  tdtrshr,  titirur  (  }  trj,  tustuvhr ,  dadasur,  dadur,  dadhhr,  dadhrsur  (AV.), 
didyutur  (TS.  11.  2.  126),  duduhur,  dudruvur  (AV.),  debhur  (dabh-  ‘harm’), 
nanakshr ,  ninidhr ,  papur  (pa-  ‘drink’),  papthr  (pat-  ‘fall’),  paprur  (prd-  ‘fill’), 
pipidur,  pipyur  (YpY,  babhuvhr ,  bibhidhr,  bibhyur  (bln-  ‘fear’),  bedhiir  (bandh-, 
AV.),  mamur  (md-  ‘measure’),  mamrur  (mr-  ‘die’),  mdmrjur ,  mamrdur,  mimikshr 
(  Y inyaks-),  mimyhr  (mi-  ‘fix’),  yamur I;,  yayur ,  yuyudhur ,  ycmhr,  rdradhur 
(Yradh-),  riripur ,  ruruc'tr ,  ruruhur,  vavakshr,  vavrjur ,  vavrur  (vr-  ‘cover’), 
vavashr  (vas-  ‘desire’),  vdvrthr ,  v  dvr  dhhr,  vidur 8,  vividur ,  vivis  hr  and  (once) 
vivesur I5,  vivisur,  sasdsur,  sasramur,  sadadhr,  dusuvur,  sckhr  (Ydak-),  sadcur, 
sasrur,  sisyadhr  (  Y sy and-,  AV.),  sisicur,  susupur  ( ]/ svap-),  susuvur  (VS.  xx.  63), 
susruvur  (AV.),  sediir  (Y  sad-),  sepur ,  skambhur  '4. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  z/4  idhe  (idh-  ‘kindle’),  u/  (ap-  ‘move’),  uhc  (ah-  ‘con¬ 
sider’),  cake(kd-  =  kan-  ‘be  pleased’),  cakre,  jigye  (ji-  ‘conquer’),  tatane10,  tasthe , 
titvise,  dade ,  mame  (md-  ‘measure’),  mdmahe,  rare  (Y raj,  depe  (Y dap-),  sasce. 


1  AV.  III.  2  l 2 ;  SV.  I.  2.  2.  110,  explained  by 
Benfey,  SV.  Glossary,  as  3.  du.  perf.  without 
reduplication.  WHITNEY,  note  on  AV.UI.212, 
thinks  it  is  a  corruption  for  cetatu,  but  quotes 
Weber  as  taking  it  for  3.  du.  perf.  from  cat - 
‘frighten  into  submission’. 

2  Unreduplicated  form  with  present  meaning 
(VI.  671). 

3  sisratur  (RV*.)  is  an  anomalous  3.  du.pres. 
ind.  of  J7'-,  according  to  the  reduplicating 
class  with  perfect  ending  instead  of  *sisrtas. 

4  The  form  vivisma  which  Avery  gives 
with  a  query  is  probably  an  error  for 
vivismas  I.  pi.  pres.  (vi.  23s-  6). 

5  Cp.  IF.  3,  9 f . ;  ZDMG.  48,  519. 

6  The  metre  requires  ninima  (see  BR. 
under  «F-  ‘lead’). 

7  With  strong  radical  syllable. 

8  Unreduplicated  form. 


9  This  form  (vi.  48s)  may  be  2.  pi.  from 
a  root  amh-  for  * anaha . 

Cp.  Whitney’s  note  on  AV.  vi.  974. 

11  This  form  without  syncope  occurs  once 
in  the  RV.,  jajhur  twice. 

12  Whitney  on  AV.  m.  96  would  emend 
this  irregular  form,  the  reading  of  all  the 
Mss.,  to  jahtur. 

This  is  the  only  finite  form  of  this 
secondary  root,  and  it  occurs  in  a  late  hymn 
(vii.  1039);  the  past  participle  gupita-  also 
occurs  twice  in  the  tenth  book.  This 
was  doubtless  evolved  from  the  denomina¬ 
tive  gopa-ya -  ‘act  as  a  cowherd’. 

14  Unreduplicated  form  occuring  once. 

15  With  irregular  strong  vowel. 

16  With  unsyncopated  vowel  occurring 
once;  3.  sing.  /a/;?,?. 


VII.  Verb.  Perfect  System. 


359 


2.  cakrse \  c  icy  use,  tasthi-se  (AV.),  dadrkse  ( drs '-  ‘see’),  dadhi-se ’  paprse > 
yuyukse  (  ]/yuj-,  AV.),  rari-se ,  ririkse  ( Y Ac-),  vavakse  (| jvac-),  vavrse  (vr- 
‘choose’),  vivitse  (vid-  ‘find’).  — With  connecting  ucise  ( Y uc-  and  Y vac-), 
upise  (  Y Tap-) ,  uhise  (  Y vah-),  jajhise  (  YJan~)i  jabhrise,  tatnise,  bedhise  (AV.), 
sepise  (Y  sap-,  AV.),  s  as  a  his  e  \ 

3.  anaje  ( Y  ahj-),  dnase  (Yams-),  dnrce,  anrdhe ;  dse  (as-  ‘throw’),  Tje 
( YyaJ~ ))  bU  (  Y tdj,  idhe  (Yidh-),  Tse  (is-  ‘move’),  uce  (uc-  ‘be  pleased’),  upe 
( Y 7/ap-),  uhc1  2  (fill-  ‘consider’),  cake  ( Y^d-),  cakrade  (Ykrand-),  cakrame, 
cakre,  caksade  (ksad-  ‘divide’),  caklpe  ( AV.),  cikite  (Y dtp,  cuksubhe  (ksubh- 
‘quake’,  AV.),  cucyuve,  jagrhe 3,  jagme  (Ygnm-'),  jajhe  (Yjan-),  jabhre(  Y  bhr-), 
jigye  (  Yji~),  jihile  (Yhld-),  jujuse \  juhve  (hu-  ‘call’),  tatakse',  tate  ( ]/ ta- 
‘stretch’  =  Y ian~)i  tatne  (\I tan-),  tatrc  (tra- c protect’),  tasthe  ( ]/ sthd-),  titvise, 
tistire'2  (str-  ‘strew’),  dddrse,  dade,  dadhanve '4,  dadhe,  dadhre  (dhr-  ‘hold’), 
dadhvase  (dhvams-  ‘scatter’),  duduhe ,  dudhuve  (  Y dhu-,  AV.),  nanakse s,  nunude, 
neme  (  Y nam-),  paprkseb ,  pape 2  (pa-  ‘drink’),  pdprathe  (RV1.)  and  paprathe 
(RV2.  AV1.),  paprei  ( ]/ pro,-,  AV.),  paspase  (spas-  ‘see’),  pipise,  pipise,  pipile , 
pipye  (/>r-‘sweH’),  pece  (  YP&C-),  babadhe,  babhre  ( j/ bhr-),  bedhe(Ybandh-,  AV.), 
bheje  (bhaj-  ‘divide’),  mame  (ma-  ‘measure’),  mdmahe,  mamrje,  tnimikse 8, 
yuyuje,  yuyuve  (yu-  ‘join’),  ycje'9  ( YyaJ~)->  yeme  (Yyam~)i  rarapse,  rarabhe 
(  Y ra>nbh-)1  ririce,  ruruce,  rebhe  /  Yra^l~i  AV.),  vavakse  (  Yvak?-),  vavande , 
vavne  (Yvan-),  vavre  (vr-  ‘cover’),  vavase  (vas-  ‘desire’),  vdvase  (vm.  4s,  vas- 
‘clothe’)10,  vavrje ,  vdvrte,  vavrdhe ’  vide  (yid-  ‘know’),  vivide  (vid-  ‘find’),  vivye 
(vya-  ‘envelope’),  vivye  (vT-  ‘be  eager’),  sasame  (VS.xxxiii.  87),  sasrathe,  sasre 
(sr-  ‘crush’),  sisriye  (sri-  ‘resort’),  susruve,  susuve  (su-  ‘swell’),  sepe  (Y sap-, 
AV.),  sasahe'1 1  and  sasdhe'12,  sasrje,  sasre  (sr-  ‘flow’),  sasvaje,  sisice,  sisyade 
( Y sy and-,  AV.),  susuve  (su-  ‘bring  forth’). 

Du.  2.  asathe  (Y  as- i  attain’),  ijathe(ANI),  uhyathe*1*  (iv.  566),  cakramathe, 
cakrathe,  cikethe 14  (ci-  ‘note’),  dadnthe ,  dadhathe ,  mamnathe  (  Y man-),  rarathe 
(rd-  ‘give’),  riricdthe ,  sasrfithe  ( Ysr-). 

3.  dsdte'15,  cakrdte,  dadhdte,  pasprdhdte ,  bhejdte  (bhaj-  ‘divide’),  mamdte 
(ma-  ‘measure’),  mamndte  (man-  ‘think’),  yuyudhdte,  yemdte  (Yyam-),  rebhdte 
(  Y nabh-,  AV.),  vdvrdhdtev\  sasvajdte. 

PL  1.  bubhujtndhe,  mumucmahe,  vavrmdhe  (vr-  ‘choose’),  sdsadmahe  (sad- 
‘prevail’),  sasrjmahe.  —  2.  dadhidhve. 

3.  dnajre  (Y  ahj-)\  cdklpre,  cikitre  (]/ cit-),  jagrbhre1 ",  jahi-re  (  Y  hd-,  AV.), 
juhure,  juhure ,  tatasre  (  Y tarns-),  tasthi-re,  dddrsre,  dadhi-re,  dadhre ,  duduhre, 
nunudre,  pasprdhre,  pipisre ,  mami-re  (ma-  ‘measure’),  mumucre ,  yuyujre,  riricre, 


1  With  strong  radical  vowel:  cp.  p.  356, 
note  2. 

2  With  passive  sense. 

3  Omitted  by  Avery  250. 

4  From  dhanv-  a  transfer  root  from  dhan- 
‘run’.  Cp.  Whitney,  Roots  81. 

5  From  naks-  ‘attain’,  a  secondary  form 
of  nas-  ‘attain’;  cp.  Whitney,  Roots  87. 

6  iv.  437.  This  form  (which  is  perhaps 
rather  to  be  taken  as  1.  sing.)  may  be  formed 
from  prat’s-,  a  secondary  form  of  prach- 
‘ask’;  cp.  Benfey,  O.  u.  O.  3,  256;  Del- 
BRUCKp.  1264;  Whitney,  Roots,  and  BR.  s.  v. 
prach-. 

7  papre,  given  by  Avery  250  with  a  query, 
does  not  seem  to  occur  in  the  RV. 

8  From  miks-,  a  desiderative  formation 

from  mis- ;  cp.  Whitney,  Roots. 


9  yeje  occurs  three  times  in  the  RV.  (only 
with  d-  and  pra-),  Tje  occurs  twice  as  3.  sing., 
once  as  I.  sing. 

10  Whitney,  Roots,  under  vas-  ‘clothe’. 
This  form  is  placed  by  BR.  and  Grassmann 
under  a  root  vas-  ‘aim’. 

11  x.  I04T0  (Avery  sasahe),  Pada  text  sasahe. 

12  vm.  96x5,  (Avery sasahe),  Pada  text  sasahe 
cp.  RPr.  580,  582,  587,  589. 

r3  This  seems  to  be  an  anomalous  form 
for  ithdthe  (uh-  ‘consider’;  cp.  Grassmann). 

14  Irregular  form  (RV1.)  for  *ciky-athe. 

x5  Thus  irregularly  accented  v.  662.  This 
form,  dsdte,  also  occurs  five  times  unaccented. 

16  The  AV.  has  also  the  transfer  form 
vdvrdhele. 

17  See  notes  on  AV.  xvni.  346  in  Whitney’s 
Translation. 


360  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


rurudhre ,  vavakre  ( vane -  ‘move  crookedly’) x,  vavasre1  2  (vas-  ‘bellow’),  vivijre , 
vidre 3,  vividre \  vivipre ,  vivisre,  sasadre.  —  With  connecting  arhire 3, 
a  sire  (Kh.  1.  n1),  tjire  (Y yaj-)3  idhire  (Y  idh-),  Trire 4,  Tsirc5  (is-  ‘send’, 
AY.),  ucire  (}/vac-:  AY.),  uhire  (Yl 7'ah-),  cakrire \  cacaksire  (VS. XL.  10  :  Up.), 
jagmire,  jajhire  (  Y jan')i  jnbhrire  (  Y b hr-) ,  jihilire  ( ]/ hid-),  tataksire,  tatnire 
(  Y tan-) ,  tastrirc 0  (  \P  str-,  AY.),  te/iire  (  Y  tan-,  VS.  TS.  AY.),  dadhanvirc1 ,  dadhire 
(Kh.  1.  43),  dadhrire  ( ]/ <77//'-) ,  papire  ( pa-  ‘drink’),  bedhire  ( ]/ bandh-,  AV.),  bhejire 
(  Ybhaj -),  mimiksire  ( Y mbks-  ‘mix’,  and  ]/ myaks-), yetird (  Yyad),yemire  (  yj <2 //;-), 
runicire  (Kh.i.  1 2 l),  rebhire  (Yrabh-),  lebhire  (Y /abh-),  vavaksire ,  vavandire \ 
vavasire,  sascire  ( ]/ jy^-),  secire  ( }b jr<7r-,  AV.),  sedire  ( }/  j^Y).  —  With  ending 
-rine '  cikitrire  ( |  cit- ) ,  jagrb/i rirc^  dadrire(  Y da-) y  bubhujrire \  vividrire ,  sasrjrire. 


Moods  of  the  Perfect. 

486.  Modal  forms  of  the  perfect  are  of  rare  occurrence  in  the  Samhitas 
except  the  RV.  They  are  made  from  the  perfect  stem  in  the  same  way  a.s 
from  the  present  stem.  It  is,  however,  not  always  possible  to  distinguish 
modal  forms  of  the  perfect  from  those  of  other  reduplicated  stems  (present 
reduplicating  class,  reduplicated  aorist,  and  intensive)  either  in  form  (because 
the  reduplication  is  in  many  instances  the  same)  or  in  meaning  (because  the 
perfect  is  often  used  in  a  present  sense). 

Perfect  Subjunctive. 

487.  The  normal  method  of  forming  the  stem  is  to  add  -a  8  to  the 
strong  perfect  stem,  accented  on  the  radical  syllable.  In  the  active  the 
secondary  endings  are  more  usual;  e.  g.  tustdv-a-t.  If  the  primary  endings 
are  added  in  the  active,  the  reduplicative  syllable  is  in  several  forms9 
accented,  as  jujos-a-si io.  In  about  a  dozen  forms,  nearly  all  with  secondary 
endings,  the  weak  stem  11  is  employed,  but  whether  the  reduplicative  syllable 
was  then  accented  is  uncertain,  because  the  examples  that  occur  are  un¬ 
accented.  Middle  forms,  numbering  not  many  more  than  a  dozen,  occur  only 
in  the  3.  sing.,  with  the  ending  -te,  and  in  the  3.  pi.  with  the  ending  -anta. 

Active.  Sing.  1.  anaja12. —  2.  jujosasi,  dlddyasi ,  papreasi 1 3 ;  cakradas , 
cabanas,  cikitas  ( ]/ cit-),  pujosas,  tatanas ,  dadasas ,  didayas,  paprdthas,  piprayas, 
bubodhas ,  mamadas ,  mama  has,  mumucas I4,  rardnas ,  sasdhas ,  susudas. 

3.  ciketati  (Y Cl Y,  jujosati,  dddasati ,  dadhdrsati ,  didesati 1 5,  diddyati, 
bubodhati,  mumocaii ,  vavdrtati\  cakdnat ,  caklpat  (AV.),  eiketat  ( Y U/-) , 
jaghdnat ,  jabhdrat ,  jugurat  ( gur -  =  ‘greet’),  jujosat ,  jujuvat 1 4,  tatdnat, 

tnstdvat ,  dddasat,  dadhdnat,  dadharsat,  paprdthat,  pasparsat,  piprdyat , 
mamddat  (AY.),  mamandat,  dldayat,  mumucat 14 ,  mumurat(miir-  —  mr-t crush’), 
mumdeat,  rardnat,  vava?iat  and  vavrtat I4,  vavanat  (TS.  11.  4.  51),  vivid  at I4, 
susravat,  susuvat 14,  sasahat,  susudat. 


1  With  reversion  to  the  original  guttural. 

2  With  shortening  of  the  radical  vowel. 

3  Without  reduplication. 

4  In  RV.  regularly  erire,  Pp.  a-irire  (but 
in  I.  64  for  mW  the  accentuation  should  be 
Am?  =  a  Trire).  The  AV.  has  once  sam-Thire 
(XIV.  146). 

5  tsire  with  irregular  accent  is  probably 
to  be  regarded  as  a  present  (450,  2). 

6  IF.  8,  Anzeiger  13. 

7  From  the  secondary  root  dhanv -  =  dhan- 
‘run’. 

8  Two  subjunctive  forms  with  double 

modal  sign  -a-  occur:  papreasi  and  vdvrdhati. 


9  Cp.  the  accentuation  of  the  reduplicating 
class. 

10  Except  the  forms  dlddyasi,  diddyati , 
dadhdrsati  and  vavdrtaii. 

11  The  two  roots  muc-  and  dhrs-  make  sub¬ 
junctive  forms  from  both  the  strong  and 
weak  stem. 

12  RV.  v.  541:  this  form  (Pp.  anaja)  is 
regarded  by  Delbruck  I26b  and  Avery 
251  as  a  2.  pi.  ind. 

13  With  double  modal  sign  -a-. 

14  With  weak  radical  syllable. 

Always  a-didesati  in  relative  clauses. 


VII.  Verb.  Perfect  System. 


361 


Du.  2.  ciketathas,  jujosat/ias;  ninithas 1  (1.  1811). 

PI.  1.  cakanama,  tatdnama,  susdvama.  —  2.  jujosatha ,  bubodhat/ia.  — 
3.  jujus  an 2 ,  jujosan ,  tatdna/i ,  paprdthan ,  matnddan. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  sasvacdi 8  (  \f  mafic-),  —  3  ,jujosate\  tat  dp  ate,  dadhrsate 2, 


yuyojate , 


vavrdhate2 4 , 

•  7 


sasdtnate  {jam-  ‘labour’).  —  PI.  1.  andsamahai. 


Perfect  Injunctive. 

488.  There  are  a  few  singular  active  and  3.  pi.  middle  forms  which  must 
be  classed  as  injunctives,  being  identical  in  form  with  the  corresponding  un¬ 
augmented  persons  of  the  pluperfect.  These  are:  Sing.  2.  s' as  as  (=  *sasas-s).  — 
3.  dudhot  (dhu-  ‘shake’),  siset 5  (si-  ‘bind’);  sasvdr  (=  "‘sasvar-t,  from  svar- 
‘sound’);  with  connecting  -T-:  dadharslt. 

PI.  3.  cdkramajita,  cakdinatita,  tatdnanta,  dadabhanta ,  paprathanta, 
mamahanta ,  rurucanta 2,  vavrdhdnta 2,  vivyacanta. 


Perfect  Optative. 

489.  This  mood  is  formed  by  adding  the  accented  optative  modal  suffix 
combined  with  the  endings  (416  a)  to  the  weak  perfect  stem.  The  active  forms 
are  the  commonest,  occurring  more  than  twice  as  often  as  those  of  the  middle. 

a.  There  are  a  few  irregularities  in  the  formation  of  this  mood.  1.  The  radical 
vowels  of  pa-  ‘drink’,  sru-  ‘hear’,  and  kr-  ‘make’,  being  treated  as  before  the  -ya  of  the 
passive  (444),  the  stems  of  these  roots  appear  before  the  optative  suffix  as  papl-,  susru 
and  cakri-.  —  2.  The  vowel  of  the  reduplicative  syllable  an-  is  shortened  (as  if 

it  contained  the  augment)  in  dnajyat  (yahj-).  —  3.  A  connecting  -I-  is  interposed  in 
jaks-i-yat ,  while  the  radical  i  is  combined  with  the  ending  in  sisrita.  —  4.  A  transfer 
according  to  the  analogy  of  the  a-  conjugation  is  ririses ;  possibly  also  siset 6. 

Active.  Sing.  1.  anasyam\  j agamy  am,  paprcyam ,  riricyam ,  vavrtydm. 

2.  cakriyas  b  juguryas  (gur-  =  gr-  ‘greet’),  pupusyas,  pup uiyas  (pur-  —  pr 
‘fill’),  babhuyas ,  mint  eyas,  vavrtyas,  vivisyas ,  susruyds 8. 

3.  anapyat’,  caeehadyat,  jaksiydt9  (ghas-  ‘eat’),  jagatnyat,  jagayat  (ga-  ‘go’), 
jagrbhyat,  jugurydt,  tutujydt \  tuturydt  (]/ tur-  =  trj,  niniyat IO,  papatyat  (AV.), 
paplyat 11  (pa-  ‘drink’),  papreyat,  babhuydt ,  mamadyat ,  riricyat ,  vavrtyat,  sasadyat 
(AV.),  sasrjyat,  sasahyat. 

Du.  2.  j agamy atam ,  susruydtam. 

PL  1.  tuturyama ,  vavrtyama ,  susuydma,  sasahyama. 

3.  j  agamy  ur,  tatanyur ,  dadhanyur,  mavirdyur,  vavrjyur,  vavrtyur. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  vavrtiya.  —  2.  caksamithas,  vavrdhithas.  —  3.  jagrasita, 
dudhuvita,  mamrjita ,  vavrtita ,  sisrita  (sri-  ‘resort’),  susucita. 

PL  1.  vavrtimahi. 

There  also  occurs  in  the  middle  one  precative  form:  Sing.  2. 
sasah-T-s-thas. 

Perfect  Imperative. 

490.  The  regular  perfect  imperative  is  formed  like  the  present  impera¬ 
tive  of  the  reduplicating  class,  the  3.  sing,  active  being  strong.  Hardly  more 


1  Abnormal  form  without  modal  sign  or 
strong  radical  vowel;  cp.  Hirt,  IF.  12,  220. 

2  With  weak  radical  syllable. 

3  This  form  occurs  only  once  (ill.  3310) 
beside  the  j-aor.  namsai,  and  may  therefore 
be  an  irregular  redupl.  aorist,  to  which  it 
is  doubtfully  assigned  by  Whitney  S63  a. 

4  SV.  jujosate. 

5  This  form,  however,  might  be  a  transfer 

present  optative  from  sa-  (the  collateral  form 


of  the  root  si-)  according  to  the  reduplicating 
class;  or  a  reduplicated  aorist  injunctive 
(Grassmann  and  Whitney  868  a). 

6  See  note  5  on  this  form. 

7  Cp.  v.  Negelein  66. 

8  With  lengthened  radical  vowel. 

9  With  interposed 

10  Cp.  Hirt,  IF.  12,  220. 

11  With  change  of  the  final  radical  vowel 
a  to  T. 


362  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

than  twenty  regular  forms  occur,  nearly  all  of  them  being  active.  There  are 
also  some  irregular  imperatives,  being  transfer  forms  which  follow  the  analogy 
of  the  a -  conjugation,  made  from  either  the  strong  or  the  weak  perfect  stem. 

Active.  Sing.  2.  cakandhi ,  cikiddhi  (  Y c it-),  dididdhi 1  ( }k  dis-),  piprlhi, 
mumugdhi  {\f muc -),  sasadhi  (\Psas-  ‘order’),  susugdhi  ( j f  sue-). 

3.  cakantu ,  didestu T,  babhutu 2,  mamdttu ,  mumoktu,  rarantu. 

Du.  2.  jajastdm 3  ( j as-  ‘be  exhausted’),  mwnuktam ,  vavrktam. 

PI.  2.  jujus  tana,  didistana  (} /dis-),  vavrttana  4. 

Middle.  Sing.  2.  dadhisvd ,  mimiksvd 5,  vavrtsva 6. 

PI.  2.  dadhidhvam ,  vavrddhvam 7  (vm.  2018).  —  3.  With  the  unique 
ending  -ram\  dadrsram  (AY1.)8  ‘let  be  seen’. 

a.  The  transfer  forms  are: 

Active.  Du.  2.  jujosatam,  mumocatam.  —  PL  2.  mumbeata 9,  rarandta 10 * 
(1.  1 7 11). 

Middle.  Sing.  2.  piprayasva ,  mamahasva ,  vavrdhasva ,  vavrsasva.  — 
PI.  3.  mamahantam. 

Perfect  Participle. 

Whitney,  Sanskrit  Grammar  S02 — S07.  —  Delbruck,  Verbum  229.  —  Lindner 
84  and  216. 

491.  There  is  an  active  and  a  middle  participle,  and  both  occur  fre¬ 
quently.  Both  are  formed  from  the  weak  stem  of  the  perfect,  being  accented 
on  the  suffix.  The  strong  form  is  made  by  adding  the  suffix  -vdms  to  the 
unstrengthened  perfect  stem;  e.  g.  cakr-vdms-,  jaghan-vdms -.  If  the  stem  is 
reduced  to  a  monosyllable,  the  suffix  is  nearly  always  added  with  the 
connecting  vowel  -A11,  as  papt-i-vdms-  from  pat -  ‘fall’.  Unreduplicated  stems, 
however,  do  not  take  the  connecting  vowel12,  as  vidvdms-.  The  weak  stem 
of  the  active  participle  is  identical  in  form  with  the  3.  pi.  ind.  act.  if  written  with 
-us  instead  of  -ur\  e.  g.  cakrus-.  The  middle  participle  is  formed  by  adding 
the  suffix  -and  to  the  weak  perfect  stem ;  thus  from  cakr-  is  made  cakr-ana-. 


Active. 

492.  cakr  vdms- I3,  cakhvdms -14,  cikitvdms-  (f.  cikit'isT-\  jaga?ivdms-  (f.  jag- 
must-),  jagrbhvdms-,  jagmivdms-  (TS.  iv.  2.  i4  for  RV.  x.  i1  jaganvdms -), 
jaghanvdms-  (f.  a-jaghnusi-'),  janivams- 1 5,  jigivams-  (;i-  ‘conquer’),  jujurvdms- 


1  Whitney,  Roots  73,  doubtfully  assigns 
this  and  the  cognate  forms  didesafi,  didista 
to  the  reduplicating  present  class. 

2  With  ft  unchanged,  as  elsewhere  in 
strong  forms. 

3  Beside  ind.  jajdsa  (AV.j.  Whitney, 
Roots  53,  assigns  this  form  to  the  redupli¬ 
cated  aor.  beside  3.  sing,  ajljasata  (SB.). 

4  Given  by  Avery  268  as  a  reduplicated 
aorist  in  the  form  of  vavrtana  (sic). 

5  For  * mimiks-sva.  Whitney,  Roots  120, 
assigns  this  form  to  the  reduplicating  present 
class. 

6  Whitney,  Roots  164,  assigns  this  form 
to  the  reduplicating  present  class. 

7  Written  vavrdhvcnn. 

8  Cp.  Whitney’s  note  on  AV.  xii.  333. 

9  Perhaps  also  susudaia  1AV.  1.  264)  placed 

by  Whitney,  Roots  188,  under  the  perfect, 

but,  Sanskrit  Grammar  871,  doubtfully  under 

the  reduplicated  aorist. 


10  Owing  to  the  strong  radical  vowel  this 
should  perhaps  be  regarded  rather  as  a 
2.  pi.  subjunctive.  (The  final  vowel  is  long 
in  the  Pada  text  also.)  The  accent  of  these 
transfer  forms  was  perhaps,  except  when 
the  radical  syllable  was  strong,  normally  on 
the  thematic  -a-.  Cp.  Whitney,  Sanskrit 
Grammar  815. 

11  Not,  however,  in  dadvdtns-,  nor  in  the 
problematic  form  cakhvamsam  (11.  144),  which 
seems  to  be  formed  from  a  root  kha-. 

12  Except  visivdms -  (AV.). 

13  With  the  weak  stem  in  the  acc.  sing. 
cakrusam  (x.  1 3  7 x). 

14  Without  connecting  vowel. 

T5  Only  the  weak  stem  of  this  participle 
occurs  in  the  form  vi-janus-ah ;  cp.  above 
482  e. 


VII.  Verb.  Perfect  System. 


363 


{jur-  =  jr-  ‘waste  away’),  jujusvdms -,  jujuvdms-,  tatanvdms -,  tastabhvdms 
tast/ii-vdms-  (f.  tasthusl '-),  titirvdms -1,  tustuvdms-  (} Pstu-),  dadasvdms-  (dams- 
‘bite’),  dadasvdms -,  dadavdms- 2  (AV.),  dad  as  us-,  dadivdms -  (AV.),  dadrvdms- 
(f.  dadrusT- 3,  AV.,  dr-  ‘pierce’),  dadr  svdms-  (f.  dadrsiisT-),  dadvdms-  {da-  ‘give’), 
dadhanvdms-,  dadhrsvdms-,  dldivdms-,  papivdms-  ( pa -  ‘drink’),  paprvdms- 
(f.  pap rusi- ;  pr-  ‘fill’),  pipivatns-  (f.  pipyusl--,  pi-  ‘swell’),  pupusvdms-,  babhuvdnis- 
({.  babhiivusT-),  bibhavdms-  (f.  bibhyusT-),  mamand'isT-,  mamrvdms-  (f.  mamrusT- ; 
mr- c die’);  yayi-vdms-  (]/yd-),  rari-vdms-  (f.  rariisl-,  AV.),  ririkvams-*  (\Pric-), 
ririhvdms-,  rurukvdms -4  ( yVv^-),  vavanvdms-,  vavarj un- 5,  vavrvdms- 6 7  (z/r- 
‘cover’),  vavrtvdms-,  vavrdhvdms-7 ,vivikvdmsA  (z//V- ‘sift’),  vividvdms -,  vividhvdms- 
(Yzyadh-),  susukvdms- 4  (  j/VW-),  susruvams-,  susuvdms -,  sasavdms -8 *,  sasrvdms- 
(f.  sasrusT-),  sasahvdins-,  sun/pvdms-  ( ]/ snap-),  susuvdms-,  sedus-  (sad-  ‘sit’). 

a.  With  connecting  arivd/ns-  presupposed  by  f.  arusi-  (r-  ‘go’), 
Tyivdms-  (f.  y^Al-),  usivdms-  (vas-  ‘dwell’),  ususT-  (TS.  iv.  3.  115:  zm-  ‘shine’), 
okivdms- 9  (weak  stem  uc-iis -,  ]A^-),  jaksivdms-  (ghas-  ‘eat’,  VS.  AV.  TS.), 
j ajnivduns- 10  (Yjnd-),  paptivdms-,  vivisivdms-  (TS.iv.  7.  151).  Also  the  negative 
compound  a-sascivams-  presupposed  by  the  feminine  a-sascusi -. 

b.  Without  reduplication:  dasvdms-,  vidvdms-  (f.  vidusi sahvdms 
perhaps  also  khidvams-  in  the  voc.  khidvas.  Similarly  formed  is  mTdhvdms- 
(f.  milhusi-)  ‘bountiful’,  though  the  root  is  not  found  in  independent  use. 
With  irregular  connecting  -i-  \  dasivdms-  (SV.),  visivdms-  (AV.),  and  the  negative 
compound  d-varjivams-  presupposed  by  the  f.  a-varjusi-  (AV.). 


Middle. 

493.  aksand-  ( jddks-),  dnajana-  (Y any-),  anas  ana-  (Yams-,  AV.),  ardnd -, 
apana-,  ijana-  (  VyaJ-),  ucand-  (} f  vac-),  cakamand- 11  (AV.),  cakand-  ( \r ka-), 
cakramdna-,  cakrand-,  caksadana-,  caskabhand-  (AV.),  cikiiafid-  (  ]/" A/-),  jagras- 
and-,  jagmd?ia-,  jajnand-  (\rjan-),  jahrsana-,  ji/uland-,  jujusand-,  juhurdna- 12 
( |/V/7;r-),  jujuvana-,  tatrdand -,  tastabhand-,  iasthana -,  tdtrpand-,  tdtrsdna-, 
titvisana-,  tistirdna-  (] rstr-),  tustuvdnd-,  tutujdnd- 1 3,  tepdnd-  (V tap-'),  dadana-, 
dadrsana -,  dadrana-  (drd-  ‘run’),  dadrhdnd-,  didyutand-,  duduhand-,  papdna- 
(pd-  ‘drink’),  paprathdnd-,  paspasand-,  pasprdhand-,  pipriyand-,  pipy  and-, 
babrhdnd-,  babhrand-,  bubudhana-,  bhejdnd-,  mdmahdna-,  mumucand-  (AV.), 
yuyujdna-,  yemd?ia-  ( Y yam-),  rardna-,  rdraksand-,  rarahand-  (ramh-  ‘hasten’), 
riricand-,  rurucand-,  rebhdna-  (AV.),  lebhdnd-  ( ]/ labh-),  1.  vdvasand-  (vas- 
‘desire’),  2.  vavasand-  (vas-  ‘bellow’),  1.  vdvasand-  (vas-  ‘wear’),  2.  vavasand- 
(vas-  ‘dwell’),  3.  vavasand- (vas- 1  aim’),  vavrdhand -,  vdvrsdna-,  vivyand-  (\dvyd-), 
sasamdnd-11,  sasaydna -14  (si-  ‘lie’),  sasdna-  (sd-  ‘sharpen’,  AV.),  sasramana-, 


1  There  also  occurs  the  weak  stem  taiarus-, 
from  \/ir-. 

2  With  strong  stem  instead  of  weak. 

3  Given  under  drd-  ‘run’  in  the  AV.  Index 
Verborum,  but  translated  by  Whitney,  AV. 
v.  13s,  as  from  dr-  ‘pierce’. 

4  With  reversion  to  the  original  guttural. 

5  With  strong  radical  vowel. 

6  The  anomalous  gen.  sing,  with  an  addi¬ 
tional  reduplicative  syllable,  va-vavrus-as 
appears  once  (1.  1735);  cp.  ZDMG.  22,  605. 

7  There  occurs  once  (iv.  2T7)  the  anomalous 
participle  with  pres,  suffix  vavrdhdntas 
(Grassmann,  Aorist). 

8  From  san-  ‘gain’.  The  metre  seems 

almost  invariably  to  require  this  participle 


to  be  read  sasanvams-  (cp.  the  f.  sasanusi - 
in  B.);  see  Arnold,  Vedic  metre  p.  1442. 

9  With  strong  radical  vowel  and  reversion 
to  the  original  guttural. 

10  The  i  may  here  perhaps  more  correctly 
be  regarded  as  a  reduced  form  of  the  basic 
vowel,  as  in  dadi-,  tasthi-  etc. 

11  The  a  is  not  syncopated  in  kam -  or 
Jam-. 

12  Doubtfully  assigned  by  Whitney,  Roots, 
to  the  reduplicating  class. 

13  More  frequently  with  the  intensive  accent 

iutujana-. 

14  With  the  double  irregularity  of  strong 
radical  syllable  and  reduplication  with  a. 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


364 


s'ds'adana- 1 
siisuvana-  3 
s  us  up  and- 


r  Z.  r 


(sad-  ‘prevail’),  sisriyand-  (sri-  ‘resort’),  susucana -,  susujana- • , 
,  sasrjand -,  sasrana -1 2 3 4,  sasvajand-,  sasahand- 5,  sismiyand sisvidana -, 
(■j/Gw^-),  susvana-  (su-  ‘press’),  sehdna-  (\hsah-)s. 


Pluperfect. 

Benfey,  Vollstandige  Grammatik  p.  353.  —  Abhandlungen  der  konigl.  Gesellschaft 
der  Wissenschaften  zu  Gottingen  15,  p.  1 5 1 — 154. —  Delbruck,  Verbum  419. —  Avery, 
Verb-Inflection  253.  —  WHITNEY,  Sanskrit  Grammar  S17 — S20. 

494.  This  tense,  which  is  a  pluperfect  in  form  but  not  in  meaning,  is 
an  augmented  preterite  made  from  the  perfect  stem.  As  in  the  perfect,  the 
strong  stem  is  used  in  the  singular  active,  the  weak  elsewhere.  The  endings 
are  the  secondary  ones;  in  the  3.  pi.  -ur  always  appears  in  the  active  and 
-iran  in  the  middle.  There  is  some  difficulty  in  distinguishing  this  tense  from 
the  imperfect  of  the  reduplicating  class  and  from  the  reduplicating  aorist6. 
Though  its  sense  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  imperfect,  its  forms  may  usually 
be  distinguished  (when  the  reduplication  would  be  identical  in  both  tenses)  by 
the  fact  that  the  verb  in  question  is  not  otherwise  conjugated  according  to  the 
reduplicating  present  class.  On  the  other  hand,  the  sense  helps  to  distinguish 
the  pluperfect  from  the  aorist,  when  the  reduplication  would  be  identical  in 
both  tenses.  With  the  aid  of  these  criteria  some  sixty  forms  may  be  classed 
as  belonging  to  the  pluperfect.  The  augment  is,  as  in  other  past  tenses, 
dropped  in  several  instances.  The  -s  and  -t  of  the  2.  3.  sing,  are  in  some 
forms  preserved  by  an  interposed  -I-  (as  in  the  aorist).  Several  transfer  forms 
according  to  the  a-  conjugation  are  met  with  in  this  tense. 

495.  Active.  Sing.  1.  acacaksam ,  ajagrabham ,  atustavam ;  dpiprayam 7 
(TS.  v.  1.  1 1 3;  VS.  xxix.  7);  cakaram ,  ciketam  ( j/ cit-),  jagrabham  (AV.). 

2.  djagan 8 ;  diyes 9  (v.  28);  cakan ,  na?iamas .  —  With  -7-:  dbubhojis , 
avivesTs,  dvivesTs ;  jihimsJs 10  (AV.). 

3.  djagan JI,  aciket  jjcit-) ;  rardn 12 .  —  With  -7-:  acucyavTt 13,  ajagrabhlt , 
arirecJt ,  dvavacTt ,  avavarlt I4.  —  With  thematic  -a-:  acakrat1  acikitat  and 
aciketat  (  \Pcit-),  adadhavat 15  ‘ran’,  asusravat 10  (MS.),  dsasvajat ;  cakradat , 
jagrabhat  (VS.  xxxir.  2),  tastdmbhat  (1.  12O). 

Du.  2.  dtatamsatam 17,  amumuktanr,  mumuktam .  —  3.  avavasTtam  (vas- 
‘desire’). 

PI.  2.  djaganta ;  djagantana ,  ajabhartana l8.  — With  -7-:  acucyavitana  V 

3.  deucy avur ,  asisrayur ,  asusravur 1C),  ablbhayur  (Kh.  1.  7S). 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  asusravi.  —  3.  didista  (\j dis-). 

Du.  2.  dpasprdhetham  17 . 


1  With  the  intensive  accent. 

2  With  the  intensive  accent  and  regarded 
by  Whitney,  Roots  174,  and  by  Lindner, 
Nominalbildung  p.  54,  as  an  intensive. 

3  With  the  intensive  accent  and  assigned 
by  Lindner,  1.  c.,  to  the  intensive,  but  by 
Whitney,  Roots  175,  to  the  perfect. 

4  Once  also  anomalously  with  - inana  : 
sasrmana •. 

5  sasahand-  once  in  RV.,  sehdna-  thrice, 
from  \sah-. 

6  On  such  doubtful  forms  see  specially 
Delbruck,  Verbum  158  (p.  135  f.). 

7  Whitney  866  also  quotes  apiprayan 
from  the  TS. 

8  For  *a-jaga?n-s. 

9  Benfey  (p.  152)  and  Delbruck,  Verbum 

p.  123  and  128,  regard  this  form  as  a  plu¬ 


perfect  of  z-  ‘go’  (=  a-iy-e-s),  Whitney,  Roots, 
as  pluperfect  of  is-  or  es-  ‘move’  (==  a-iy-es) , 
Roth  and  Grassmann  as  aorist  of  ]/A-. 

With  irregular  accent. 

11  For  *d-jagam-t. 

12  From  ran-  ‘rejoice’  (i.  I2212). 

x3  Cp.  Whitney  868  a. 

J4  From  vf-  ‘cover’;  cp.  Delbruck,  Verbum 
p.  I22+. 

XS  Whitney  regards  this  form  as  an  aorist, 
but  the  reduplicative  vowel  is  that  of  the 
pluperfect,  while  the  sense  (ix.  877)  does 
not  seem  decisive. 

|  16  Whitney  866. 

T7  Transfer  form. 

18  With  strong  radical  vowel. 

19  These  three  are,  however,  classed  by 
;  Whitney  861,  and  Roots,  as  aorists. 


VII.  Verb.  Aorist  System. 


365 


PI.  3.  dcakriran ,  ajagmiran ,  apeciran ( ]P pac-,  AV.) ;  avavrtra?i ;  dsasrgram h 
—  Transfer  forms  according  to  the  cr-  conjugation:  atitvisanta,  adadrhanta , 
ddadrmhanta  (TS.  iv.  6.  24),  dvavasa?ita  (yas-  ‘bellow’);  cakrpanta ,  dad  hr  santa 
(AV.),  vavasanta  (vas-  ‘bellow’).  —  With  ending  -ranta:  avavrtranta. 

Periphrastic  Perfect. 

496.  This  formation  made  with  the  reduplicated  perfect  of  ‘make’ 
which  governs  the  acc.  of  a  fem.  substantive  in  -a  derived  from  a  secondary 
(causative)  verbal  stem,  is  found  only  once  in  the  Mantra  portion  of  the 
Vedas:  gam  ay  dm  cakara  (AV.  xviii.  227)  ‘he  caused  to  go’  (lit.  ‘he  made  a 
causing  to  go’).  In  the  Brahmana  portions  of  the  Samhitas  (TS.  MS.  K.), 
such  periphrastic  forms  (made  even  with  an  aorist)  are  occasionally  met  with.1 2 


III.  The  Aorist  System. 

497.  The  aorist  is  of  frequent  occurrence  in  the  Vedas,  being  made  from 
about  450  roots.  An  augmented  tense  taking  the  secondary  endings  and 
forming  moods  and  participles,  it  is  distinguished  from  the  imperfect  by  lack 
of  a  corresponding  present 3  (e.  g.  3.  sing.  aor.  d-kar ,  3.  sing.  imp.  d-krnot , 
3.  sing.  pres,  krnoti)  and  by  difference  of  meaning  (dkar  ‘he  has  done’,  akrnot, 
‘he  did’). 

There  are  three  distinct  types  of  aorist. 

1.  The  simple  aorist  adds  the  endings  to  the  root  either  directly  or 
with  the  connecting  vowel  -a-.  It  thus  resembles  the  imperfect  of  the  root- 
class  or  of  the  accented  d-  class.  This  type  of  aorist  is  formed  by  nearly 
170  roots.  Some  nine  or  ten  roots  have,  beside  the  regular  forms  of  the 
simple  aorist,  a  certain  number  of  other  forms  which  have  the  appearance 
of  indicatives  present.  They  seem  to  represent  a  transition  to  the  formation 
of  a  new  present  stem.  The  most  striking  example  is  the  aorist  stem  voca- 
from  which  the  3.  sing,  vocati  occurs  several  times. 

2.  The  reduplicated  aorist  resembles  the  imperfect  of  the  reduplicating 
present  class.  It  is,  however,  distinguishable  from  the  latter  not  only  in 
meaning,  but  by  a  certain  peculiarity  of  reduplication  and  by  being  nearly 
always  formed  with  a  connecting  -a-.  This  type  of  aorist  is  taken  by  about 
85  roots. 

3.  The  sigmatic  aorist  inserts  -s-,  with  or  without  an  added  -a,  between 
the  root  and  the  endings.  It  is  taken  by  rather  more  than  200  roots. 

Thus  each  of  the  three  types  has  one  form  following  the  analogy  of  the 
graded  conjugation,  and  another  following  that  of  the  a-  conjugation.  The 
sigmatic  aorist  has,  however,  further  subdivisions. 

Upwards  of  50  roots  take  more  than  one  form  of  the  aorist.  One  verb, 
budh-  ‘wake’,  has  even  forms  from  five  varieties  of  the  aorist;  from  two  of 
the  first  type,  e.  g.  d-bodh-i  and  budhd-nta ;  from  one  of  the  second,  e.  g. 
a-bubudh-a-t ;  and  from  two  of  the  third,  e.  g.  d-bhut-s-i  and  bddh-i-s-a-t. 


1  With  reversion  to  the  original  gut¬ 
tural. 

2  See  Whitney,  Sanskrit  Grammar  1073  a,  b; 
Jacobi, KZ. 35,578 — 587;  JBohtlingk,ZDMG. 
52,  article  11 ;  Delbruck,  Altindische  Syntax 
42b4  f. ;  Ludwig,  Sitzungsber.  d.  kgl.  Bohm. 
Ges.  d.  W.,  phil.-hist.  Kl.  Nr.  XIII. 


3  There  are,  however,  sometimes  sporadic 
forms  from  the  same  stem  as  the  aorist 
beside  the  normal  ones;  thus  the  2.  du.  pres. 
kr-ihds  occurs  besides  the  numerous  regular 
forms  of  the  nu -  class. 


366 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


1.  Simple  Aorist. 

A.  Root  Aorist. 

Benfey,  Vollstandige  Grammatik  S40.  —  Avery,  Verb-Inflection  253—256.  — 
Whitney,  Sanskrit  Grammar,  299 — 304;  Roots  222  {.;  AV.  Index  Verborum  380. 

498.  This  form  of  the  simple  aorist  is  taken  by  about  100  roots  (and 
by  more  than  80  of  these  in  the  RV.),  the  commonest  being  those  with 
medial  a  (nearly  30  in  number).  It  is  inflected  in  both  the  active  and  the 
middle  voice.  The  root  is  strong  in  the  indicative  active  singular,  but  weak 
elsewhere.  Roots  ending  in  vowels,  however,  show  a  tendency  to  retain  the 
strong  vowel  throughout  the  indicative  active  except  the  3.  plural. 

a.  Roots  ending  in  a,  of  which  there  are  some  eight,  retain  the  a  throughout 
the  indicative  active  except  the  3.  pi.,  where  they  drop  it  before  the  ending 
which  in  these  verbs  is  invariably  -nr.  In  the  middle  indicative,  the  radical 
vowel  is  weakened  to  i1. 

The  forms  which  occur  from  these  roots,  if  made  from  sthd-  ‘stand’, 
would  be  the  following: 

Active.  Sing.  1.  dstham.  2.  dsthas.  3.  dsthat. —  Du.  2.  dsthatam.  3.  dstha- 
tam.  —  PI.  1.  dsthama .  2.  asthdta.  3.  dsthur . 

Middle.  Sing.  2.  dsthithas.  3.  dsthita.  —  PI.  1.  dsthimahi.  3.  asthiran. 

b.  Roots  ending  in  r,  of  which  there  are  some  ten,  take  Guna  throughout 
the  indicative  active  except  the  3.  pi.  Roots  ending  in  T  and  n  (of  which, 
however,  few  dual  and  plural  forms  occur)  show  the  same  tendency.  The 
root  bhu-  ‘be’  retains  its  u  throughout  (as  in  the  perfect),  interposing  v  between 
it  and  a  following  a.  The  forms  met  with  from  kr-  ‘make’  are  the  following: 

Active.  Sing.  1.  dkarai?i.  2.  dkar.  3.  dkar.  —  Du.  2.  kartam  (AV.). 
3.  d kartam.  —  PI.  1.  dkarma .  2.  d kart a.  3.  dkran. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  akri.  2.  dkrthas.  3.  dkrta .  —  PI.  3.  dkrata. 

The  forms  which  actually  occur  are  the  following: 


Indicative  Active. 

499.  Sing.  1.  dkaram,  dgamam2 3,  agam  (ga-  ‘go’),  dgrabham ,  adha?n,  dp  am  3 
{pa-  ‘drink’),  abhuvam 4,  abhedam ,  arodham  ( mdh -  ‘hinder’),  asravam ,  astham 
(AV.) ;  karam ,  gamam ,  gam  (AV.),  dam 5,  dham  (AV.),  vam 0  {par-  ‘cover’). 

2.  agds,  adds7,  apds ,  apras ,  dbhus ,  dsres ,  dsthas ;  gas,  dels,  dhas ,  bhus, 
sthds.  —  With  loss  of  ending:  akar ,  dkran  brand-'),  dgan8,  dghas ,  avar 
{vr-  ‘cover’),  aspar\  knap,  avar  {par-  ‘cover’);  kar,  kran 10  (]/SDt?7a-),  bhet 
( Y b/iid- ),  var,  vdrk11. 

3.  acet 1 2  (<V-  ‘collect’),  ddat12,  ddhat  {dha-  ‘put’),  adhat 
( dha -  ‘suck’,  AV.),  dpat,  aprdt  (AV.),  dbhut,  dsret  ( ]/ /r/-),  ds'rot,  dsthat, 


1  As  in  the  perfect  before  consonant 
endings  and  in  the  past  passive  participle, 

e.  g.  ia-sthi-se  (AV.),  and  sthi-ta-  from  sihd- 
‘stand’. 

2  This  might  also  be  the  sing.  I.  of  the 
thematic  aorist  agama-t  etc. 

3  No  forms  of  pa-  ‘pr°t:ect’  are  made 
according  to  this  aorist,  while  pd-  ‘drink’ 
(present  stem  piba -)  has  no  forms  from  the 
root  in  the  present  system  except pattii  (RV1.) 
and  pdthas  (AV1.),  but  perhaps  even  these 
are  rather  to  be  taken  as  meant  for  aorist 
forms;  cp.  p.  369,  note  1  and  p.  368,  note  10. 

4  With  the  usual  absence  of  Guna  in  this 
root;  later  abhuvam. 

5  There  is  also  the  transfer  form  adam 


(1.  1262),  which  though  not  analyzed  in 
the  Pada  text,  appears  to  stand  for  a- adam 
as  indicated  by  both  sense  and  accent. 

6  For  varam  formed  by  false  analogy  as 
a  first  person  to  2.  sing,  vah  (for  *var-s) 
appearing  as  if  formed  with  the  - s  of  2.  sing. 

7  There  is  also  the  transfer  form  ddas 
(I.  1218),  which  though  not  analyzed  in  the 
Pada  text,  is  shown  by  both  sense  and  accent 
to  stand  for  a-adas. 

8  For  *  a- gam-s. 

9  For  *a-nass  from  nas-  ‘attain’,  where 
*cinak  would  have  been  phonetic  (54,  6). 

10  For  * kram-s . 

11  For  *varj-s  from  ] /vrj-. 

12  There  is  also  the  transfer  form  adai 


VII.  Verb.  Aorist  System.  367 

asrat* 1  (VS.  vm.  28);  gdt,  dat,  dhdt 2,  bhut,  sthlt.  —  With  loss  of  ending: 
dkar,  akran 3  (  ]/ kram-),  akran  ( Y brand-),  agan,  ag/ias,  acet  ( cit -  ‘observe’), 
atari,  adar  (dr-  ‘pierce’),  abhet,  abhrat  ( ]/ bhraj-),  amok  (Y nine-,  AV.),  arnyak  / 
( ]/" myaks-),  dvart 4,  (AV.),  dstar;  dnat,  dvar;  kar,  gan,  nat  (Ynas- 

‘attain’,  AY.),  bhet,  vdr,  vark,  skan  ( ]/ skand-). 

Du.  2.  agatam  (AV.),  dbhutam ,  amuktarn  (Kh.  1.  126);  kartam  (AV.), 
gdtam  (AV.),  datam,  d/idtam,  spartam. 

3.  dkartam ,  agatam  (AV.),  ddhatam  (VS.  xx.  57),  dnastam  (‘reach’), 
dpatarn  (VS.  xxxvm.  13),  abhutdm ;  gdtam  (AV.),  dat  dm. 

PI.  1.  akarma ,  dganma,  dgama,  adarsma  (TS.  hi.  2.  54),  adama 6,  apama, 
ab/iuma7,  asthdma  (AV.),  ahema  (Yhi-)\  dharna ,  bhuma  (AV.). 

2.  d  kart  a,  agdta  (AV.),  dbhiita ;  abhutana,  dhetana;  karta  (AV.)  and 

krta 8  (AV.),  (AV7.),  sthdta  (AV.). 

3.  akran  (Y  kr-),  dksan 9  (Ygkas-),  dgrnan ,  abhuvan,  avrjan,  avrtan 10 

(AV.),  avran,  asriyan  ( ]AW-),  dsravan  (AV.),  ahdtan,  a/iyan  ( ]/ /«-),  dst/ian11 
(AV.);  kran  (AV.),  As-<z//  ( Yi^°s~\  gman,  vran.  —  With  ending  -wr: 
dkramur ,  ddur,  adhur ,  tf/zzr  (1.  1647),  dyamur,  dsthur ;  gur,  dabhur , 

dur,  dhur,  nrtur12,  mandur,  sthur. 

Indicative  Middle. 

500.  Sing.  1.  akri,  ajani ,  ayuji ,  avri  (vr-  ‘choose’),  a  hid  ( ]/  hu-,  AV.). 

2.  akrthds ,  agatkds  (VS.  in.  19),  adhithas,  ayukthds,  dstkithds. 

3.  akrta,  dgata  (AV.),  ddista,  adhita,  aprkta  ( ]//r/-) ,  dmata  ( ]/ man-), 
amrta  (AV.),  dyukta ,  avrkta  k\kvrj~),  avrta  (‘choose’  and  ‘cover’),  dsrsta ,  askrta 
(x.  1273),  asthiia,  dspasta  (  Y spas'-),  dslta  (s’T-  ‘sharpen’);  dyukta ;  drta  (r-  ‘go’), 

(<?/-  ‘attain’);  arta  (r-  ‘go’),  krta,  gurta  (gur-  ‘greet’),  gdha13,  mrta  (AV.). 

Du.  1.  gdnvahi.  —  3.  adhitdm  14  (yV/fccf-). 

PI.  1.  dganmahi ,  adimahi  (TS.  1.  8.  62)  and  adimahi 14  (VS.  111.  5 8) I5, 
adhimahi 14  ( ]/ dha-),  apadmahi  (VS.  iv.  29),  dmanmahi ,  ayujmahi,  ahumahi ; 
dhimahi H  (Y dha-). 

2.  dcidhvam  (ci-  ‘note’),  dmugdhvam  ( Y muc-),  ayugdhvam. 

3.  akrata16,  dgmata,  atnata\  drata,  dsata  (as-  ‘attain’);  yujata.  —  With 
the  ending -ra/7 :  akrpran 1 1 ,  agrbhran,  ajusran,  ddrsran,  apadran,  abudhran, 
dyujran,  avasran  18  (rw-  ‘shine’),  dvisran ,  avrtran,  dsrgran19,  dsthiran,  asprdhran. 

—  With  ending  -ram:  adrsram,  dbudhram,  dsrgram19. 


(1.  1276,  11.  124,  v.  32s)  which,  though  not 
analyzed  in  the  Pada  text,  appears  to  stand 
for  a-adat. 

1  For  *asras-t :  see  Sandhi  p.  61V 

2  Also  the  transfer  form  (prati)  dhat 
(iv.  27  s). 

3  For  *abram-t. 

4  For  *avart-l  from  vrt-  ‘turn’. 

5  Seemingly  with  anomalously  weak  root 
for  *avrk-t.  But  the  form  really  stands  by 
haplology  for  the  3.  sing.  mid.  avrkta :  apavrk 
tamah  (AV.  XIII.  29)  ‘he  has  wasted  away 
the  darkness’:  see  Wackernagel,  KZ.  40, 
544-547- 

6  That  is,  in  adatna  (v.  30  5 ),  which  though 
not  analyzed  in  the  Pada  text,  must  stand 
for  d-addma. 

7  arudhma  is  quoted  in  Whitney’s  Roots 
as  occurring  in  the  MS.  [I.  6^:  94,  6]. 

8  Emendation  for  kridm  (AV.  XIX.  441)- 


9  For  agh{a)san. 

10  Misprinted  as  acrta?i  in  the  text  ofAV. 
m.  311:  see  Whitney’s  note. 

11  Transfer  form  probably  for  asthur  from 
sthd-  ‘stand’;  see  AJP.  12,  439;  IF.  5,  388; 
KZ.  22,  435;  Whitney,  Sanskrit  Grammar 
847,  and  his  note  on  AV.  xm.  l5. 

12  This  form  might  be  regarded  as  an  un¬ 
augmented  perfect. 

13  For  gh(a)sda ,  from  \ghas-\  cp.  p.  56,  3. 

14  With  1  for  z ;  cp.  Brugmann,  Grundriss 
2,  p.896;  v.Negelein  6r;  Oldenberg,ZDMG. 
63,  297. 

15  From  da-  ‘share’. 

16  There  is  also  the  transfer  form  kra?ita 

(I.  14 1 3). 

17  Cp.  Bloomfield,  Johns  Plopkins  Uni¬ 
versity  Circular,  Dec.  1906,  p.  10. 

18  Cp.  p.  327,  note  7. 

19  With  reversion  to  the  original  guttural. 


368  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


Passive  Indicative  of  the  Root  Aorist. 


Delbruck,  Verbum  1811 2 * 4.  —  Avery,  Verb-Inflection  275.  — Whitney,  Sanskrit  Grammar 
842 — 845;  Roots  240.  —  v.  Negelein,  Zur  Sprachgeschichte  4.  —  Cp.  Osthoff,  IF.  3, 
390;  Hirt,  IF.  17,  64  f. 


501.  There  is  a  peculiar  middle  form,  made  from  about  45  roots  in  the 
Samhitas  (40  of  them  occurring  in  the  RV.),  which  is  used  with  a  predomi¬ 
nantly  passive  meaning1.  When  it  is  formed  from  verbs  with  a  neuter  signi¬ 
fication,  like  gam-  ‘go’,  the  sense  remains  unaltered  (as  in  the  past  passive 
participle).  It  is  a  3.  sing,  indicative,  in  which  the  augmented  root  takes  the 
ending-/.  This  -/,  otherwise  the  ending  of  the  1.  sing,  middle,  appears  to  be 
used  in  the  regular  3.  sing,  perfect  middle  (e.  g.  dadhe ,  1.  and  3.  sing.),  and 
sometimes  in  the  3.  sing,  present  middle  (e.  g.  sdye,  1.  and  3.  sing.).  The 
characteristic  feature  of  this  passive  form  is  the  strengthening  of  the 
root  as  compared  with  other  middle  forms,  e.  g.  dkari  beside  akri  (1.  sing, 
mid.) 2. 


a.  A  prosodically  short  medial  /,  u  or  r  takes  Guna,  while  a  is  normally 
lengthened;  a  final  /,  u  or  r  takes  Vrddhi,  while  final  a  interposes  a  y  before 
the  ending.  The  accent  in  unaugmented  forms  is  always  on  the  root.  The 
forms  actually  occurring  are:  Sing.  3.  dkari ,  agdmi ,  a  ceti,  acchedi ,  dja?id, 
djnayi ,  atapi ,  adarsi ,  ddhayi ,  dpadi  (AY.),  dpayi  (‘drink’),  aprayi  (AV.  VS.), 
dbod/ii ,  dbhraji ,  amayi  (‘measure’),  dmodi ,  dmyaksi ,  ay  ami,  vyJzv4  (YS.  xxvm.  15  ), 
dyoji,  dradhi ,  aroci,  avahi  (Kh.  v.  153),  avaci ,  avari  (‘cover’),  azr<//  (‘find’), 
dsoci,  dsrayi  ( Y  sri-),  asarji ',  dsadi ,  dsavi  (\dsu-),  astari ,  astavi,  a/iavi\  ceti, 
jdni,jani ,  /Jr/,  dars'i,  dayi  (‘give’),  jVfy/  (‘bind’),  d/idyi,  pddi,  vcdi  (‘find’),  sddi5.  — 
Used  injunctively :  gkosi,  ceti ,  chedi ,  /vr/,  dZidyi ,  bhari ,  bZiedi  (VS.  xi.  64), 
.wV/  (AV.),  j ’<?//,  m-/,  rod,  vandi ,  varZii ,  vaci,  samsi ,  iJr/,  /m  (i/j-  'leave’,  AV.), 
srdvi,  sarji ,  tvJ/,  /rTy/  (Zj-  ‘leave’,  AV.);  also  the  unique  form  j dray  Ay  i  ‘let 
him  be  embraced’,  from  the  secondary  stem  jdra-ya -  ‘play  the  lover’. 


Root  Aorist  Subjunctive. 

502.  Active.  Sing.  1.  karani,  gamdni,  gdni,  bZiuvdni.  —  2.  kdrasi ;  kdras , 
gam  as,  gds° ,  t dr das,  dds,  dZids,  pare  as,  pds  (iv.  204  ‘drink’),  /rJj-,  bZiuvas1 , 
yamas,  vdras  (‘choose’),  sdsas,  stZids. 

3.  karati ,  josati,  darsati  (AV.),  ddti,  dZidti,  padati0,  bZiedati,  radZiati , 
varjati ,  stZutti ;  karat,  gdmat,  garat  (gr-  ‘swallow’,  AV.),  gat,  josat,  ddt,  dZiat , 
padath  (AV.),  mathad  (AV.  vn.  505),  yamat,  yodZiat ,  radZiat ,  vdrat  (‘choose’), 
vdrtat ,  sravat,  sdgkat,  sat,  stZidt,  spdrat.  —  Without  Guna:  f dZiat,  bZmvat, 
sruvat  (RV1.). 

Du.  2.  karat Zias ,  gamatZias ,  darsatZias,  pathas10  (AV.  vn.  291),  bZiutZids II, 
sravatfias.  —  3.  karatas ,  gam  at  as,  bZiutas If,  sravat  as,  stkdtas. 


1  In  one  or  two  passages  this  form  seems 
to  have  a  transitive  meaning;  cp.  Whitney, 
Sanskrit  Grammar  845  (end). 

2  Cp.  Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  1054,  3. 

J  This  augmented  form  always  occurs  in 
the  RV.  with  short  radical  vowel,  beside 
the  unaugmented  _/a»i  as  well  as  jani . 

4  From  47;-  ‘separate’. 

5  The  form  svani  (vi.  46' 4)  may  be  the 
3.  sing,  passive  aorist  (BR.  and  doubtfully 
Whitney,  Roots  201),  but  Grassmann,  s.  v. 
svani ,  regards  it  as  a  neut.  substantive  in  -/. 
Cp.  Neisser,  BB.  30,  305  ff. 

6  The  2.  3.  sing,  with  secondary  endings 


from  roots  ending  in  J  cannot  be  distinguished 
from  injunctives. 

7  Formed  without  Guna  as  in  the  ind. 
aor.  and  perfect. 

8  With  double  modal  sign  -J-. 

9  This  form  has  a  subjunctive  sense  (‘might 
shake’);  it  might  otherwise  be  an  injunctive 
of  the  a-  aorist. 

10  Assigned  by  Whitney,  Roots,  to  the 
present  of  the  root  class. 

11  Both  bhuikas  (vi.675)  and  bZiutas  (x.  27 7) 
seem  to  be  meant  for  subjunctives  formed 
anomalously  without  mood  sign,  instead  of 
*bhtwaihas  and  *bhuvatas. 


VII.  Verb.  Aorist  System.  369 

PI.  1.  kardma,  gamdma ,  gama ,  dhama ,  rddhdma.  —  3.  karanti ,  gamanti , 
pdnii 1  (11.  1114);  karcin ,  gam  an ,  garan ,  ddrsan,  bhuvan ,  yarnan. 

Middle.  Sing.  2.  kdrase ,  josase  (AV.).  —  3.  idhate 2  (RV1.),  karate , 
bhojate ,  yojate,  vdrjate ,  stdrate.  —  Du.  2.  dhe'the 3,  dhaithe.  —  PI.  1.  kdramahe , 
gdmamahai,  dhamahe ,  nia?ianiahe  (VS.  iv.  11),  stardmahe.  —  3.  yavanta  (yu- 
‘separate’). 

Root  Aorist  Injunctive. 

503.  Active.  Sing.  1.  kara?n  (AV.),  ^yz/tz,  dhdm  (VS.  1.  20),  bhuvam, 
bhojam ,  yojam ,  stham. 

2.  jes,  bhus ,  bhes  (Ybhu-,  VS.  1.23  etc.;  TS.  iv.  5.  io1).  —  With  loss  of 
ending:  kar  (TS.  1.  3.  72),  dhak  (dagh-  ‘reach’),  bhet  (]/ bhzdj,  rok  ( ritj-, 
VS.),  var  (‘cover’),  vark  (Y vrj-),  star,  spar . 

3.  bhut ,  /7-r/,  ut-thdt  (Yst/id-,  Kh.11.  n3).  —  With  loss  of  ending:  0-0/z 
(VS.  xxvn.  31;  TS.  v.  6.  i4),  dhak  {Ydagh-),  nak  and  nat  (nas-  ‘attain’),  zv?>, 
vark,  skdn  ( ]/ skandj ,  stan 4. 

PI.  1.  gama,  chedma 5,  daghma ,  bhuma ,  bhema 5,  hbma 5  (/h^-  ‘call’).  — 
3.  bhuvan,  vrdn.  —  With  ending  -ur :  kramur,  gur,  dabhur,  dur,  dhur ,  sthur. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  ndmsi  ( nams -  =  nas-  ‘attain’).  —  2.  dhrthas  (AV.), 
nutthds,  bhitthds  (VS.  xi.  68),  mrthds  ( mr -  ‘die’),  mrsthas  ( p" mrs-),  rikthds 
(Ywc-),  vikthds  (YZV~,  VS.  1.23).  —  3.  arta  ( j/V-),  (^'"  ‘attain’),  vzz/taz 

(TS.  iv.  3.  114),  vikta  (Y^ij-),  vV^a  (ZT~  ‘choose’).  —  PI.  1.  dhlmahi 6  (]/V//h7-).  — 
3.  as  at  a  (SA.  xii.  19). 

Root  Aorist  Optative. 

504.  Active.  Sing.  1.  asydm  (as-  ‘attain’),  rdhyam  (AV.),  deydm 7,  dheyam1 , 
vrj  yam,  sakydm.  —  2.  avyas,  asyds,  rdhyas,  gamy  as,  jneyds,  bhuyds,  mrdhyas , 
sahyds.  —  3.  bhuydt 8 *  (AV.). 

D  u.  1.  yujyava .  —  3.  yujydtam. 

PI.  r.  asydtna,  rdhyama,  kriyama ,  bhuydma,  vrjydma,  sahydma 9,  stheyama1 . 
—  3.  asyur  (as-  ‘attain’),  dheyur ,  sahyur. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  asiya,  muriya  (mr-  ‘die’,  AV.).  —  3.  77/7/0  ( j/V-) 

uhita- 10  (  I/T’tz/z-),  vurlta  (vr-  ‘choose’).  —  Du.  2.  rdhathe. 

PI.  1.  asimahi ,  idhimahi ,  rdhimdhi ,  nasimahi  (‘reach’),  nasimahi , 
prcTmahi,  mudlmahi ,  yamTmahi ,  slmahi 11  (syz-  ‘bind’). 

a.  Precative  forms  of  the  root  aorist  are  common  in  the  active,  being 
made  from  about  twenty  roots  in  the  Samhitas. 

Active.  Sing.  1.  apyasam 12  (AA.  v.  3.  2^)  rdhyasam  (VS.  vm.  9),  jlvydsam 
(AV.  VS.),  priydsa?n  13  (AV.),  bhuydsam,  bhrdjydsam  (AV.),  bhriydsam  (VS.  11. 8), 
rddhydsam  (VS.  xxxvn.  3),  vadhydsam  (VS.  AV.),  sruydsam  (AV.).  —  3.  azyds, 
asyds  (‘reach’),  rdhyas,  gamydi ^  daghyds,  peyds  (‘drink’),  bhuyds,  yamyds,  yuyds 14 
977-  ‘separate’),  vrjyds ,  sruyas,  sahyds. 


1  Assigned  by  Whitney,  Roots,  to  the 
present  of  the  root  class. 

2  With  weak  and  unaccented  root. 

i  A  transfer  form  for  *dhathe. 

4  This  form  may,  however,  perhaps  pre¬ 
ferably  be  classed  as  an  imperfect  injunctive 
along  with  stanihi  as  pres,  impv.,  as  in 
Whitney’s  Roots.  These  are  the  only  forms 
of  the  simple  verb  beside  the  aor.  astdmt  (AV.). 

5  With  strong  radical  vowel. 

6  Probably  to  be  explained  as  the  in¬ 

junctive  corresponding  to  the  augmented 

indicative  adhimahi  (see  500,  note  r4) ;  it 

might,  however,  be  the  I.  pi.  opt.  mid.  with 

loss  of  a  before  the  modal 

Indo-arische  Philologie.  I.  4. 


7  For  dd-iydm,  dhd-iynm,  sthd-iyama. 

8  The  RV.  has  no  forms  of  the  3.  sing, 
in  -9/J7,  but  only  the  somewhat  numerous 
precatives  in  =  *-^5^-7. 

9  With  irregular  strong  radical  vowel, 
Padapatha  sahydma ;  cp.  RPr.  IX.  30. 

10  Aor.  opt.  in  Whitney,  Sanskrit  Grammar 
837  b,  but  pres.  opt.  in  ‘Roots’  157. 

11  With  loss  of  a  before  the  modal 

12  Accented  dpydsam  in  the  ed.  (B.  I.). 

13  Whitney,  in  AV.  hi.  54,  would  emend 
this  form  to  bhriydsa?n :  see  his  note  on 
that  passage. 

14  According  to  Avery  241,  3.  sing.  pres, 
opt. 


24 


37° 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar 


Du.  2.  bhuyastam  (VS.11. 7).  —  PI.  1.  rdhydsma  (AV.),  kriyasma ,  bhuydsma 
(AV.  VS.),  radhyasma  (AV.).  —  2.  bhuydsta 1  (TS.  ill.  2.  56). 

Middle.  Sing.  3.  padlstd ,  mucista2. 

Root  Aorist  Imperative. 

505.  The  active  forms  of  this  mood  are  fairly  numerous,  occurring  in 
all  the  2.  and  3.  persons;  but  middle  forms  occur  in  the  2.  pers.  only,  ten  in 
the  sing,  and  two  in  the  pi.  In  the  2.  persons  active  of  all  numbers,  several 
forms  irregularly  strengthen  the  root,  which  is  then  nearly  always  accented. 

Active.  Sing.  2.  hrdhi,  gadhi,  bodhi 3 4,  yandhi  ( \Pyam-),  yodhi6’,  randhi 
(=  rand- d hi]  )/  randh-),  viddhi  (Y vis-,  AV.),  vrdhi  ‘cover’,  sagdhi  (  Y  sak-), 
srudhi,  sprdhi.  —  With  ending  -hi:  gahi ,  pahi  (AV.),  mdhi  ‘measure’, 
sdhi  ‘bind’. 

3.  gantu,  datu,  dhatu,  pdtu  (AV.),  bhutu ,  srotu ,  sotu  (su-  ‘press’). 

Du.  2.  kartam 5  (AV.)  and  krtdm ,  gatdm  and  g  ant  dm  5,  jitam ,  ddtam , 
dhaktam  (Y  dagh-),  dhatam,  pdtam  (AV.),  bhutdm ,  b  hr  tarn  (VS.xi.  30),  yantdm5, 
riktatn  ( ]/r/V-),  varktam 5  (Y  WJ~)>  v  art  am 5  (zw-  ‘cover’),  volhdm °,  saktam , 
s  rut  dm,  sitam  (si-  ‘bind’),  sutdm ,  sthdtam ,  sprtam. 

3.  gantdm  5  (VS.  ix.  19),  ghdstdm  (VS.  xxi.  43),  datum ,  patcirn ,  volhdm 6. 

PI.  2.  kdrta 5  and  krta ,  cg<2/<2  and  gdnta 7 * ,  gdtd,  data,  dhdta 8,  pat  a  (AV.), 
bhutd,  ydnta 5 ,  varta  9  ( }/ zw/-),  jWAz  ( ]/ s'ams-),  sruta  and  srota10,  sola 5  (j/hw-), 
sthdta ,  hda 5  (|//A-).  —  With  ending  -tana:  hartana5,  gdnta?ia 5,  gdtana, 
dhatana,  dhetana 1 J,  patana  (AV.),  bhutana,  yantana^,  sotana  (  |/jw-). 

3.  gam antu,  ddntu  (da-  ‘cut’,  AV.  xii.  33),  dhdntu,  pdntu  (AV.),. 
sruvantu. 

Middle.  Sing.  2.  krsvd ,  dhisvd  (]/ dhd-),  yuhsvd;  accented  on  the 
root:  matsva,  ydksva ,  rdsva,  vamsva  (van-  ‘win’),  sdksva 12  (1.  421,  j/j-tfz’-); 
unaccented  tffaz/#  (<Az-  ‘give’,  VS.  xxxvm.  3),  masva  ‘measure’. 

PI.  2.  krdhvam,  vodhvam 13  (VS.). 

Root  Aorist  Participle. 

506.  Of  the  active  form  of  the  participle  of  the  root  aorist  few  examples 
occur.  But  the  middle  form  is  common,  nearly  forty  examples  being  met 
with  in  the  RV.  The  accent  here  generally  rests  on  the  final  syllable  of  the 
suffix  -czzztf,  but  in  several  examples  it  is  on  the  radical  syllable. 

Active,  rdhant -,  krdnt gmdnt-,  c  it  dint-,  pant-,  bhiddnt-,  sthdnt -;  also 
dyutdnt -14  as  first  member  of  a  compound. 

Middle.  arand-,  idhana-,  urand-  ‘choosing’,  uhana-  (]/ vah-),  brand-15, 
citdna-,  cydvana-,  jusana -,  trsand-,  drsand-  and  drsdna -,  dyutdna-  and  dyutana-, 
dhuvand-  (TS.  iv.  4. 125),  nidana-,  pisana-,  prcana-,  prathand-,  budhand-,  bhiyand -, 
manand-,  ?nandana-,  (vi-)mdna-  (TS.  iv.  6.  33),  yatdna-  and  ydtdna -,  yujdna-, 


1  AV.  xviii.  486  has  the  corrupt  reading 
bkuyaslha;  see  Whitney’s  note  on  that 
passage. 

2  The  form grabhista  is  a  2.  pi.  injv.  beside 
the  1.  pi.  ind.  agrab/usma  according  to  the 
A-  aorist. 

3  From  both  bhii -  ‘be’  for  *bhu-dhi  and 
budh -  ‘awake’  for  bo  d-d  hi  instead  of  *bud- 

dhi. 

4  For  *ybd-dki  instead  of  *yuddhi. 

5  With  strong  root. 

6  For  vah-tam ,  vah-tam  through  *vazh-iam, 

*vazh-tam. 


7  Once  (vi.  4911)  accented  ganta. 

8  With  the  accent  of  strong  forms. 

9  For  vart-ta  (like  varti  for  var(-li). 

10  Always  sruta  or  srota ;  also  so  to.  (cp. 
RPr.  vil.  14  f.). 

11  With  e  for  a. 

*2  sdksva  (in.  377)  is  from  \/sah-,  being  an 
j--  aor.  form,  for  *sah-s-sva  beside  I.  sing, 
mid.  asaksi  and  sciksi. 

13  For  vah-dhvam  through  * vazh-dhvam . 

J4  In  dyutdd-yaman -  ‘having  a  shining 
track’. 

15  Cp.  BB.  20,  89. 


VII.  Verb.  Aorist  System. 


37i 


rucand -,  ruhana -,  vdsana-  ‘dwelling’,  v  ip  and-,  vrand-  ‘covering’,  subhdna- 
and  sutnbhana -,  suit  and-,  sacdna -,  suvand- 1  and  svand-  (SV.)  (jv^-  ‘press’), 
srjand -,  sprdhand -,  hiyand-2 3.  As  members  of  compounds  only,  -cetdna-  and 
-hraydna-3  occur. 

B.  a-  Aorist. 

Avery,  Verb-Inflection  256  f.  —  Whitney,  Sanskrit  Grammar  p.  305 — 308;  Roots  224  ; 
AV.  Index  Verborum  380.  —  v.  Negelein,  Zur  Sprachgeschichte  32 — 34. 

507.  This  form  of  the  simple  aorist  is  taken  by  nearly  60  roots,  chiefly 
by  such  as  contain  a  medial  vowel.  In  the  RV.  less  than  half  as  many  verbs 
form  the  a-  aorist  as  form  the  root-aorist ;  and  it  is  more  frequent  in  the  AV. 
than  in  the  RV.  The  root  generally  appears  in  the  weak  form,  the  stem 
being  made  with  an  added  -a,  which  in  unaugmented  forms  is  normally 
accented.  This  form  of  the  aorist  therefore  resembles  an  imperfect  of  the 
d-  class.  Middle  forms  are  of  rare  occurrence  in  this  aorist. 

a.  A  certain  number  of  irregularities  occur  in  the  formation  of  the  stem.  1.  The 
radical  vowel  of  sds-  ‘order’  is  reduced  to  /4,  e.  g.  sisal 5  (iv.  27). —  2.  Some  half  dozen 
roots  containing  a  medial  a  followed  by  a  nasal,  drop  the  nasal;  these  are  brand-  ‘cry 
out’,  tains-  ‘shake’,  dhvatns-  ‘scatter’,  bhrams-  ‘fall’,  randh-  ‘make  subject’,  srarns-  ‘fall’.  — 
3.  On  the  other  hand  r-  ‘go’  and  sr-  ‘flow’  take  Guna  and  accent  the  radical  syllable, 
as  aranta  (unaugmented  3.  pi.)  and  sdrat.  —  4.  Several  roots  form  transfer  stems  from 
the  root  aorist.  Some  half  dozen  do  this  by  reducing  a  final  radical  d  to  a.  This 
is  regularly  the  case  in  khyd-  ‘see’,  vyd -  ‘envelope’,  hvd-  ‘call’;  e.  g.  akhyat,  avyat, 
ahvat;  but  from  da-  ‘give’,  dhd-  ‘put’,  and  st/id-  ‘stand’,  only  occasional  transfer  forms 
occur;  thus  adat ;  adhat  (SV.)  and  dhat ;  dsthat  (AV1.).  On  the  other  hand,  occasional 
transfer  forms  are  made  from  hr-  ‘make’,  and  gam-  ‘go’,  in  which  the  radical  syllable 
remains  strong;  e.  g.  akarat  (AV.)  and  agamat. 


Indicative. 

508.  The  forms  of  the  indicative  actually  occurring,  if  made  from  vid - 
‘find’,  would  be  as  follows: 

Active.  Sing.  1.  avidam.  2.  dzddas.  3.  avidat. —  PI.  1.  dvidama.  2.  dvidata. 
3.  dvidati. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  divide.  3.  dvidata.  —  PI.  1.  vidamahi.  3.  dvidanta. 

The  forms  which  actually  occur  are  the  following: 

Active.  Sing.  1.  dkhyatn ,  agrbham  (Kh.  111.  155),  atrpam  (AV.  TS.), 
atrham  (AV.),  anijam  (AV.),  dmacam  (AV.),  druham  (TS.  VS.  AV.),  avidam, 
dvrdham  (Kh.  iv.  85),  asakam  (VS.  11.  28),  dsanam ,  asaram,  ahyam6  ( Y hi-, 
AV.),  ahvam  (AV.);  dpani  (AV.);  aram ,  vidam. 

2.  akaras  (AV.),  akrtas  ( krt -  ‘cut’),  dkhyas  (TS.  AV.),  aruhas ,  dvidas ,  asadas 
(TS.  VS.  AV.),  dsaras;  dpas;  kdras,  gu/ias,  drnhas,  bhuvas 1 ,  mucas  (AV.),  vidds. 

3.  akarat 8  (AV.),  akramat  (AV.),  akhyat ,  agamat 8  (AV.),  dgrdhat ,  acchidat 
(AV.),  atanat,  at  as  at  (N  S.  AV.),  ad/pat9  (AV.),  adhat 10  ( ]d  dha-,  SV.),  dmucat , 


1  Always  written  thus  in  the  RV.,  but  to  be 
pronounced  svand-. 

2  Hardly  any  of  these  participles  occur 
in  any  of  the  other  Samhitas :  rucand- 
(VS.  XII.  i),  ruhana-  (TS.  IV.  I.  24),  svdna- 
(SV.). 

3  In  a-cetana-  ‘thoughtless’,  and  a-hrayana- 

‘bold’. 

4  As  in  the  weak  forms  of  the  present 
stem. 

5  At  the  same  time  accenting  the  radical 
syllable. 

6  Though  the  other  forms  from  \/hi- 


follow  the  root-aorist  ( dhema ,  akyan,  etc.), 
this  is  probably  to  be  regarded  as  a  transfer 
form,  since  the  regular  form  according  to 
the  root  aorist  ought  to  be  * ahayam . 

7  A  transfer  form,  bhiiva-s ,  following 
bhuv-am  as  if  from  a  stem  bhuva-. 

8  Transfers  from  the  root  aorist,  following 
the  1.  sing,  akar-am ,  agam-am. 

9  Emendation  in  AV.  XX.  136b 

10  Transfer  from  the  root  aorist  for 
a-dhat. 


24* 


372  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

drudat  (AV.),  arudhat ,  druhat ,  dvidat ,  avrtat  (AV.),  avrdhat,  avyat1  (Yvya-), 
dsakat  (AV.),  asucat ,  dsramat  (AV.),  dsadat,  dsanat,  dsarat,  dsicat  (TS.  111.  2.8+), 
dsrpat  (AV.),  dhvat I;  ddat 2  ( |/V<z-),  dp  at,  drat,  dsthat 3  (AV1.);  #70/  (AV.), 
dhat 4  (  [/ dhd-),  bhuvat r,  viddt,  sadat  (AV.),  sdnat,  sdrat. 

PI.  1.  aruhama  (VS.  viii.  52),  avidama,  dsanama ,  dhvama\  vrdhdma 5 
(AV.  v.  1 9).  —  2.  dvyata  1 ;  drata. 

3.  akhyan ,  akraman  (AV.),  agaman  (AV.),  acchidan  (AV.),  ddrsan  (TS. 
iv.  5.  13),  arudhan  (AV.),  druhan ,  dvidan,  avrjan ,  avrdhan  (VS.  xxxm.  60), 
asakan  (AV.),  asadan ,  asa?ian ,  asaran ,  asicair,  dpan ,  dsthanb  (AV. xm.  15); 

khydn ,  dhvasdn1,  vidan ,  sadan. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  ahve\  hve( AV.). —  3.  akhyata ,  dvyata1 ;  drata ;  vyaia1.  — 
PI.  1.  sisamahi  (Y sas-).  —  3.  avidanta  (AV.),  ahvanta ;  aranta,  krdnta I. 

a-  Aorist  Subjunctive. 

509.  The  forms  of  this  mood  are  rare  and  almost  restricted  to 
the  active. 

Active.  Sing.  2.  viddsi ;  vidds.  —  3.  mucdti ;  viddt. 

Du.  1.  ruhdva.  —  2.  viddthas.  —  3.  gamdtas  (AV.  x.  742). 

PI.  1.  arama ;  radhama ,  risama ,  sadama.  —  2.  gam  at  ha  (AV.),  risatha , 
vidatha ;  risdthana. 

Middle.  Sing.  3.  mucdte,  Usatai 8  (/A-  ‘leave’,  AV.  11.  313). 

PI.  1.  sisamahe 9  (AV.  SV.). 

a-  Aorist  Injunctive. 

510.  Active.  Sing.  1.  ara?n ,  khyam ,  ddrsani,  radhajn ,  risam,  ruhdm, 
vidam ,  sanam. 

2.  kradas ,  krudhas  (AV.),  khyds,  guhas ,  grdhas  (AV.  VS.),  druhas  (AV.), 
mucds,  vidas,  risas  (VS.xi.  68;  TS.  iv.  1.91),  /Am  (‘leave’),  sadas ,  .rr/m  (AV.). 

3.  ksudhat  (AV.),  khyat ,  grdhat  (AV.),  tanat,  ta?nat,  trsat  (AV.),  dasat, 
dhrsat  (Kh.iv.  1),  bhrasat,  mucat,  risat,  rudhat ,  ruhat I0,  viddt,  shat11,  srarnat , 
srisat,  sruvat12,  sadat,  sdnat10,  srpat  (AV.),  sridhat. 

PI.  3-  aran,  khyan,  gaman  (VS.  xvii.  78),  trpdn ,  trsan  (VS.vi.  31),  drsan, 
druhan,  risan,  vidan,  sakan  (AV.). 

Middle.  Sing.  3.  vidata  (AV.  xm.  231). 

PI.  1.  ardmahi  (AV.);  grhdmahi.  —  3.  aranta,  budhdnta,  mrsanta, 
viddnta. 

a-  Aorist  Optative. 

5 1 1.  This  mood  is  rare  and  confined  to  the  active  in  the  RV.,  though 
three  or  four  middle  forms  occur  in  the  later  Samhitas. 

Active.  Sing.  1.  dpeyam 13  (AV.),  gameyam ,  drseyam,  bhideyam  (AV.), 


1  Transfer  form. 

2  A  transfer  form  :  see  p.  366,  note  l2. 

3  See  p.  327,  note  5. 

4  prdti  dhat  (iv.  27  s). 

5  Whitney,  note  on  AV.  v.  r9,  would  in¬ 
stead  of  vfdhdma  read  (with  Paipp.) 

avTvrdhama. 

6  A  transfer  form  from  ]AAa- ;  cp.  Whit¬ 
ney’s  note  on  AV.  xill.  Is. 

7  With  loss  of  medial  nasal,  from  \/dhvatns-. 

8  This  form  is  probably  a  corrupt  reading 
for  the  passive  sisyatai:  see  Whitney’s  note 
on  AV.  II.  3 13. 

9  For  sisd?nahi  of  RV.  VIII.  241. 


10  With  accent  on  the  radical  syllable. 

11  From  jaj-  ‘order’,  with  accent  on  the 
root. 

12  It  is  hard  to  decide  whether  this  form, 
which  occurs  only  once  (i.  1273)  beside  the 
regular  sravat,  should  be  classed  here  as  an 
injunctive  of  the  a-  aorist,  or  as  an  irregular 
subjunctive  of  the  root-class  following  the 
analogy  of  bhuvat  (cp.  5°2)* 

In  prcipeyam  (AV.  III.  209),  analyzed  in 
the  Pada  text  as  dpeyam ;  cp.  Whitney’s 
note  on  the  passage. 


VII.  Verb.  Aorist  System.  373 

videyam 1  (AV.),  sdkeyam  (Kh.iv.  84 5),  saneyam.  —  2.  games  (VS.).  —  3.  rdhet 
(AV.),  garnet ,  ya?n1 ei2  (AV.),  videt,  sanet ,  set3  (VS.  ix.  5,  6). 

PI.  1.  asema  (‘attain’),  rdhema  (AV.),  game'ma ,  drsema  (AV.),  pusema , 
bhujema ,  ruherna ,  videvia  (AV.),  sake'ma,  sadema ,  sane'ma  and  sdnema ,  sr asema 4. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  videya  (VS.  iv.  23).  —  PI.  1.  gamemahi .  There  is  also 
one  precative  form:  3.  sing,  videsta  (AV.)  ‘may  she  find’. 

<7-  Aorist  Imperative. 

512.  This  mood  is  also  of  rare  occurrence  and  is  restricted  to  the  active, 
excepting  two  middle  plural  forms. 

Active.  Sing.  2.  kara$  (RV\),  bhuja  (TS.  iv.  5.  14),  nine  a,  ruha  (AV.), 
sana6,  sdra.  —  3.  sadatu. 

Du.  2.  aratam,  karatam 7  (RV1.),  khyatam ,  ruhatam ,  vidatam,  sd da  tarn. 

3.  aratam,  karatam 8,  sadatilm. 

PI.  2.  khydta,  s  a  data-,  sadat ana.  —  3.  sadantu. 

Middle.  PL  2.  mucadhvam.  —  3.  sadantam  (AV.). 

a-  Aorist  Participle. 

a.  There  are  hardly  more  than  a  dozen  certain  examples  of  the  parti¬ 
ciple  of  this  aorist. 

Active,  trpdnt-,  dhrsdni-,  rlsant-  or  rlsant -9,  vrdhdnt-,  sisdnt-  {sets-  ‘order’), 
sue  ant-,  sddant-10,  sdnant-10;  and  as  first  member  of  compounds:  krtdnt -, 
guhdjit- ,  viddnt- 1 1 . 

Middle,  guhdmdna-,  dhrsdmana-,  nrtdmana-,  suedmana--,  possibly  also 
ddsamana-12.  Probably  three  participles  in  -ana  are  to  be  regarded  as  belonging 
to  this  aorist:  dhrsand-  (AV.),  vrd/mnd-,  sridhand-. 

2.  Reduplicated  Aorist. 

Delbruck,  ATrbum  143  f.  —  Avery,  Verb-Inflection  266 — 268.  —  Whitney,  Sanskrit 
Grammar  856 — 873;  Roots  224;  Atharvaveda,  Index  Verborum  380.  —  v.  Negelein, 
Zur  Sprachgeschichte  68  f. 

513.  This  type  of  aorist  is  formed  from  nearly  90  verbs  in  the  Samhitas. 
Though  it  has  come  to  be  associated  with  the  secondary  conjugation  in  -dya 
(causative),  it  is  not  in  form  (with  a  few  slight  exceptions)  connected  with 
that  stem,  being  made  directly  from  the  root.  It  is,  however,  in  sense 
connected  with  the  causative,  inasmuch  as  it  has  a  causative  meaning 
when  the  corresponding  verb  in  -aya  has  that  meaning.  As  an  augmented 
reduplicated  form,  it  has  affinities  with  the  imperfect  of  the  reduplicating 
present  class  and  with  the  pluperfect.  It  may,  however,  be  distinguished  from 
the  imperfect  by  the  long  reduplicative  vowel,  by  the  thematic  -a-  which 
nearly  always  appears  in  the  stem,  and  often  by  the  meaning;  and  from  the 


1  Emendation  in  AV.  XIX.  42  for  vide  yam  ; 
see  Whitney’s  note. 

2  A  probable  conjecture  for  yame  in  AV. 
XVIII.  23. 

3  From  sd-  ‘gain’,  as  if  sa-  [sa-Jt).  Cp. 
v.  Negelein  34. 

4  With  loss  of  the  radical  nasal,  from 
\svams-. 

5  A  transfer  from  the  root  aorist  (other¬ 
wise  krdhi).  Avery  243  adds  gatnaR). 

6  With  accent  on  the  root  instead  of  the 

second  syllable;  always  sand :  cp.  RPr.  vh. 

IT  19,  33- 


7  A  transfer  form  from  the  root  aorist 
(otherwise  krtdrn). 

8  A  transfer  form  from  the  root  aorist. 

9  Once  with  the  short,  six  times  with  the 
long  vowel  in  the  Samhita  text  (Pp.  always  t) : 
see  APr.  583,  584,  588. 

With  accent  on  the  root  as  also  risant- 
and  risant-. 

11  In  krtad-vasu -  ‘disclosing  wealth’,  guhdd- 
avadya-  ‘concealing  faults’,  viddd-va.su -  ‘win¬ 
ning  wealth’. 

12  As  occurring  beside  the  a-  aorist  in¬ 
junctive  form  dasat  (510). 


374 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar 


pluperfect  by  difference  of  reduplication  when  the  root  contains  a  or  r,  and 
often  by  meaning. 

a.  The  characteristic  feature  of  this  aorist  is  the  almost  invariable 
quantitative  sequence  of  a  long  reduplicative  and  a  short  radical  vowel 
(_  w).  The  vowels  a,  r,  / x,  as  well  as  z,  are  reduplicated  with  i  2 3 4,  which  (unless 
it  becomes  long  by  position)  is  lengthened  if  the  radical  vowel  is  (or  is  made) 
prosodically  short;  e.  g.  a-jijan-a-t  from  jail-  ‘beget’;  d-vwrdh-a-t  from  vrdh- 
‘grow’,  but  ciksip-a-s  from  ksip-  ‘throw’. 

In  order  to  bring  about  this  trochaic  rhythm,  the  radical  vowel  has  to  be 
shortened  or  the  nasal  dropped  in  the  roots  vas-  ‘bellow’,  sadh-  ‘succeed’, 
hid-  ‘be  hostile’,  krand-  ‘cry  out’,  jambh-  ‘crush’,  ratidh-  ‘subject’,  syand-  ‘flow’, 
srams-  ‘fall’ ;  e.  g.  avivasat ,  acikradat.  In  jlhvaratam  (TS.)  the  reduplicative 
vowel,  being  already  long  by  position,  is  unnecessarily  lengthened,  a 

1.  In  a  few  forms  the  reduplicative  vowel  is,  contrary  to  the  prevailing  rhythmic 
rule,  left  short:  jigrtam  and  jigrtd  (beside  d/'igar) ;  didhrtam  and  ririsas  (beside  rJrisas). 
On  the  other  hand,  in  the  isolated  injunctive  form  didipas 5,  the  radical  vowel  remains 
long,  and  in  dmTmet  both  the  reduplicative  and  the  radical  syllable  are  long  (beside 
mimayat  with  the  regular  rhythm). 

2.  The  p  of  the  causative  stems  j fid-pay  a-,  sthd-paya-,  ha-paya ,  ar-paya-  [r-  ‘go’),  is 
retained  in  the  aorist,  the  radical  vowel  being  at  the  same  time  reduced  to  i  in  the  first 
three:  ajijnipat (TS.),  dtisthipat,  flhipas',  the  s  of  the  causative  stem  bhlsaya-  is  also  retained: 
bJbhis-as  (TS.). 

3.  The  root  dyut-  ‘shine’,  reduplicates  with  i:  adidyutat  L  In  the  aorist  formed 
from  the  causative  stem  arpaya-,  the  reduplicative  i  appears  after,  instead  of  before,  the 
radical  vowel,  doubtless  owing  to  the  difficulty  caused  by  the  initial  a  and  the  augment: 
arp-i-p-am  (AV.).  The  initial  a  also  led  to  the  anomaly  of  reduplicating  the  whole  of 
the  root  am  ‘injure’,  and  then  prefixing  the  augment:  dm-am-at. 

4.  There  are  three  anomalous  aorists  formed  from  vas-  ‘be  lost’,  pat-  ‘fall’,  and 
vac-  ‘speak’,  in  which  besides  an  irregular  reduplicative  vowel,  the  radical  a  is  syncopated 
[a-pap-t-at,  d-?ie-s-an )  or  contracted  ( d-voc-at ).  As  beside  the  former  two  the  regular  redupli¬ 
cated  aorists  apipaiai  and  aninasat  occur,  and  as  all  three  have  the  regular  reduplicative 
vowel  a  of  the  perfect5,  they  appear  to  have  been  originally  pluperfects  which  before  being 
shortened  had  the  form  of  *a-papat-atb ,  *  a-nanas-at,  *d-vavac-at ' .  But  they  all  came  to 
be  regarded  as  aorists.  This  is  undoubted  in  the  case  of  avocat  owing  to  its  numerous 
mood  forms;  dp  apt  at,  moreover,  has  an  imperative  form  beside  it;  and  dnesan  (TS  VS.) 
has  a  distinctly  aoristic  meaning. 

b.  The  reduplicated  aorist  in  the  great  majority  of  forms  makes  its 
stems  with  a  thematic  -a-.  Before  this,  a  final  r  regularly,  and  I  and  u 
in  two  or  three  forms,  take  Guna;  e.  g.  adldhar-a-t  (}dd/ir~),  blbhay-a-t  (  Y b hi-), 
cucyav-a-t  ( \cyu-),  dudrav-a-t  ( j/ dm-).  The  inflexion  of  this  aorist  stem  is 
like  that  of  an  imperfect  of  the  a-  conjugation. 

c.  About  a  dozen  roots,  however,  have  occasional  forms  from  stems 
made  without  thematic  -a-,  the  inflexion  then  being  like  that  of  an  imper¬ 
fect  of  the  reduplicating  class.  These  roots  are  tna-  ‘bellow’;  s'ri-  ‘resort’; 
tu-  ‘be  strong’,  dnt-  ‘run’,  dhu-  ‘shake’,  7iu-  ‘praise’,  pu-  ‘cleanse’,  yu-  ‘separate’, 


1  In  y kip-,  the  only  root  in  which  it 
occurs. 

2  In  the  reduplicating  present  class  f  is 
almost  invariably,  and  a  predominantly,  re¬ 
duplicated  with  i  (457). 

3  In  form  this  might  be  a  pluperfect.  A 
similar  reversal  of  the  ordinary  rhythm  appears 
in  the  three  forms  dtaiamsata?n  (1.  I207), 
adadhdvat  (ix.  877),  vavaksat  (SV.  I.  1,  2,  2,  3 
var.  lect.  for  vavaksa  of  RV.  X.  I151)  each 
occurring  once,  but  owing  to  the  reduplica¬ 
tive  vowel  they  should  rather  be  accounted 
pluperfects.  Cp.  p.  364,  note  I5. 

4  See  514,  note  T. 


5  That  is,  nes-  for  nanas-,  on  the  analogy 
of  sed-  for  *sazd-  in  the  perfect:  this  form 
of  contraction  would  be  unique  in  an  original 
aorist. 

6  Like  a-sasvaj-at ;  becoming  a-papt-at  like 
a-cakr-at  beside  cakar-am. 

1  The  cause  of  the  anomalous  contraction 
may  be  due  to  the  awkwardness  of  com¬ 
bining  the  augment  with  the  reduced  redupli¬ 
cative  syllable  11-  of  the  perfect  (*a-uvac-at). 
The  accentuation  of  the  augment  would  also 
favour  the  second  syllable  taking  Sampra- 
sarana:  a-va-uc-at. 


VII.  Verb.  Aorist  System.  375 

su -  ‘generate’,  sru-  ‘flow’;  gr-  ‘waken’,  dhr-  ‘hold’;  svap-  ‘sleep’;  e.  g.  asisre-t 
(TS.),  ddudro-t ,  djlgar ,  sisvap.  Beside  forms  made  thus,  occur  others  made 
from  several  of  these  roots  with  the  thematic  -a-;  and  those  made  from  the 
roots  ending  in  u  (the  majority),  cannot  be  distinguished  in  form  from  plu¬ 
perfects.  The  number  of  forms  of  this  type  which  can  with  certainty  be 
classed  as  aorists  is  therefore  very  small. 

d.  Besides  the  indicative  all  the  moods  are  represented  in  this  aorist, 
but  no  participial  form  has  been  found. 

Reduplicated  Aorist  Indicative. 

514.  The  forms  actually  occurring  would,  if  made  from  jan-  ‘beget’ 
with  thematic  - a -,  be  the  following: 

Active.  Sing.  1.  djljanam.  2.  djijanas.  3.  djljanat.  — -  Du.  2.  ajijanatam.  — 
PL  1.  djljanama.  2.  djijanata.  3.  ajljanan. 

Middle.  Sing.  3.  djijanata .  —  PI.  2.  djljanadhvam.  3.  djijananta. 

The  forms  actually  occurring  (including  those  made  without  thematic -a-)  are: 

Active.  Sing.  1.  aciZzrsam ,  ajigamam  (TS.  VS.  AV.),  ajljabham  (AV.), 
atisthipam  (AV.),  adudusam  (AV.),  anlnasam ,  apTparam  ( pr-  ‘pass’,  AV.), 
amlmadam  (AV.),  avocam,  dsisamam  {jam-  ‘be  quiet’,  AV,);  arpipam  (AV.), 

2.  acikradas ,  djijanas,  dtisthipas,  dtltaras  (AV.),  atltrpas  (AV.),  anlnasas 
(‘be  lost’,  AV.),  aplparas  (AV.),  abubZiuvas  (AV.),  dmimadas  (AV.),  arurupas 
(AV.),  dvTvrdZias  (AV.),  asTsamas  (AV.):  jihvaras  (AV.),  didyutas l,  rUrupas 
(AV.),  susucas  (TS.  iv.  1.  43),  sisvapas.  —  Without  thematic  -a-:  tutos 2, 
susros;  ajlgar 3  (gr-  ‘swallow’),  djlgar  (gr-  ‘waken’);  didZiar ,  sisvap . 

3.  acikradat ,  aciklpat  (AV.),  aclcarat  (AV.),  dcuZzrudZiat ,  acucyavat 4  (K.), 
ajijhipat  (TS.11. 1. 1 13),  djljanat ,  djihidat  (A V.),  dtisthipat ,  adidyutat  \  adidharat , 
adudusat ,  anmasat ,  dpaptat  and  dip  ip  at  at,  abubudhat,  amumuhat  (AV.),  drlramat , 
dr  Ur uc  at,  avivasat  (‘has  bellowed’,  ]/m/-),  ainvipat,  avivrtat ,  dvivrdhat,  avocat, 
asisriyat 5  (AV.),  dsisvitat,  asisamat  (AV.),  asisyadat  ( syand-) ;  amamat 
(l f  am-)  \  jfjanat,  didyutat  (VS.  xxxviii.  22),  didharat,  dudrdvat,  nesat 6,  bibhayat , 
vavrtat ,  vocat ,  sisnat/iat.  —  Without  thematic  -or-:  ddudrot,  dnunot ,  dpupot, 
dmlmet1  (ma-  ‘bellow’),  as  is  ret8,  asusot  (Y  su-,  MS.),  dsusrot  (VS.  xvm.  58;  TS. 
v.  7.  71);  tutot,  dudhot  (d/iu-  ‘shake’);  djlgar  (gr-  ‘waken’),  asisnat  ( ]/ snatZi-) ; 
dldZiar.  —  Du.  2.  drUrujatam  (Kh.  1.  510). 

PL  1.  dtltrpama  (VS.vn.  29),  atltrsama,  apaptama  (Kh.m.  19),  apipadama 
(AV.),  dvivrtama  (AV.),  dvocama. 

2.  djljapata 9  (VS.  ix.  12),  arurucata  (VS.  xxxvii.  15). 

3.  acikradan ,  djljanan,  atitrasan  (AV.),  adidZiaran  (AV.),  amnasan  (AV .), 
an  elan  (VS.  xvi.  10;  TS.  iv.  5.  14),),  apaptan,  apiparan  (pr-  ‘cross’),  amlmrnan 
(AV.),  avivatan ,  avlvaran  (AV.),  avlvasan  (vas-  ‘bellow’),  avwipan,  dvlvrdZian, 
avocan ,  a  sis  a  man  (AV.),  ds'usubZian ,  asisrasan  ( Y  s  rains-,  AV.),  asTsadan  (Y sad-, 
VS.  xii.  54;  TS.  iv.  2.  44);  jijanan,  paptan. 


1  Reduplicated  with  z  owing  to  the  vocalic 
pronunciation  of  the  ( digit -)  as  in  the  per¬ 
fect  :  see  482  a  I. 

2  Classed  by  Whitney,  Sanskrit  Grammar 
868  a,  as  an  aorist,  but  Roots  63,  as  plu¬ 
perfect;  similarly  tutot  below. 

3  Occurring  only  in  RV.  I.  163'  —  VS. 
xxix.  18  =  TS.  iv.  6.  73. 

4  Whitney  866  (Mantra?). 

5  This  form  occurs  only  once  (AV.  VI.  3 1 3), 

as  a  variant  for  dhlyate  in  RV.  x.  1893 


(=  SV.)  and  for  sisriye  in  TS.  I.  5*  31*  See 
Whitney’s  note  on  AV.  vi.  313. 

6  This  form  occurs  once  in  the  RV.  (vi.  ix7) 
as  a  past  tense  (along  with  three  other  un¬ 
augmented  forms :  rocata,  ar/a,  tist/iat)  and 
twice  as  an  injunctive.  Bartholomae,  KZ. 
27,  360,  note  R  regards  it  as  a  pluperfect. 

7  Whitney  868  a;  v.  Negelein  691. 

8  Occurs  TS.  I.  8.  io2  with  other  aorists. 

9  From  the  causative  stem  jdpaya -  of 
ji -  ‘conquer’. 


376  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

Middle.  Sing.  3.  dvivarata  (■ vr -  ‘cover’,  AV.;  TS.  v.  6.  11 2 3).  —  With 
ending  -/  for  -ta :  a  tit  ape. 

PI.  2.  aznvrdhadhvam.  —  3.  atitrpanta  (VS.  xix.  36),  dblbhayanta , 

dmimadanta ,  avivasanta  (]dvas-),  dvTvrdhanta ,  dvocanta ,  asisyadanta  ( ]/ syand-), 
asusudanta  (TS.  1.  8.  io2);  jijananta. 

Reduplicated  Aorist  Subjunctive. 

515.  This  mood  is  of  rare  occurrence,  only  about  a  dozen  forms  having 
been  noted.  The  active  is  represented  in  all  the  persons  of  the  sing,  and 
the  1.  pi.  only;  the  middle  by  a  single  dual  form. 

Active.  Sing.  1.  raradha ,  vocd.  —  2.  tltapdsi  (AY.),  vocdsi  (VS.xxm.  51). 
—  3.  clklpati,  pisprsati r,  vocati 2,  vocati ,  sisadhati 3  ( j/Yj^/z-). 

PI.  1.  cukrudhama ,  riramdma ,  vocdma ,  sisadhama  (Y sadh -). 

Middle.  Du.  1.  vocavahai. 

Reduplicated  Aorist  Injunctive. 

516.  Forms  of  this  mood  are  of  common  occurrence  in  the  active,  in 
which  voice  more  than  fifty  have  been  found;  but  in  the  middle  only  five 
have  been  noted. 

Active.  Sing.  1.  cukrudham ,  jijanam ,  didharam ,  vocam. 

2.  cikradas ,  ciksipas ,  jihvaras,  jihipas  (caus.  hd-paya-),  tltrsas  (TS.  111.  2.  53), 
didfpas ,  didyutas ,  dtdharas ,  mnamas,  nfnasas ,  paptas ,  pisprsas,  piparas  {pr- 
‘cross’),  blbhisas  (TS.  in.  2.  52),  mimrsas ,  rTradhas,  rlrisas ,  vivijas ,  vocas , 
sisnathas,  sisrdthas,  susucas  (AV.),  sTsadhas  (y^sad/i-). 

3.  cncyavat ,  tisthipat ,  didharat ,  dudravat ,  dudusat,  nesat,  p apt at  (AV.), 
pfparat  (pr-  ‘cross’,  RV1.)  and  pfpdrat  (pr-  ‘cross’,  RY1.  =  TS.  1.  6.  123), 
piparat  (pr-  ‘fill’),  mlmayat 4,  riradhat  ( ]/ rand/i-),  rlrisat ,  vocat ,  sisrathat , 
sisvadat  (| f svad-).  —  Without  thematic  -a-:  nunot  (nu-  ‘praise’),  yuyot  (yu- 
‘separate’),  susrot. 

Du.  2.  jihvaratam 5  (VS.v.  17)  and  jihvaratam 5  (TS.i.  2. 132),  rJradhatam 5. 

PI.  2.  riradhata* ,  rlrisata 5  (1.  §99  =  VS.  xxv.  22). 

3.  ciksipan  (AV.),  p  apt  an ,  rTraman ,  vocati ,  susucan  (VS.  xxxv.  8). 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  voce.  —  2.  b  ib  his  at  ha  sb . 

Pi.  3.  jijananta ,  vdcanta ,  slsapatita  (sap-  ‘serve’). 

Reduplicated  Aorist  Optative. 

517.  The  forms  of  this  mood  are  rare,  numbering  altogether  (including 
a  precative)  not  more  than  a  dozen.  The  majority  of  these  come  from  vac- 
‘speak’,  and  the  rest  from  two  other  roots,  ‘stir’  and  rA-  ‘hurt’. 

Active.  Sing.  1.  voceyam.  —  2.  ririses,  voces.  —  3.  vocet  (AV.). 

Du.  2.  vocetam.  —  PI.  1.  vocema1.  —  3.  voceyur. 

Middle.  Sing.i.  voceya.  —  Pl.i.  cucyuvimahi 8,  vocemahi.  —  3.  cucyavirata s, 
There  is  also  the  precative  sing.  3.  riris-T-s-ta  9  (vi.  51?)  or  riris-i-s-ta  (vm.  1 8 13). 


1  As  if  from  an  indicative  3.  sing.  *apisprk. 

2  Like  an  indicative  present  in  form. 

3  These  forms  refute  the  statement  of 
Hirt,  IF.  12,  214  f.,  that  the  reduplicated, 
as  well  as  the  root  and  a-  aorist,  has  no  sub¬ 
junctive,  but  only  injunctive  forms.  Cp. 502, 509. 

4  This  form  seems  to  have  an  injunctive 
sense  in  RV.  X.  2722,  its  only  occurrence. 

5  Reckoned  here  an  injunctive  form  (not 

imperative)  because  accompanied  by  mi: 

cp.  Delbruck,  Altindische  Syntax  p.3611. 


6  Formed  from  the  causative  stem  bhlsaya- 
of  /VF-  ‘fear’. 

7  This  form  occurs  six  times  in  the  RV., 
three  times  unaccented  and  three  times 
accented  vocema.  Avery  268  wrongly  states 
vocema  to  occur  five  times  and  vocema  (sic) 
once. 

8  Without  thematic  -a-. 

9  In  the  Pada  text  ririsJsta. 


VII.  Verb.  Aorist  System. 


377 


Reduplicated  Aorist  Imperative. 

518.  Forms  of  this  mood  are  rare,  numbering  hardly  more  than  a  dozen. 
They  occur  in  the  active  only. 

Active.  Sing.  2.  vocatat.  —  3.  vocatu.  —  Du.  2.  jigrtam  (gr-  Svaken’), 
did  hr  t am,  vocatam.  —  PI.  2.  jigrta ,  didhrtd ,  paptata  1  (1.  88 x),  vocata , 
susuddta  (AV.  1.  2  b4)2.  —  3.  pupurantu  (pr-  ‘fill’),  sisrathantu. 

3.  Sigmatic  Aorist. 

519.  The  general  tense  sign  of  this  aorist  is  an  y  added  to  the  root. 
This  s  in  the  vast  majority  of  verbs  (more  than  200)  comes  immediately 
before  the  endings.  When  such  is  the  case,  the  stem  may  be  formed  in 
three  different  ways:  the  s  being  added  1.  direct  to  the  root,  e.  g.  a-jai-s-am 
( ji -  ‘conquer’);  2.  with  a  connecting  -A,  e.  g.  a-kram-i-s-am  ( kram -  ‘stride’); 
3.  with  an  additional  t-  prefixed  to  the  connecting  -i-,  e.  g.  a-ya-s-i-s-am  (yd- 
‘go’).  The  inflexion  of  these  three  varieties  (A)  follows  that  of  the  graded 
conjugation.  In  a  small  number  of  verbs  the  stem  is  formed  by  adding  -y 
extended  with  a  thematic  a;  e.  g.  d-ruk-sa-t  ( nih -  ‘mount’).  The  inflexion  of 
this  fourth  form  (B)  of  the  sigmatic  aorist  is  like  that  of  an  imperfect  of  the 
a-  conjugation. 

Of  the  four  varieties  of  the  sigmatic  aorist,  the  first  two,  the  aorist  and 
the  is-  aorist,  are  very  common,  each  being  formed  by  nearly  100  roots. 
The  other  two  are  rare,  the  sis-  aorist  being  made  from  only  six,  and  the 
sa-  aorist  from  only  nine  roots. 

A.  1.  The  s-  aorist. 

Delbruck,  Verbum  177— 179.  —  Avery.  Verb-Inflection  257 — 259.  —  Whitney,. 
Sanskrit  Grammar  878 — 897;  Roots  225—226;  Atharvaveda,  Index  Verborum  3S0.  — 
v.  Negelein,  Zur  Sprachgeschichte  83 — 84. 

520.  In  this  form  of  the  sigmatic  aorist,  the  radical  vowel  as  a  rule 
takes  Vrddhi  ( a  being  lengthened)  in  the  active.  In  the  middle,  on  the 
other  hand,  excepting  final  z  and  u  (which  take  Guna),  the  radical  vowel 
remains  unchanged.  Thus  in  the  active  there  occur  the  forms  1.  sing. 
a-jai-sam  (yji-),  a-bhdr-sam  (  ybhr-),  3.  sing,  d-raik  ( \/ric-):  3-pb  a-cchdnt-sur 
( Y chand -);  while  in  the  middle  we  find  1.  sing,  a-vit-si  (yzdd-),  d-bhut-si 
( ybicdh -),  a-srk-si  (]/ srj-),  a-nu-si  (?iu-  ‘praise’),  beside  forms  with  Guna  from 
roots  ending  in  t  or  it  such  as  3.  pi.  a-he-s-ata  ( ]/7zz -),  a-ne-s-ata  ( 

1.  sing,  a-sto-si  ( y stu-). 

a.  There  are,  however,  some  irregularities.  1.  In  a  few  active  injunctive  forms 
Guna  appears  instead  of  Vrddhi,  e.  g.  sing.  2 .  je-s  (]/ji-),  pi.  I .  je-sma.  —  2.  In  two  or  three 
middle  forms  of  sah-  ‘overcome’,  the  a  is  lengthened,  e.  g.  sing.  I.  sak-si 3.  —  3.  The 
root  is  shortened  in  a  few  middle  forms;  thus  the  a  of  da-  ‘cut’,  is  reduced  to  i  in 
sing.  1.  opt.  di-s-Tya,  and  the  nasal  of  gam-  ‘go’  and  man-  ‘think’  is  dropped  in  the  forms 
a-ga-smahi  and  ma-sTya.  —  4.  After  a  consonant  other  than  n  m  r,  the  tense  sign  s  is 
dropped  before  t,  th ,  and  dh\  thus  a-bhak-ta  beside  d-bhak-s-i  (]/bha/'-);  pat-thas  (AV.) 
beside  pat-s-i  ( \pad -,  AV.);  d-sto-dhvam 4  (]A/«-),  where  the  s  on  becoming  z  cerebralized 
the  following  dental  before  disappearing  (gd-sio-z-dhvam). 

In  addition  to  the  indicative,  all  the  moods  of  this  form  of  the  aorist 
occur.  There  is  also  a  participle,  but  it  is  rare. 


1  An  imperative  form  like  this  justifies 
the  classification  of  apapiat  etc.  as  an  actual 
aorist,  apart  from  its  possible  origin  as  a 
pluperfect. 

2  Pada  text  susuddta.  It  is  perhaps  better 

to  class  this  form  here  (cp.  Whitney,  Sanskrit 

Grammar  871)  than  as  a  transfer  form  of 
the  perfect  imperative  from  \'sud-  (Roots 


188),  though  the  reduplicative  vowel  is 
short.  Cp.  p.  362,  note  9. 

3  Also  in  the  active  subjunctive  form 
sdksatna,  where  the  a  would  normally  remain 
short,  as  the  radical  vowel  in  this  mood 
takes  Guna  only. 

4  The  only  example  in  this  aorist  of  the 
ending  -dhvam. 


378  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


Indicative. 

521.  The  only  point  in  which  the  inflexion  differs  from  that  of  the  imper¬ 
fect  of  the  graded  conjugation  is  that  the  3.  pi.  active  invariably  ends  in  -ur. 

a.  The  following  peculiarities  and  irregularities  are  moreover  to  be  noted.  1.  In  the 
active:  in  the  RV. 1  the  endings  -s  and  -t  of  the  2.  3.  sing,  disappear,  and  the  tense  sign 
also,  unless  the  root  ends  in  a  vowel;  e.  g.  a-hdr  ( AV.),  3.  sing,  from  y hr-,  —  *a-har-s-t ,  but 
a-hd-s,  3.  sing,  from  hd-  ‘lea ve’ —  *a-ha-s-i.  The  AV.  and  TS.,  however,  less  often  than 
not,  insert  a  connecting  -I-  before  these  endings,  thus  preserving  both  the  latter  and  the 
s  of  the  tense  stem;  e.  g.  a-naik-s-T-t  (\/niJ-,  AV.),  a-tdm-s-T-t  (J/tan-,  TS.).  In  four  forms 
in  which  the  -T-  is  not  inserted,  the  -s  and  -t,  as  distinctive  of  the  2.  and  3.  persons, 
abnormally  take  the  place  of  the  * s  of  the  stem  or  the  final  consonant  of  the  root: 
a-srai-t  (AV.)  for  *a-srai-s-t  Q/rW-);  d-hai-t  (AV.)  for  *a-hai-s-t  (j/74-);  a-vd-t  (AV.  vm.  I21) 
for  *a-vds-i2  ( yas -  ‘shine’);  2.  sing,  srd-s  (AV.)  for  *sraj-s-s 3 4  (] /srj-\  The  RV.  also  has 
a-yd-s  for  *a-ydj-s-s  ( yaj -  ‘sacrifice’)  beside  the  phonetically  regular  form  in  the  3.  sing. 
a-yap  for  * a-yaj-s-t.  —  2.  In  the  middle  nine  first  and  one  or  two  third  persons  singular 
appear  in  which  the  stem  is  made  with  the  addition  of  -s,  but  which  have  both  the 
ending  and  the  meaning  of  the  present;  and  the  -s  is  added  to  a  present  stem  and 
not  to  the  aorist  form  of  the  root.  Thus  formed  are  from  a  present  stem  of  1.  the 
a-  class:  arca-s-e  ‘I  praise’,  yaja-s-e  ‘I  worship’  (vm.  25 r);  2.  the  a-  class,  nasalized: 

rhja-s-e 4  ‘I  strive  after’;  3.  the  ya-  class:  gdy-i-se 5  ‘I  sing’;  4.  the  nd-  class:  grnT-s-e 6 
‘I  praise’;  pum-s-e  T  purify’;  5.  the  root  class:  kr-s-e  ‘I  make’,  hi-s-e  ‘I  impel’,  stu-s-e 7 8 
‘I  praise’6;  6.  the  intensive:  carkr-s-e  which  (like  stuse '■  9  in  I.  1227)  is  a  3.  sing,  with  a 
passive  sense:  ‘is  praised’. 

522.  The  forms  of  the  indicative  actually  occurring  would,  if  made  from 
bhr -  Tear’  in  the  active  and  stu-  ‘praise’  in  the  middle,  be  as  follows: 

Active.  Sing.  1.  dbharsam.  2.  dbhar,  abharsis  (AV.).  3.  dbhar ;  abhdrsit 
(AV.TS.).  —  Du.  2.  dbhar stam.  3.  abhdrstam.  —  PI.  1.  abharstna.  2.  dbhdrsta. 
3.  abhdrsur. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  dstosi.  2.  astosthds.  3.  astosta.  —  Du.  3.  astosdtdm.  — 
PI.  1.  dstosmahi.  2.  astodhvam.  3.  dstosata. 

The  forms  which  actually  occur  are  the  following: 

Active.  Sing.  1.  akdrsa??i  (AV.),  ajaisam  ( ]///-),  dpraksam  (  Y prach AV.), 
abharsam,  dy  at  ns  am  {  Y yam-),  aydsam,  dsparsam  (spr-  ‘win’),  dhdrsam  (  YAr~)- 

2.  akrd?i  (Y brand-),  aghds10  (Yghas-,  AV.  xx.  12910),  dhas  (hd-  ‘leave’, 

AV.  11.  io7).  —  With  irregular  ay  as  ( YyaJ~)i  sr^s  ( V  AV.).  — 

With  connecting  -T-:  ardtsTs  {radh-  ‘succeed’,  AV.),  avdtsls 11  {yas-  ‘dwell’, 
AV.);  bhaisls  (AV.). 

3.  With  loss  of  the  ending-^:  ajais 12  ( |//V-),  aprds  (YPr^~),  dhas  (ha- 
‘leave’).  —  With  loss  of  both  tense  sign  and  ending:  dkrdn 13  ( }/ brand-), 
dksar  (  Y ksar-),  acait  (  yV/A),  acchdn  (  ]/  chand-),  atd?i  (  Y^an~),  dtsar  (  j/Azzr-), 
adyant  (| fdyut-),  adhak  (  [Z dah-),  aprdk  ( pre -  ‘mix’,  AV.),  aprdt  (  prach-), 
abhdr,  ay  at  (  Yya/~)i  ay  an  (  Y yam-),  araut1*  (  ]/ rudh-,  AV.),  dvat  (Y^ah-), 
avdt 15  {vas-  ‘shine’,  AV.),  asvait  ( |/ svit-),  asydn  (  )/ syand-),  dsrak  (  Ys.rJ~)i 
dsvar  (  ]/ svar-),  ahdr  (Y hr-,  AV.);  draik  (  Y ric-) ;  dyaut ,  vdt  (  Yd’ ah-).  — 


1  and  the  Ivathaka,  Whitney  S88. 

2  In  avdt  the  t  may,  however,  represent 
the  final  s  of  the  root,  the  form  possibly 
standing  for  *a-vat-s-i ;  see  above  44  a  2, 
and  Whitney,  Sanskrit  Grammar  167. 

3  The  phonetically  regular  form  would  be 
*srak.  Cp.  p.  61  (middle). 

4  Also  the  participle  rhjas-dna- . 

5  From  gdya-,  with  -i-  for  - a -. 

6  From  the  weak  stem. 

7  These  three  forms  seem  to  represent 
the  transition  of  aorist  stems  to  employment 
as  present  stems. 

8  The  form  stuse  is  frequent  as  a  I.  sing.; 


in  one  passage  (i.  1227),  however,  it  appears 
to  be  a  3.  sing,  with  a  passive  sense :  ‘is 
praised’. 

9  On  stuse  in  general,  see  Oldenberg, 

ZD  MG.  59, 355  T,  Neisser,  BB.  325- 

10  Cp.  above  499,  dghas  sing.  2.  3. 

11  Cp.  v.  Negelein  83,  note  5;  above 
44,  a  I. 

12  For  * ajais-t. 

13  For  *akrdnd-s-t. 

x4  For  *araudh-s-t. 

T5  Cp.  avdt-s-T-s  (AV.)  from  vas-  ‘dwell’. 
Cp.  note  2  and  p.  36  (top). 


VI.  Verb.  Aorist  System.  379 

With  irregular-?:  asrait (  \f sri-,  AV.),  d/iait(  Y hi-,  A V.).  — With  connecting 
-7-:  atamsit  ( Y  tan TS.  iv.  7.  13s;  VS.  xv.  53),  anaiksit  (Y  nij-,  AV.);  rautsTt 
(Yrudh-,  Kh.  iv.  7s). 

Du.  2.  asrastamx  (Y srj\  AV.).  —  3.  abharstam  (VS.xxviii.  1 7),  asvarstam 

( yAz/rtr-). 

PI.  1.  ajaisma ,  dbhaisn^j. —  2.  acchanta1  2 3  ( ]/ chand-),  anaista  (TS.v.  7. 2*). — 
3.  dec  Hants  ur ,  dbhaisur ,  amatsur  {Y  mad-),  ayasur,  avaksur  (Yvah-,  AV.) k 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  adiksi  ( ]/ AV-),  (V/j-  ‘give’,  AV.),  anusi  { Y nu -), 

dbhaksi  ( Ybhaj -),  dbhutsi  ( ]/ bndh-),  dmasi  {ma-  ‘measure’,  AV.),  dmuksi 
(V  muc-,  AV.),  avitsi  { vid- -  ‘find’),  asaksi 5  ( j/TtzA-),  asrksi ,  as  to  si ;  marnsi 
{ Y  man-),  WksY  (Yvrj;  AV.),  saksi$. 

2.  ajhasthas  (AV.),  dt  apt  has 1  (AV.ix.  56),  aprkthas  (  Y Pt'c~i  AV.),  dmukthas 
( ]/ muc-,  AV.). 

3.  aprkta  ( Y dbhakta  {Ybhaj-),  dmamsta  (VS.  v.  40),  amatta 
( / mad-),  ayamsta  ( ]/ycz//;-),  ayasta  (  ]/jy7/-),  dramsta  (  }/ ram-),  drabdha 
(  Yrabh-),  asakta  { Y saJ~)>  dsrsta  {Ys.rJ~)>  cistosta. 

Du.  3.  anusatam,  amamsatam  (VS.  xxxvm.  13),  dyuksatam  (Yyud')- 

PI.  I.  agasmahib  (  )/" gam-),  aprksmahi  (  ]/ pTc-,  AV.),  abhutsmahi  ( ]/ budh-), 
dviksmahi  (j/W/-),  asrksmahi  {Ys.rj~i  TS.  1.  4.  453 *;  VS.  xx.  22). 

2.  astodhvam  (for  *d-stos-dhvam  from  ‘praise’). 

3.  akramsata  (AV.),  ddrksata  (Y drs-),  ddhuksata  (Y duh-),  ddhilrsata 9 
{dhvr-  ‘injure’),  adhusata,  anusata ,  anesata  (Y nT-),  dbhutsata  {Ybudh-), 
amamsata  (  ]/ man-),  amatsata  (  )/ mad-),  ayamsata  (Y);am-),  ayuksata  {Yyuj-), 
drains  at  a  (AV.),  drasata ,  alipsata,  dviksata  (]/VA-),  avrtsata  ( j/Vr/-),  avrsata 
{vr-  ‘choose’,  AV.111.35),  asaksata  {sac-  ‘accompany’),  asrksata  {Y sVj~)> 
dstosata,  ahasata,  ahusata  {hu-  ‘call’),  ahrsata  ( ]////'-),  ahesata  {Y  hi-). 


5-  Aorist  Subjunctive. 

523.  This  mood  is  quite  common  in  the  RV.,  but  decidedly  less  so 
in  the  other  Samhitas.  Its  forms  are,  however,  frequent  only  in  the  active, 
in  which  all  persons  are  represented  except  the  1.  du.  The  middle  is  much 
less  common,  about  20  forms  occurring  altogether;  only  one  of  these  is 

found  in  the  dual,  and  two  in  the  plural.  The  root  regularly  takes  Guna 
throughout  before  the  tense  sign10,  in  the  middle  as  well  as  the  active.  The 
primary  endings  are  frequent,  being  used  almost  exclusively 11  in  the  du.  and 
the  2.  pi. 

In  the  middle  3.  sing,  and  pi.  the  exceptional  ending  -tai  occurs  in  two 
forms  in  later  Samhitas  (AV.  TS.). 

Active.  Sing.  1.  stosani.  —  2.  darsasi  {dr-  ‘split’);  jesas  (]//V-), 

vdksas  ( Y "a ah-).  —  3.  nesati  { ]/ nI-{,  parsati  {pr-  ‘take  across’),  pasati 

(‘protect’),  matsati  ( ]/ mad-),  yosati  {yu-  ‘separate’),  vaksati  (j fvah-),  sak- 
sati  ( ]/ sah-,  AV.);  dksat  {as-  ‘attain’,  x.  117),  ksesat  {ksi-  ‘dwell’), 

chant  sat  ( ]/ chand-),  jesat  ( Y A\),  ddrsat  {dr-  ‘split’),  dasat  {da-  ‘give’),  drasat 


1  Emendation  for  dsrastram  of  the  Mss., 
AV.  iv.  284;  see  Whitney’s  note. 

2  For  * acchant-s-tci. 

3  Avery  257  adds  the  form  avesan,  which 

occurs  twice  in  the  RV.,  regarding  it  doubt¬ 

less  as  an  s-  aorist  of  It  would  as  such 

have  the  double  anomaly  of  absence  of 

Vrddhi  and  the  ending  -an.  It  is  probably 

3.  pi.  impf.  of  \vis-  in  both  passages  (1. 1702; 

X.  I141).  Grassmann  in  X.  1141  regards  it 

as  aorist  of  \vT-. 


4  Cp.  v.  Negelein  834. 

5  With  anomalous  long  vowel. 

6  See  Whitney’s  note  on  AV.  vi.  302. 

7  For  * d-tap-s-thas. 

8  With  loss  of  the  radical  nasal  {a  taking 
the  place  of  the  sonant  nasal). 

9  With  interchange  of  the  radical  vowel 
and  semivowel:  see  50,  b. 

i°  The  a  of  sah  is  lengthened  in  the  forms 
saksdma  and  saksate. 

11  Excepting  only  the  3.  du.  act.  yaksatdm. 


380  I.  Aligemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

(. drd -  ‘run’),  naksat  ( nas -  ‘reach’),  nesat  ( pdksat  (  ]/ pac-),  pdrsat  (‘take 
across’),  presat  (yprl-),  bhaksat  (  ]/ bhaj-),  bharsat  (  \fb/ir-),  matsat  (  Y mad •), 
ydmsat  ( y yam -),  ydksat  (j dyaj-),  yds  at ,  yosat  (yu-  ‘separate’),  rdsat ,  vdmsat 
(]  van-),  vdksat  (}/vah-),  valsat  (Kh.  v.  i5t6),  ve'sat1  (} fvl-)2,  saksat  (sac- 
‘accompany’3  and  sa/i-  ‘overcome’4),  satsat  ( Y  sad-),  sarsat  (\Psr-,  AV.), 
stosat,  sraksat  (  Y srj-,  VS.  xxi.  46). 

Du.  2.  ddsathas ,  dhasathas ,  parsathas  (pr-  ‘take  across’),  vdksathas 
(Y"vah-,  AV.),  varsathas  (vr-  ‘cover’). 

3.  pdscitas  (‘protect’),  yamsatas  (Yj’a;n~)>  yaksatas  (Vycij-),  yosat  as  (yu- 
‘separate’,  AV.),  vaksatas  ( ]/ vah-).  —  With  -tam:  yaksatam  (YyaJ~)- 

PI.  1.  jdsama  (]///-),  vdmsama  (  ]/ 7,’ an-),  s&ksdmci 5  ( jAy <?//-),  stosdma. — 

2.  dhasatha ,  nes  at  ha ,  parsatha  (‘take  across’),  vidtsatha .  —  3.  parsan  (‘take 

across’),  yamsan  (| /yarn-),  rdsa/i,  vdksan ,  (/f-  ‘lie’). 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  namsai,  mdmsai  (Y man-).  —  2.  drksase 6,  prksase 6 
(VPfc~)>  1 namsase  (Yinan~)-  —  3*  kramsate ,  trasate ,  darsate  (dr-  ‘split’), 
mamsate  (Y man-),  yamsate  (  iAv^ot-),  yaksate  ( YyaJ~)t  rasate,  vamsate  ( ]/" van-), 
saksate 5  (]A^-)7.  —  With  ending  -fa/:  mdsatai  (AV.). 

Du.  2.  trdsathe  (for  *trdsaithe).  —  PI.  3.  ndmsante  ( }/ nam-),  mdmsante 
(Y  man-).  —  With  ending  -fa/:  mains  at ai 8  (TS.  vn.  4.  151). 

5-  Aorist  Injunctive. 

524.  Injunctive  forms  are  of  fairly  common  occurrence,  especially  after 
md.  Judged  by  the  extremely  few  accented  forms  occurring,  the  accent  was 
on  the  radical  syllable.  All  the  forms  occurring  in  the  1.  sing.  act.  are  irregular 
in  one  way  or  another:  nearly  all  of  them  take  Guna  instead  ofVrddhi,  while 
yusam  (AV.)  only  lengthens  the  radical  vowel  (yu-  ‘separate’).  Three  first 
persons  from  roots  in  -a  substitute  <?9  for  that  vowel,  as  yes  am  from  yd-  ‘go’; 
the  same  substitution  takes  place  in  the  i.pl.  gesma  (AV.),  desma  (VS.),  and 

3.  pi.  sthesur  (AV.). 

Active.  Sing.  1.  jesam'10  (]/;'/-,  VS.  ix.  13  etc.),  yusam  (yu-  ‘separate’, 
AV.),  stosam10;  from  roots  ending  in  -a:  gesam  (gd-  ‘go’,  VS.  v.  5),  yesam 
(yd-  ‘go’),  sthesam 9  (sthd-  ‘stand’,  VS.  11.  8). 

2.  jes 10 ;  bhdk  ( ]/  bZiaj-),  ydt  (Yyaj~)>  }'aus  C yu~  ‘separate’),  hvdr  (  Y  Zivar-, 
VS.  1.  2).  —  With  connecting  -T-:  basis  (Kh.  iv.  85;  AA.  11.  7). 

3.  dhak  ( dah-),  bhdk  (  Y bhaj-),  bhar  (  Y dhr-),  mauk  (  Y muc-,  VS.  1.  25), 
has 11  (ha-  ‘leave’).  —  With  connecting  -T-:  tdpslt  (VS.  xiii.  30),  vdksit 
(Yvdh-,  AV.),  haslt  (TS.  vn.  3.  131;  AV.),  hvdrsit  (Y hvar-,  VS.  1.  2). 

Du.  2.  tdptam  ( ]/* tap-,  VS.  v.  33),  yaustam  (yu-  ‘separate’),  srdstam 

( Ysrj-,  av  ). 


1  As  appearing  in  immediate  juxtaposition 
with  presat  (I.  1806),  this  form  appears  to  be 
an  aorist  subjunctive  of  vi-,  not  a  present 
injunctive  of  \/vis-  (ye sail). 

2  Avery  258  gives  sisat,  among  these 
forms,  as  occurring  once.  He  doubtless 
means  ni-sisat  (iv.  2 ')  which  occurs  beside 
the  subjunctives  bharat  and  udTrat.  But  it 
cannot  be  an  s-  aorist  (which  would  be 
siksat).  Whitney,  Roots,  takes  it  as  an  a- 
aorist  of  sis-  ‘leave’,  Grassmann,  W’orter- 
buch  1392,  as  an  aorist  of  sas-.  Cp.  above  510. 

3  In  I.  12910  (‘accompany’). 

4  In  V.  306  (‘conquer’). 

5  With  lengthened  radical  vowel. 


6  Weak  radical  vowel  instead  of  Guna. 

7  Avery  258  adds  Zidsate,  also  Whitney, 
Grammar  S93  a;  but  this  form  is  doubtless 
a  3.  sing.  mid.  pres,  of  has •  ‘hasten’,  a  secon¬ 
dary  form  of  ha-  ‘leave’  according  to  the  a- 
class;  also  hasante  (AV.  iv.  36s).  Cp.  p.321, 
note  7. 

8  See  Weber’s  ed.  of  the  TS.,  p.310,15, 
note  I2. 

9  Made  perhaps  from  an  i-  form  of  roots 
ending  in  -a.  Cp.  Whitney,  Grammar  S94  c. 

10  Formed  perhaps  under  the  influence  of 
the  subjunctives  jesat  and  stosat. 

r*  Unnecessarily  regarded  by  Delbruck, 
Verbum  p.  60  (80)  as  from  hr-  ‘take’. 


VII.  Verb.  Aorist  System.  381 

PI.  1.  yausma  ( yu -  ‘separate’,  VS.1v.22).  —  With  Guna  only:  gesma  1 
(ga-  ‘go’,  AV.),  jesma  (]/>'/-),  desma 1  (da-  ‘give’,  VS.  11.  32).  —  2.  naista 
(Ymj,  yausta  (] /yu-  ‘separate’,  AV.),  sdpta 2  (TS.  nr.  3.  91).  —  3.  jaisur 
(l /)'/-,  AV.),  dhasur ,  yausur  (yu-  ‘separate’),  sthesur1  (AV.  xvi.  47),  hisur. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  ‘sing’),  nij -,  AV.),  patsi  ( [T /tea7-,  AV.), 

bhaksi  (  ybhaj -,  vn.  41 2),  (wf-  ‘diminish’,  AV.),  yamsi  (] fyam-),  yaksi 

(  YyaJ~)i  vdmsi  ( j/zvz/z-),  zrAV  (  ]/ 7.77-). 

2.  cyosthds  (  pTy?/-),  chitthds  (Y chid-,  AV.),  patthas  (  Y pad-,  AV.),  bhitthds 
(TS.  iv.  1.  92),  mamsthas  (Yman-,  AV.;  VS.  xm.  41),  mesthas  ( ]/ 'mi-,  AV.), 
ramsthas  ( }/ram-,  AV.),  hdsthas  (/id-  ‘go  forth’,  AV.). 

3.  ksesta  (^/-‘destroy’,  AV.),  nesta  (  Ynl -,  AV.),  pasta  (pa-  ‘drink’,  AV.), 
mamsta  ( Y man -,  AV.),  mamsta  6  ( j/” man-,  AV.  xi.  28),  mesta  (mi-  ‘fail’,  AV.), 

(/$#-  ‘be  left’,  AV.). 

Du.  2.  srksatham  (Ystj->  VS.  xix.  7). 

PI.  1.  yutsmahi 3  ( AV.),  hasmahi  (/id-  ‘be  deprived  of’). 

3.  dhuksata  (Y du/i-),  niisata,  matsata  (Ymad-),  muksata  (Ymuc-), 
saksata  (Y sac-  ‘accompany’). 

5-  Aorist  Optative. 

525.  This  mood  occurs  in  the  middle  only  in  this  form  of  the  sigmatic 
aorist.  The  2.  3.  sing,  always  appears  with  the  precative  s  excepting 
the  one  form  bhaksita  in  the  SV.  (1.  1.  2.  42). 

Sing.  1.  disiya *  (da-  ‘cut’),  bhaksiya  (Ybhaj-),  masiya  5  (y  man-),  mukslya, 
rdsTya ,  sdkslyab  (Ysah-,  AV.),  strsjya  (j  sir-,  AV.) 

2.  mamsisthds  (yfmanj.  —  3.  darsista  (dr-  ‘tear’),  bhaksita  (SV.), 

mamsTsta  (j.  man-),  mrksista  (mrc-  ‘injure’). 

Du.  2.  trCisTthdvi  (for  * tras-lydthdm ). 

PI.  1.  dhuksTmdhi  (j/ duh-,  TS.  1.  6.  43),  bhaksimdhi  (Ybhaj-),  mamsTtndhi 
jj man-),  vamsimahi  and  vasimahi 5  (|/V<2//-,  ix.  72s),  sakslmahi  (' Ysac -).  — 
3.  mamsJrata. 

s-  Aorist  Imperative. 

526.  No  certain  regular  forms  of  the  imperative  occur  in  the  active. 
Two  or  three,  such  as yaustam,  naista,  might  have  been  classed  here,  but  as 
they  occur  with  md  only,  they  have  been  placed  among  the  injunctives.  There 
are,  however,  the  two  transfer  forms  in  the  2.  sing,  nesa  (Y hi-,  AV.)  and 
parsa  (pr-  ‘take  across’)7.  The  only  forms  of  the  imperative  occurring  in 
the  middle  are  three  made  from  rd-  ‘give’  and  one  from  sah-  ‘conquer’. 

Middle.  Sing.  2.  sdksva.  —  3.  rdsatdm.  —  Du.  2.  rdsdthdm.  —  PI.  3. 
rasantdm. 

s-  Aorist  Participle. 

527.  Only  two  or  three  forms  of  the  active  participle  are  found.  These 
are  daksant-  and  dhaksant-  from  dah-  ‘burn’,  and  sdksant-  from  sah-  ‘prevail’. 
In  the  middle  there  are  no  regular  forms.  There  is  one  doubtful  example 
in  which  the  stem  is  extended  with  -a-  and  accordingly  adds  the  suffix  -mdna, 
as  in  the  a-  conjugation:  dhi-s-a-mana-  (dhi-  ‘think’). 

There  are,  besides,  a  dozen  stems  irregularly  formed  by  adding  s  to  the 
root  with  an  intermediate  -a-,  and  taking  the  regular  ending  -ana.  These  forms 


1  See  p.  380,  note  9. 

2  For  sap-s-ta. 

3  A  somewhat  doubtful  reading :  see 
Whitney’s  note  on  AV.  vii.  522. 

4  With  the  radical  a  weakened  to  i. 


5  Root  weakened  by  loss  of  nasal  ( a  taking 
the  place  of  the  sonant  nasal). 

6  With  irregular  lengthening  of  the  radical 
vowel. 

7  See  Whitney,  AV.  Index  Verborum  382. 


382  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

may  be  accounted  as  belonging  to  the  s-  aorist.  All  but  two  of  them  occur 
in  the  RV.  They  are:  arsasand-  ‘injuring’,  ohasdna-  (jduh-)  ‘lying  in  wait’, 
jrayasand-  ( Vj'ri -)  ‘far-extending’,  dhiyasana-  (y  d/iT-)  ‘attending’,  namasdnd- 
(Y nam-)  ‘rendering  homage’  (AY.),  bhiydsdna-  (Y bZii-)  ‘fearing’ (A V.),  mandasand- 
(' Y?na?id '-)  ‘rejoicing’,  yamasana-  (] fyarn-')  ‘being  driven’  (with  passive  sense), 
rabhasdnd-  ( Yrabh -)  ‘agile’,  vrdhasand-  i^fvrdh-')  ‘growing’,  savasdnd-  (Y su-) 
‘strong’,  sahasdna-  (]/ sah-)  ‘mighty’. 


A.  2.  The  /s-  Aorist. 

Delbruck,  Verbum  p.  179—180.  —  Avery,  Verb-Inflection  259—261.  —  Whitney, 
Sanskrit  Grammar  898 — 910;  Roots  226 — 227;  AV.  Index  Verborum  3S0.  —  v.  Negelein, 
Zur  Sprachgeschichte  85 — 86. 

528.  About  So  roots  take  this  form  of  the  sigmatic  aorist  in  the  RV. 
and  about  a  dozen  others  in  the  AV. 

The  -s  is  here  added  to  the  root  with  the  connecting  vowel  The 

radical  vowel  as  a  general  rule  takes  Guna  throughout;  but  in  the  active 
a  final  vowel  takes  Vrddhi  and  a  medial  -a  is  sometimes  lengthened.  No 
roots  with  final  -d  and  few  with  final  -1  take  this  aorist.  The  terminations  are 
the  same  as  those  of  the  s-  aorist,  excepting  that  the  2.  and  3.  sing.  act.  end 
in  -is  (=  is-s)  and  -it  (=  is-t).  Active  and  middle  forms,  though  frequent, 
are  rarely  both  made  from  the  same  root,  occurring  thus  in  about  fifteen 
verbs  only.  This  is  the  only  aorist  from  which  a  few  forms  are  made  in  the 
secondary  conjugation  h 

Besides  the  indicative,  all  the  moods  are  represented  in  this  aorist,  but 
no  participial  forms  have  been  met  with. 

Indicative. 

52g.  In  the  active  all  persons  are  represented  except  du.  1.2.  and  pi.  2.; 
but  in  the  middle  only  sing.  2.  and  3.  occur  besides  a  single  form  of  sing.  1 
(Kh.),  du.  3.  and  pi.  3.  (VS.). 

a.  A  few  irregularities  occur  in  the  formation  of  this  tense1 2.  1.  The 
forms  atdrima  (beside  the  normal  dtdrisma )  and  avddiran 3  (AV.),  are  probably 
to  be  regarded  as  irregular  forms  with  abnormal  loss  of  the  aoristic  -s.  — 
2.  The  root  grabh-  ‘seize’  takes  the  connecting  vowel  T  3  (as  it  does  in  other 
verbal  forms)  instead  of  -i-,  as  agrabhJsma.  —  3.  In  the  sing.  1.  act.,  the 

ending  -Tm  appears  instead  of  -isam  in  the  three  forms  dkratnim ,  vdd/ilm, 
and  agrabhlm  (TS.),  doubtless  owing  to  the  analogy  of  the  2.  and  3.  sing.  -Is 
and  -f/4.  —  4.  The  abnormal  ending  -ait  appears  in  the  3.  sing,  in  dsarait 5 
(AV.)  beside  asarlt  (AV.)6. 

The  normal  forms  occurring,  if  made  from  kram-  ‘stride’,  would  be  as 
follows: 

Active.  Sing.  1.  akramisam.  2.  akramls.  3.  akramlt.  —  Du.  3.  akra- 
mistam.  —  PI.  1.  dkramistna.  3.  akramisur. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  dkramisi  (Kh.).  2.  akramisthas.  3.  dkramista. —  Du.  3. 
akramisdtdm.  —  PI.  3.  dkramisata  (VS.). 

The  forms  which  actually  occur  are  the  following: 


1  From  causatives  dhvanaylt,  ailaylt  (]///-, 
AV.),  from  a  desiderative  TrisTs  ( \rdh AV.). 

2  The  weak  form  of  the  root  appears  in 
the  injunctive  nudisthas  (AV.)  and  the  opta¬ 
tive  rucisiya  (AV.)  and  gmisTya  (VS.),  which 
syncopates  the  radical  vowel  as  in  the  root 
aor.  and  the  perfect  of  this  verb. 

3  Cp.  Whitney  904  d. 


4  Cp.  Delbruck,  Verbum  p.  18S. 

5  This  abnormal  ending  also  occurs  in 
the  secondary  conjugation  in  the  denomi¬ 
native  aor.  dsaparyait .):  see  below  57°* 

6  Both  these  forms  also  show  the  irregu¬ 
larity  of  taking  Guna  instead  of  Vrddhi. 


VII.  Verb.  Aorist  System, 


Active.  Sing.  i.  akanisam ,  akdrisam ,  akramisam,  acayisam  (AV.), 
acdrisatn ,  abharisam  (yb/ir-,  AV.),  avadhisam  (AV.),  avadisam  (AV.),  as'am- 
sisam ,  asanisam ;  dsisam  (as-  ‘eat’,  AV.);  ravisam.  —  With  ending  -//n: 
akramTm,  agrabhlm  (TS.);  vadhlm. 

2.  afo'amTs,  adrmhls  (VS.  vi.  2),  dvad/us,  avarsis T,  astaris  (]/ t/t-,  AV.); 
<2/141  2  (<2/-  ‘eat’,  AV.),  auksis  (uks-  ‘grow’);  kramis ,  vddhis. 

3.  akdrlt ,  dkramlt ,  dgrabhlt ,  dgraklt  ( AV.),  dtarlt ,  adrmhit  (MS.  iv.  138), 
anayit 2  (\f  nl-,  AV.),  dmandlt,  ay  as  it,  dyod/ut ,  aravit,  dvadZut ,  dvarsit  (]/  z/77-, 
AV.),  asamslt,  asarit 3  (AV.),  asavit ,  astanit  (AV.),  dsvanlt ;  <2^/,  <2/1?  (<2/- 
‘eat’,  AV.);  jdrvit  (jurv-  ‘consume’),  tarlt,  vddhit.  —  With  ending  -a/Y: 
asarait 4  (AV.). 

Du.  3.  dmanthistam ;  janistam. 

Pl.  1.  agrabhisma,  atarisma  and  atarima 5,  dvadhisma  (VS.  ix.  38). 

3.  ataksisur,  atari sur,  adhanvisur ,  dnartisur,  dnindisur ,  apavisur,  dman- 
disur ,  amadisur ,  arajisur,  aranisur  (ran-  ‘rejoice’),  dravisur ,  avadisur ,  asdvisur ; 
dksisur0  (1.  16310),  anisur  (\dan-,  AV.,  TS.),  dvisur  (Yav-).  —  With  -ra/?: 
avcidiran  (AV.). 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  aiksisi  (Kh.  1.  i1:  j/f&s--).  —  2.  ajanisthds  (AV.), 
asamisthas  (sam-  ‘labour’),  asayisthds ,  asramisthds ;  jdnisthas. 

3.  akrapista  ( Ykrp -),  ajanista ,  adhavista,  anavista ,  aprathista ,  arocista 
(VS.  xxxvii.  1 5),  avasista  (vas-  ‘wear’),  asamista ,  dsahista ;  duhista  (uh-  ‘con¬ 
sider’);  krdmista ,  janista ,  prdthista,  mdfidista ,  yamista. 

Du.  3.  dmandisatam.  —  Pl.  3.  dgrbhjsata  (VS.  xxi.  60). 

/s-  Aorist  Subjunctive. 

530.  Active  forms  of  this  mood  are  fairly  common,  but  are  almost 
exclusively  limited  to  the  2.  and  3.  sing.  Middle  forms  are  very  rare,  occurring 
only  in  the  pl.,  where  not  more  than  four  examples  have  been  noted. 

Active.  Sing.  1.  davisdni 7.  —  2.  avisas ,  kdnisas ,  tdrisas ,  raksisas , 
vddhisas ,  vddisas  (AV.),  vesisas ,  samsisas. 

3.  kdrisat ,  jamb  his  at,  josisat ,  tdrisat,  nindisat  (AV.),  paris  at  (‘take 
across’),  bddhisat,  mardhisat,  yacisat ,  yodhisat,  raksisat,  vanisat  (A V.),  vyathisat 
(VS.  vi.  18),  samsisat  (TS.  v.  6.  86),  sanisat ,  sdvisaY  (su-  ‘vivify’). 

PL  3.  sanisan 9  (AV.  v.  3s). 

Middle.  PL  1.  yacisdmahe ,  sanisamahe .  —  3.  vanisanta 10  (TS.  iv.  7.  141), 
sanisanta. 

is-  Aorist  Injunctive. 

531.  Forms  of  the  injunctive  are  commoner  than  those  of  the  subjunctive. 
In  the  active  they  are  found  almost  exclusively  in  the  2.  3.  sing.,  2.  du.  and 
2.  3.  pl. ;  in  the  middle  nearly  a  dozen  forms  occur,  all  but  one  in  the  sing. 

The  forms  of  this  mood  have  the  accent  on  the  root  (as  in  the  un¬ 
augmented  indicative). 

Active.  Sing.  1.  sdmsisam ,  himsisam  (VS.  1.  2  5). 


1  Avery  259  adds  avarhis  as  occurring  once. 

2  See  Whitney’s  note  on  AV.  xi.  326. 

3  With  Guna  instead  of  Vrddhi  of  final 
vowel;  cp.  Bartholomae,  Studien  2,  165. 

4  See  Whitney’s  note  on  AV.  vi.  662, 
where  the  reading  asarit  is  better  supported; 
cp.  his  note  on  AV.  VI.  651. 

5  With  loss  of  the  aoristic  -j. 

6  From  <%£.r-  ‘attain’  (Whitney,  Roots  1) 

a  secondary  form  of  jAzi-;  otherwise  a  Ar- 

aorist  from  ai-  ‘attain’. 


7  Cp.  V.  ScHROEDER,  WZKM.  1 3,  I  19 — 122. 

8  This  form  occurs  also  in  two  passages 
of  the  AV. ;  in  a  third  (AV.  I.  l82)  savisak 
appears  instead  of  it.  Cp.  Whitney’s  note 
on  this  passage,  and  his  Grammar  151  a. 

9  The  corresponding  passage  of  the  RV. 
(x.  1 28 3)  has  vanusanta ,  and  of  the  TS. 
(IV.  7.  141)  vanisanta. 

10  See  preceding  note. 


384  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

2.  avis,  kramis  (AY.),  jlvTs  (AV.),  bar/us,  matins,  mard/us,  tnosis , 

ydvls,  yod/us,  raksTs  (AY.),  randhts ,  lekhis  (VS.v.  43),  vddfus ,  Arcs-  (YS.xi.  45), 
.jviz/14,  spharTs,  himsTs  (VS.  AV.).  —  With  -a/s:  s'arais  (]GV-,  AV.). 

3.  a/f/  (a/-  ‘eat’),  garit  (gr-  ‘swallow’),  car  it,  jlvit  (AV.),  tarit,  daslt  (das- 
hvaste’),  bar  hit,  mathit,  vadhlt  (TS.  iv.  2.  91;  VS.  xm.  16),  zw'f/,  svanlt,  himsTt. 

Du.  2.  t dr  is  t  am,  mardhistam,  himsistam  (AV.  VS.). 

PI.  1.  sramisma. —  2.  grab  hist  a,  vadhista,  himsista  (AV.  TS.);  mathistana 
(AV.),  ranistana  (]/  ran-),  vadhistana.  —  3.  jarisur  ( jr -  ‘waste  away’),  jivisur 
(AV.),  tarisur 1  (AV.),  vadhisur  (AV.),  vadisur  (AV.),  himsisur  (AV.). 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  rddhisi  (AV.).  —  2.  ksanisthas2  (AV.),  nudist  has 3 

(AV.),  marsisthds  (]Pmrs-),  vadhisthas  (Kh.  11.  113),  vyathisthds  (AV.).  — 
3.  panista,  pavista ,  badhista .  —  PI.  1.  vyathismahi  (AV.). 

/s-  Aorist  Optative. 

532.  This  mood  is  rare,  occurring  in  the  middle  only  and  being  formed 
from  hardly  a  dozen  roots.  Though  the  ending  is  accented,  the  root  appears 
in  a  weak  form  in  gmisTya 4 5  (VS.)  and  rucisTya  (AV.).  The  2.  and  3.  sing, 
take  the  precative  -s-. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  edhisjyd  (AV.),  gmisTya 3  (VS.  nr.  19 ),  janisTy a  (AV.)5, 
rucisTya 3  (AV.).  —  2.  modisTsthas  (AV.).  —  3.  janisista,  vanisjsta. 

Du.  1.  sahislvahi  (AV.).  —  PI.  1.  edhisTmdhi  (AV.),  tarisTmahi,  mandisT- 
mahi  (VS.iv.  14;  TS.i.  2. 31  etc.),  vandisimahi,  vardhisimdhi  (VS.ii.i4,xxxvm.  2 1), 
sahisimahi  (AV.),  sahisimahi  (Pada  text  sahislmahi). 

is -  Aorist  Imperative. 

533.  Forms  of  this  mood  are  rare,  occurring  in  the  active  only  and 
being  made  from  six  or  seven  roots  at  the  most.  Among  these  forms,  two 
only  are  distinctively  imperative,  aviddhi  and  avistu ;  a  few  others  can  be 
distinguished  by  having  the  accent  on  the  ending;  the  rest,  being  unaccented 
and  used  without  md,  cannot  be  distinguished  from  injunctives. 

Sing.  2.  aviddhi.  —  3.  avistu.  —  Du.  1.  avistdm,  kramistam ,  gamistam, 
canistdm,  cayistam  (ci-  ‘gather’),  yodhistam  (] fyudh-),  vadhistam ,  snathistam.  — 
3.  avistdm.  —  PI.  2.  avitd 6 ;  avistdna,  snathistana. 


A.  3.  The  sis-  Aorist. 

Delbruck,  Verbum  p.  179.  —  Avery,  Verb-Inflection  261.  —  Whitney,  Sanskrit 
Grammar  91 1 — 916;  Roots  227.  —  v.  Negelein,  Zur  Sprachgeschichte  86. 

534.  This  aorist,  which  is  inflected  exactly  like  the  is-  aorist,  is  formed 
by  only  six  or  seven  roots  in  the  Samhitas.  Middle  forms  occur  in  the 
optative  only. 

Indicative. 

Sing.  1.  ayasisam.  —  Du.  3.  ayasistam  (VS.  xxvm.  14).  —  PL  2.  ayd- 
sista.  —  3.  agdsisur  ( gd -  ‘sing’),  aydsisur1. 

Subjunctive. 

Sing.  3.  gasisat  ( ga -  ‘sing’),  y  a  sis  at. 


1  With  accent  on  the  ending  instead  of 
the  root. 

2  Cp.  Brugmann,  KZ.  24,  363  f. 

3  With  weak  form  of  root. 

4  Cp.  Zimmer,  KZ.  30,  222. 

5  The  Kathaka  has  the  forms  janiseyam 

and  jamseya  made  from  a  secondary  - a -  stem 
(Whitney  907). 


6  This  may  be  regarded  as  a  form  irregu¬ 
larly  lacking  s  =  avistci. 

7  aksisur  is  formed  from  as-  ‘attain’,  accord¬ 
ing  to  Delbruck,  Verbum  p.  179;  according 
to  Whitney,  Sanskrit  Grammar  913,  and 
Roots  1,  from  the  secondary  root  a ks- ;  see 
above  p.  383,  note  6. 


VII.  Verb.  Aorist  System.  385 

Optative. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  vamsisTya 1  {van-  ‘win’,  AV.).  —  2.  yasislsthds2 3.  — 
PI.  i.  pyasisimahi 8  (AV.;  VS.  11.  14;  MS.  iv.  910  [p.  181,  9]). 

Injunctive. 

Sing.  1.  ramsisam 4  (SV.i.  4. 1. 2s).  —  Du.  2.  hasistam  (AV.). —  3.  hasistam 
(AV.).  —  PI.  2.  hasista  (AV.).  —  3.  hasisur  (AV.). 

Imperative. 

Du.  2.  yasistam.  —  PI.  2.  yasista 5  (r.  1 6 5 1 5) . 

B.  The  sa-  Aorist. 

Delbruck,  Verbum  p.  179.  —  Avery,  Verb-Inflection  262.  —  Whitney,  Sanskrit 
Grammar  916 — 920;  Roots  227.  —  v.  Negelein,  Zur  Sprachgeschichte  86. 

535.  In  the  Samhitas  this  form  of  the  sigmatic  aorist  is  taken  by  only 
nine  roots,  which  end  in  j  s'  s  or  h  and  contain  the  medial  vowels  i  u  or  r. 
The  thematic  a  doubtless  came  to  be  employed  in  these  few  verbs  to  avoid 
a  difficult  agglomeration  of  consonants  when  the  endings  were  added.  The 
inflexion  is  like  that  of  an  imperfect  of  the  d-  class  of  the  first  conjugation, 
the  -sd-  being  accented6 *  in  unaugmented  forms.  Besides  the  indicative,  only 
forms  of  the  injunctive  and  imperative  occur,  altogether  fewer  than  a  dozen. 
No  subjunctive,  optative,  or  participial  forms  have  been  noted. 

Indicative. 

536.  Neither  forms  of  any  person  of  the  dual  nor  of  the  2.  pi.  occur  in 
the  indicative  of  this  type  of  the  s-  aorist.  The  active  forms  greatly  pre¬ 
dominate,  the  middle  being  represented  in  the  3.  sing,  and  pi.  by  only  three 
or  four  forms  altogether. 

Active.  Sing.  1.  avrksam  (]Pvrh~).  —  2.  adhuksas  ( yduh-,  VS.  1.  3), 
aruksas  {\ruh-,  AV.);  ruksas  (y  ruh-,  AV.). —  3.  dkruksat  ( | r kr us- ) ,  aghuksat 
(l ^guhj,  aduksat  7  and  dd folks  at  (' yduh- ),  amrksat  (j/  mrs-,  AV.)  druksat 
( y ruh -),  dsprksat  (\f sprs-,  AV.;  VS.  xxvm.  18).  —  PI.  1.  amrksama  {\rmrj- 
Svipe’),  aruksama  ( y ruh- ,  AV.).  —  3.  ddhuksan  {y duh-) \  duksati 8  and 
dhuksdn  (y  duh-). 

Middle.  Sing.  3.  ddhuksata 9 ;  duksata 8  and  dhuksata.  —  PI.  3.  amrksanta 
(y  mrj-). 

Injunctive. 

Active.  Sing.  2.  duksas ,  mrksas  (yfmrs-).  —  3.  dviksat  (]/ dvis-,  AV.).  — 
PI.  2.  mrksata  {ymrs-). 

Middle.  Sing.  3.  duksata 8  and  dhuksata  {yduh-),  dviksata  (j/  avis-, 
AV.).  —  PI.  3.  dhuksdnta  (]/i duh-). 

Imperative. 

Active.  Du.  2.  mrksatam  {y mrj-).  —  3.  yaksatam  {\/yaj-). 

Middle.  Sing.  2.  dhuksasva  ( yduh-) . 


1  In  the  Mss.  varnsisTya ;  see  Whitney’s 

note  on  AV.  IX.  i>4. 

2  With  precative  j. 

3  In  the  Mss.  pyasisimahi ;  see  Whitney’s 
note  on  AV.  vii.  815. 

4  Variant  for  rasiya  of  the  RV. 

5  With  1  for  i.  Avery  261  gives  the  form 

as  yasista. 

Indo-arische  Philologie.  I.  4. 


6  Three  forms  occur  accented  thus;  the 
root  is,  however,  accented  in  dhuksata. 

7  See  above  32  b. 

8  See  above  32  b. 

9  In  ix.  1108  the  form  ddhuksata  seems 

to  be  a  3.  pi. 


386 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


IV.  The  Future  System. 

Delbruck,  Verbum  p.  183  — 184.  —  Avery,  Verb-Inflection  262.  — •  Whitney, 
Sanskrit  Grammar  931 — 941;  Roots  228  b;  AV.  Index  Verborum  380.  —  v.  Negelein, 
Zur  Sprachgeschichte  86 — S7. 

537.  The  stem  is  formed  by  adding  -syd 1  or  (rather  less  frequently 
with  connecting  -/-)  - isyd 1  to  the  root,  which  gunates  a  final  or  a  prosodi- 
cally  short  medial  vowel.  As  the  subjunctive  frequently  has  a  future  sense, 
and  even  the  present  indicative  may  have  it,  the  occasion  for  the  use  of 
actual  future  forms  seldom  arises  in  the  RV.,  which  forms  a  future  stem  from 
only  fifteen  roots,  while  the  AV.  does  so  from  more  than  thirty  (about  eight 
of  these  occurring  in  the  RV.  also)2.  There  is  only  one  subjunctive  and 
one  conditional  form,  but  some  twenty  participles  occur. 

a.  In  the  following  stems  the  suffix  -sya  is  added  direct:  ksi-  ‘abide’  : 
kse-sya- 3 4 ;  ji-  ‘conquer’  :  je-syd-]  dah-  ‘burn’  :  dhak-sya- ;  yaj-  ‘sacrifice’  \  yak- 
syd-;  vac -  ‘speak’  :  vak-syd- ;  su-  ‘bring  forth  :  sii-sya-*.  In  the  AV.  also  occur: 
i-  ‘go’  :  e-syd-]  krt-  ‘cut’  :  kart-sya-]  kram-  ‘stride’  :  kra?n-sya gup-  ‘protect’  : 
gap- sya- ;  da-  ‘give’  :  da- sya-]  m-  ‘lead’  :  ne-sya-]  mi/i-  ‘mingere’  :  mek-sya-5 6] 
yd-  ‘go’  : ya-sya-]  yuj-  ‘join’  : yok-sya-b;  radh-  ‘succeed’  :  rat- sya-]  va/i-  ‘carry’ 

:  vak-syd-]  vrt-  ‘turn’  :  -vart-sydi- 7 ;  sad-  ‘fall’  :  sat-sya-]  sah-  ‘prevail’  :  sdk-sya- 8 ; 
ha-  ‘leave’  :  hd-sya- ;  hu-  ‘sacrifice’ :  ho-syd-.  In  the  VS.  bandh-  ‘bind’  :  bhant-sya-. 

b.  In  the  following  stems  the  suffix  is  added  with  connecting 

av-  ‘favour’  :  av-isyd-9]  as-  ‘shoot’  :  as-isyd-]  kr-  ‘do’  :  kar-isyd-]  jan-  ‘beget’  : 
jan-isya-]  bhu-  ‘be’ :  bhav-isyd-]  man-  ‘think’ :  man-isyd-]  vd-  ‘weave’ :  v ay -isyd- 10 ; 
san-  ‘acquire’  :  san-isyd-]  sr-  ‘hasten’  :  sar-isyd-]  stu-  ‘praise’  :  stav-isyd-.  From 
causative  stems :  ^/'-‘support’  :  dharay-isya-]  vas-  ‘clothe  oneself’ :  vasay-isyd-. 

The  AV.  has  the  following  additional  stems:  gam-  ‘go’  :  gam-isya-]  dhr- 
‘maintain’  :  dhar-isya-  ]  nas-  ‘disappear’  :  nas-isya-]  pat-  ‘fly’  :  pat- isyd- ]  mr-  ‘die’ 

:  mar-isya-]  vad-  ‘speak’  :  vad-isya-]  vrt-  ‘turn’ :  vart-isya- 1 1 ;  svap-  ‘sleep’ :  svap- 
2 syd- 12 ;  hail-  ‘slay’  :  han-isyd-.  From  causative  stems:  dus-  ‘spoil’  :  dusay- 
isya-  ]  vr-  ‘cover’  :  vdray-isya-  ‘shield’. 

538.  a.  Subjunctive.  The  only  subjunctive  form  occurring  is  kar-isyd{-s) 
in  iv.  3023. 13 

b.  Conditional.  The  only  example  occurring  is  formed  from  bhr-  ‘bear’ 
:  a-bhar-isya-t  ‘he  was  going  to  bear  off’  (11.  3o2). 

c.  Participles.  A  good  many  participial  forms  occur.  The  following 
stems  are  met  with: 

Active,  av-isydnt -H}  as-isydnt-,  e-sydnt-(KV .)  IS,  kar-isydnt-,  kse-syant-,  khan- 
isyant-  (TS.),  je-sydnt -l6  (AV.),  da-sydnt-  (AV.),  dhak-sydnt-,  pat-isydnt-  (AV.), 


1  On  the  origin  of  this  suffix  see  Brug-  j 
MANN,  Grundriss  2,  747  (p.  1092),  who  con- 
nects  the  -isya  form  with  the  is-  aorist;  and  | 
v.  Negelein,  Zur  Sprachgeschichte  86. 

2  According  to  Whitney  937  the  future 
is  formed  from  over  60  roots  in  the  TS.  but 
I  am  uncertain  how  many  of  these  occur 
in  independent  Mantra  passages. 

3  This  is  the  only  stem  in  which  -syd  is 
to  be  read  -sia  :  ksesiantas. 

4  This  stem  has  the  double  irregularity 
of  accenting  the  root  and  not  taking  Guna: 
cp.  the  perfect  sasiiva. 

5  The  Mss.  read  meksami  in  AV.  vii. 
1021 :  cp.  Whitney’s  note. 

6  Doubtful  reading  see  note  3  p.387  on yoksye. 


7  See  Whitney’s  note  on  AV.  xv.  67. 

8  An  emendation  :  see  note  on  sdksyc. 

9  Cp.  Delbruck,  Verbum  p.  184. 

10  Op.  cit.  p.  183. 

11  In  the  form  anvartisye  for  amt-vartisye ; 
see  p.  1 1,  18. 

12  See  Whitney’s  note  on  AV.  xix.  479. 
U  The  form  karifyd  (1.  1659)  is  probably  to 

be  explained  as  the  same  subjunctive 
(=  karisyds ):  cp.  BR.  sv,  bar  isya. 

1 4  Cp.  Delbruck,  Verbum  p.  183. 

J5  In  praisydn  (AV.  v.  22 r4),  Bp.  pra-esyan , 
but  Whitney  =  pra-isyan. 

16  In  AV.  xv.  201  nearly  all  the  Mss.  read 
Jyesyan  (as  if  from  \jyd-)  for  jesyan. 


VII.  Verb.  Future  System. 


387 


bZiar-isydnt-  (TS.),  bhav-isydnt -  (AV.  VS.),  ya-sydnt-  (AV.),  vac-  ‘speak’ :  vak-sydnt 
vay-isydnt -,  san-isyant-,  sar-isyant -,  sd-syant-,  Ziati-isyant-. 

Middle,  kramsya-mana-  (AV.),  janisya-mana-  (VS.xvm.  5),  yciksyd-mana -, 
stavisyd-?na?ia-  (AV.). 

Future  Indicative. 

539.  The  future  is  inflected,  in  both  active  and  middle,  like  the  present 
of  the  <7-  conjugation.  The  forms  actually  met  with  in  the  Samhitas  would, 
if  made  from  hr-  ‘do’,  be  the  following: 

Active.  Sing.  1.  karisydmi.  2.  karisydsi.  3.  karisydti.  —  Du.  2.  karisyathas 
(TS.).  3.  karisyatas  (AV.).  • —  PI.  1.  karisydmas  and  karisydmasi  (AV.).  2.  kar- 
isydtka.  3.  karisyanti  (AV.). 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  karisye.  2.  Zzarisyase.  3.  karisyate. 

The  forms  actually  occurring  are  the  following: 

Active.  Sing.  1.  esyami  (AV.),  karisydmi( AV.),  kartsyami  (AV.),  carisydmi 
(VS.  1.  5),  j esyami ,  bhantsydmi  ( \rbandfi -,  VS.  xxn.  4)1,  meksydmi2  (AV.), 
vaksydtni  (jdvac-),  stavisydmi. 

2.  karisydsi,  jesyasi  (VS.  xxm.  1 7),  bZiavisyasi  (AV.),  marisyasi  ( AV.),  rJA- 

(\Zrddh-,  AV.),  vaksyasi  (p  vac-,  TS.  n.  6. 1 25),  sanisyasi ,  Zianisyasi  (AV.). 

3.  karisyati ,  gamisyaii  (AV.),  nasisyati  (AV.),  nesyati  (AV.),  patisyati 
(AV.),  bhavisydti,  marisyati  (AV.),  vadisyati  (AV.),  sanisyati,  sthdsyati  (VS. 
vi.  2),  Zianisyati  (AV.). 

D  u.  2.  karisyathas  (TS.  iv.  1.  9*).  —  3.  7tiarisyatas  (AV.),  vaksyatas 

( \hvah- ,  AV.). 

PI.  1.  bharisydmas  (VS.  xi.  16),  vaksydmas  (| fvac-),  svapisydmasi  (AV.). 

2.  karisydtha ,  bhavisyatha ,  sarisyatha  (AV.). 

3.  gopsyanti  (]dgup-,  AV.),  satsyanti  (yrsad-,  AV.),  hasydnti  (y  ha-,  AV.). 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  dharisye  (AV.),  matiisye ,  (AV.),  vartisye 4  (AV.), 

saksye 5  (|/ JY7/F,  AV.).  —  2.  stavisyase.  —  3.  janisyate ,  stavisyate  (AV.). 

Periphrastic  Future. 

540.  Of  this  formation,  common  in  the  later  language,  there  seems  to  be  an 
incipient  example  in  VS.xvm.  59  =  TS.v.7.71:  anvdgantd  yajhdpatir  vo  dtra  ‘the 
sacrificer  is  following  after  you  here’,  a  modification  of  AV.vi.  I231-  2:  anvdgantd 
yajatnanaZi  svasti,  which  Whitney  translates  ‘the  sacrificer  follows  after  well- 
being’6. 

V.  Secondary  Conjugation. 

541.  As  opposed  to  the  primary  conjugation,  there  are  four  derivative 
formations  in  which  the  present  stem  is  used  throughout  the  inflexion  of 
the  verb  and  is  everywhere  accompanied  by  the  specific  sense  connected 
with  that  stem.  The  forms  which  occur  outside  the  present  system  are,  how¬ 
ever,  rare.  The  four  derivative  formations  are  the  desiderative,  the  intensive, 
the  causative,  and  the  denominative. 


1.  The  Desiderative. 

Delbruck,  Verbum  p.  184 — 186.  —  Avery,  Verb-Inflection  230,  268 — 270.  —  Whitney, 
Sanskrit  Grammar  1026  —  1040;  Roots  233!.  —  v.  Negelein,  Zur  Sprachgeschichte  88 — 90. 

542.  Though  the  least  frequent  of  the  secondary  conjugations,  the  desi¬ 
derative  is  perhaps  best  dealt  with  first,  as  being  akin  in  derivation  and 


1  In  AV.  ill.  95  Roth  and  Whitney’s 
edition  reads  bhartsyami\  but  Whitney,  note 
on  that  passage,  would  emend  this  to 
bhantsydmi  ( \/bandh -),  and  SHANKAR  Pandit 
reads  bhatsydmi. 

2  Whitney’s  emendation  for  meksatni  of 
the  Mss.;  see  his  note  on  AV.  VII.  1021. 


3  All  the  Mss.  in  AV.  XIX.  131  read  yokse 
(but  Paipp.  yoksye ). 

4  In  anvartisye  (AV.  XIV.  156)  given  under 
the  root  art •  by  Whitney,  AV.  Index  Ver- 
borum;  see  p.  386,  note 

5  The  Mss.  in  AV.  II.  275  read  sakse. 

6  Cp.  Whitney,  Sanskrit  Grammar  946. 


388 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


meaning  to  the  future x,  the  last  of  the  primary  verbal  formations  treated 
above  (537 — 540).  The  desiderative  is  formed  from  the  root  with  an  accented 
reduplicative  syllable  and  the  suffix  - sa ,  which  expresses  the  desire  for  the 
action  or  condition  denoted  by  the  root;  e.  g.  pd-  ‘drink*  :  pi-pd-sa-  ‘desire  to 
drink’.  Desiderative  stems  from  fewer  than  sixty  roots  are  met  with  in  the 
Samhitas. 

The  characteristic  reduplicative  vowel  is  /,  which  appears  in  all 
stems  except  those  formed  from  roots  containing  u  (which  reduplicate  with  u) ; 
and  the  root  generally  remains  unchanged.  Thus  jha-  ‘know’  :  ji-jud-sa-  (AV.) ; 
jya-  ‘overpower’  :  ji-jyd-sa -;  da-  ‘give’  :  di-da-sa- ;  pd-  ‘drink’  :  pi-pd-sa-)  tij-  ‘be 
sharp’  :  ti-tik-sa- ;  nid-  ‘blame’  :  ni-nit-sa bhid-  ‘split’  :  bi-bhit-sa- ;  mis-  ‘mix’  : 
mi-mik-sa-)  ris-  ‘hurt’  :  ri-rik-sa -;  nT-  ‘lead’  :  ni-m-sa-)  prT-  ‘love’  :  pi-prT-sa- ; 
guh-  ‘hide’  :  ju-guk-sa- 2 3 ;  duh-  ‘milk’  :  du-duk-sa-2 ;  muc-  ‘release’  :  mu-muk-sa-) 
yudh-  ‘fight’  :  yu-yut-sa-)  ruh-  ‘ascend’  :  ni-ruk-sa-)  bhu-  ‘be’  :  bii-bhu-s a- ;  trd- 
‘pierce’  :  ti-trt-sa- ;  trp-  ‘delight’  :  tl-trp-sa-)  drs-  ‘see’  :  di-drk-sa-)  vrt-  ‘turn’  : 
vi-vrt-sa s/p-  ‘creep’  :  si-srp-sa-. 

a.  A  few  desideratives  reduplicate  with  a  long  vowel:  iur-  (=  tr-) 
‘cross’  :  tfi-tur-sa badh-  ‘oppress’  :  bi-bhat-sa-)  man-  ‘think’  :  mT-mdm-sa-  (AV.) 
‘investigate’.  On  the  other  hand,  two  desideratives  abbreviate  the  reduplica¬ 
tive  syllable  by  dropping  its  consonant;  thus  yaj-  ‘sacrifice’  :  i-yak-sa-  for 
*yi-yak-sa-*\  nas-  ‘attain’ :  i-nak-sa -,  for *ni-nak-sa-,  perhaps  through  the  influence 
of  iyak-sa-\  and  the  RV.  has  one  desiderative  form  from  dp-  ‘obtain’  in  which 
the  reduplication  is  dropped  altogether:  ap-santa. 

b.  The  radical  vowel  is  lengthened  when  i,  z/,  or  r  is  final  (the 
latter  becoming  Tr))  thus  ci-  ‘see’  :  ci-kT-sa-\  ji-  ‘conquer’  :  jl-gT-sa-;  yu-  ‘unite’ 

:  yu-yu-sa- ;  sru-  ‘hear’  :  s/l-s'ru-sa-;  kr-  ‘make’  :  ci-kir-sa-  (AV.) ;  hr-  ‘take’  : 
ji-hir-sa-  (AV.);  dhvr-  ‘injure’  :  du  dhur-sa-  with  u  because  vowel  and  semi¬ 
vowel  have  interchanged4. 

a.  A  few  roots  with  medial  a  followed  by  n  or  m  lengthen  the 
vowel;  thus  man-  ‘think’  :  mT-mdm-sa-  (AV.) ;  han-  ‘smite’  :  ji-gham-sa -;  gam- 
‘go’  :  ji-gdm-sa-  (AV.);  two  others  do  so  after  dropping  the  nasal,  viz.  va?i- 
‘win’  :  vi-va-sa -;  and  sail-  ‘gain’  :  si-sd-sa- 5. 

c.  In  nearly  a  dozen  roots,  on  the  other  hand,  the  radical  vowel  is 
weakened. 

1.  In  a  few  roots  final  a  is  reduced  to  f  and,  in  one  instance,  even 
z6;  thus  gd-  ‘go’  :  ji-gT-sa-  (SV1.);  pd-  ‘drink’  :  pi-pT-sa-  (RV.)  beside  pi-pd-sa -; 
hd-  ‘go  forth’  :  ji-hT-sa-1  (AV.);  dhd-  ‘put’  :  di  dhi-sa-  (RV.)  beside  dhit-sa-. 

2.  Half  a  dozen  roots  containing  d  or  a  shorten  the  root  by  syncopation 
resulting  in  contraction  with  the  reduplicative  syllable;  da-  ‘give’  :  dit-sa-,  for 
di-d[a}-sa-,  beside  di-da-sa- ;  dhd-  ‘put’  :  dhi-t-sa-,  for  d'i-dh-\a\sa beside  di- 
dhi-sa- ;  dabh-  ‘harm’  :  di-p-sa-,  for  dl-d\a\bh-sa-\  labh-  ‘take’  :  li-p-sa-  (A V.);  for 
li-l\a\bh-sa-\  sak-  ‘be  able’  :  si-k-sa-,  for  s'i-s'[a]k-sa- ;  sah-  ‘prevail’  :  sf-k-sa for 
sl-s\a\k-sa- ;  similarly  initial  a  in  dp-  ‘obtain’  :  ip-sa-%  (AV.);  and  in  rdh- 
‘thrive’  :  tri-sa-  (AV.)  the  initial  r  is  treated  as  if  it  were  <?r-9. 

a.  In  a  few  roots  the  consonants  undergo  exceptional  changes;  thus  palatals  revert 
to  the  original  guttural  in  ci-  ‘note’  :  ci-kl-sa- ;  cit-  ‘perceive’ :  ci-kit-sa-;  ji-  ‘conquer’ :  ji-gT-sa 


1  Cp.  v.  Negelein  86. 

2  See  above  32  b. 

3  Cp.  v.  Negelein  6S,  note  2.  The  i  being 
the  reduplicative  vowel,  cannot  be  explained 
in  the  same  way  as  that  of  the  perfect 
i-ycij-  for  *ya-j/aj-,  where  i-  has  the  nature 
of  Samprasarana. 

4  Cp.  \dTv-  :  dyu-td -  etc.,  below  573  a. 


5  As  in  the  past  participle  574,  2  a. 

6  As  in  the  past  participle  574,  3. 

7  In  AV.  XX.  1 272  the  Mss.  read  jihTsatc 
probably  for  jihTdate. 

8  Cp,  Brugmann  2,  S54,  1027. 

9  v.  Negelein  (89,  note  2)  thinks  Trisa-  can 
only  be  explained  from  t-Trdh-sa-. 


VII.  Verb.  Future  System.  Secondary  Conjugation.  389 


ban-  ‘slay’  :  ji-gham-sa-.  In  ghas -  ‘eat’  the  final  s  becomes  t  before  the  s  of  the  suffix: 
ji-ghat-sa- 1  (AV.). 

(L  The  desiderative  suffix  -sa  Is  never  added  in  the  RV.  with  the  connecting  vowel 
-1-;  but  there  is  one  example  of  this  formation  in  the  AY.,  viz.  pat -  ‘fly’  :  pi-pat-i-sa- 2. 

Inflexion. 

543.  The  desiderative  is  inflected  regularly  like  verbs  of  the  a-  conjuga¬ 
tion  in  both  voices,  having  the  moods  and  participles  of  the  present  tense, 
as  well  as  an  imperfect.  No  forms  outside  the  present  system  occur  in  the  RV. 
with  the  exception  of  the  perfect  from  mis-,  mi-miks-ar 3  etc.  (in  which,  how¬ 
ever,  the  desiderative  stem  is  treated  as  a  root)  besides  two  aorist  forms  and 
one  passive  participle  in  the  AV. 4. 

The  forms  of  the  present  indicative,  active  and  middle,  which  actually 
occur,  would  if  made  from  z n-va-sa-  ‘desire  to  win’,  be  as  follows: 

Active.  Sing.  1.  vivasdmi.  2.  z nvasasi.  3.  vivasati. —  Du.  2.  vivasathas. 
3.  vivas  atas.  —  PL  1.  vivasamas.  3.  vivas  anti. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  vivase.  2.  vtvasasc.  3.  vivasaitt.  Id.  i.  viv  tsatnahc. 
vivdsante. 

544.  Forms  occurring  elsewhere  in  the  present  system  are  the  following: 

a.  Subjunctive.  Active.  Sing.  3.  jighdmsdt  (TS.),  titrpsdt ,  dipsat 
(TS.  AV.),  ninitsdt ,  vlvdsdt.  —  PI.  3.  tyaksan ,  titrtsdn ,  vlvasdn. 

b.  Injunctive.  Active.  Sing.  3.  inaksat ,  cikitsat ,  vivdsat.  —  Middle. 
PI.  3.  apsanta ,  didhisanta ,  siksanta. 

c.  Optative.  Active.  Sing.  1.  ditseyam ,  vivaseyam.  —  3.  vivaset.  — 
PI.  1.  didhisema ,  vivdsema.  —  Middle.  Sing.  1.  didhiseya . 

d.  Imperative.  Active.  Sing.  2.  cikitsa ,  dips  a  (AV.),  mimiksa ,  vivdsa. 
—  3.  cikitsatu  (AV.).  —  Du.  2.  mlmiksatam ,  sisdsatam.  —  3.  mimiksatdm .  — 
PL  2.  cikitsata  (TS.),  vivdsata.  —  3.  didhisanta. 

e.  Participles.  Active,  itiaksant -,  iyaksant -,  ipsant-  (AV.),  irtsant- 
(AV.),  cikitsant -,  jlghamsant-,  dltsant dips  ant-,  duduksant -,  pipTsant -,  bubhusant -, 
yuyutsant-,  yuyusant-,  r Iriks  ant-  (}rris-),  ruruksant-  (]  nth-),  vivdsant-,  sisdsant-, 
sisrpsant siksant-.  —  Middle,  iyaksamdna-,  frtsamdna-  (AV.),  jigTsamdna-, 
mumuksamdna-,  lipsamdna-  (AV.),  siksamana-  (TS.),  s  us  r us  am  dn  a- \  and  with 
-ana:  didhisdna-. 

f.  Imperfect.  Active.  Sing.  2.  asisdsas.  —  3.  ajighdmsat ,  asisdsat.  — 
PI.  3.  dyuyutsan,  asisdsan ;  duduksan ,  bib  hits  an. 

g.  Aorist.  Sing.  2.  acikitsTs  (AV.),  fz'/j'rj'  (AV.). 

h.  Passive.  No  finite  form  of  the  passive  seems  to  occur  in  the  Sam- 
hitas;  of  participles,  no  certain  form  of  the  present  occurs,  mimdnisydmana- 
(AV.  ix.  624)5  being  a  conjecture;  and  of  the  past  only  one  form  has  been 
noted:  mJmdmsitd-  (AV.  ix.  624)L 

i.  Gerundive.  Two  regular  forms  occur:  didrks-enya-  ‘worthy  to  be 
seen’  and  susrus-enya-  (TS.)  ‘worthy  to  be  heard’.  There  are  also  one  or 
two  irregular  formations:  didrks-eya-  ‘worthy  to  be  seen’  and  paprks-enya-  ‘to 
be  asked’  (unless  from  aorist  stem)  L 

k.  Verbal  adjective.  A  considerable  number  (more  than  a  dozen  in 
the  RV.)  of  verbal  adjectives  are  formed  from  the  desiderative  stem  with  the 


1  See  above  44  a,  I. 

2  The  desiderative  of  jiv -  ‘live’,  jijiv-i-sa-, 
occurs  in  VS.  XL.  (Isa  Up.). 

3  According  to  Grassmann,  perf.  des.  of 
mih-  ‘mingere’;  cp.  WHITNEY,  Roots,  s.  v.  w/Ar. 

4  In  all  these  forms  the  stems  have  lost 
their  distinct  desiderative  meaning:  cp. 

Whitney  1033. 


5  Cp.  Whitney’s  note  in  his  translation; 
in  his  grammar  1039  he  quotes  rurutsyamdna 
(ytrudh-)  from  K.  37,  12  (apa-). 

^Whitney  1037  quotes  the  gerund  numcim- 
sitva.  from  K. 

7  See  below,  Gerundive  580. 


390 


Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


suffix  -u.  They  have  the  value  of  a  present  participle  governing  a  case; 
thus  iyaks-u-  ‘wishing  to  sacrifice’;  jigis-u-  ‘wishing  to  conquer’;  didhis-u-  ‘desiring 
to  win’;  dips-u-  ‘wishing  to  injure’;  vivaks-u-  (AY.)  from  vac-  ‘speak’;  sisds-it- 
‘eager  to  win’ r. 

2.  Intensives. 


Delbruck,  Verbum  p.  130 — 134.  —  Avery,  Verb-Inflection  230,  270—272.  — 
Whitney,  Sanskrit  Grammar  1000 — 1025;  Roots  232  b  —  v.  Negelein,  Zur  Spracli- 
geschichte  78 — 80.  —  Lindner,  Altindische  Nominalbildung  10  (p.  48)  and  21c  (parti¬ 
ciples).  —  Burchardi,  Die  Intensiva  des  Sanskrit  und  Avesta.  Teil  I.  Halle  1892; 
Teil  II.  BB.  19,  169-225. 


545-  The  intensive  or,  as  it  is  also  often  called,  the  frequentative  implies 
intensification  or  repetition  of  the  sense  expressed  by  the  root2.  It  is  a 
common  formation,  being  made  from  over  90  roots  in  the  Samhitas.  The 
stem  is  derived  from  the  root  by  means  of  a  reduplicative  syllable,  the 
characteristic  feature  of  which  is  that  it  always  has  a  strong  form.  The 
reduplicative  syllable  may  be  formed  in  three  different  ways :  1.  radical  1  u 
are  always  reduplicated  with  a  Guna  vowel,  and  a  and  r  ( ar )  often  with  d) 
2.  roots  containing  r  or  a  followed  by  r  l  11  m  more  usually  reduplicate 
with  a  and  liquid  or  nasal;  3.  a  considerable  number  of  intensives  interpose 
the  vowel  l  between  the  reduplicative  syllable  and  the  root. 

1.  a.  Roots  containing  2  or  u  reduplicate  with  e  or  0;  thus  cit -  ‘per¬ 
ceive’  :  cekit- ;  tij-  ‘be  sharp’  :  te-tij- ;  dis-  ‘point’  :  de'-dis -;  nij-  ‘wash’  :  ni-nij-) 
til-  ‘lead’  :  ne-nl -;  pis-  ‘adorn’  :  pc-pis- ;  ml-  ‘damage’  :  me-ml-\  ri/i-  ‘lick’  :  re- 
rih -;  vij-  ‘tremble’  :  ve-vij-)  vid-  ‘find’  :  ve-vid- ;  vis-  ‘be  active’  :  v  e-vis- \  vl- 
‘enjoy’  :  ve-vl- ;  sid/i-  ‘repel’  :  se-sidh -;  gu-  ‘sound’  :  jogu-\  dhu-  ‘shake’  :  do-dhu-) 
mi-  ‘praise’  :  no-nu-)  pruth-  ‘snort’  :  po-pruth- ;  bhu-  ‘be’  :  bo-bhu-)  yu-  ‘join’  : 
yo-yu- ;  yu-  ‘separate’  \  yo-yu-)  ru-  ‘cry’  :  ro-ru- ;  ru-  ‘break’  :  ro-ru- ;  sue-  ‘gleam’ 
:  so- sue- ;  su-  ‘generate’  :  so-su-)  sku-  ‘tear’  :  co-sku -;  hu-  ‘call’ :  jo-hu-. 

b.  More  than  a  dozen  roots  with  medial  a  (ending  in  mutes  or  sibilants, 
and  one  in  m),  as  well  as  three  with  final  -r,  reduplicate  with  a:  kds- 
‘appear’  :  cd-has- ;  gam-  ‘go’  :  ja-gam -;  nad-  ‘sound’  :  nd-nad- ;  pat -  ‘fall’  :  pa¬ 
pal-)  badh-  ‘oppress’  :  bd-badh -;  raj-  ‘colour’  :  rd-raj -;  randh-  ‘make  subject’  : 
rdrandh -;  rap-  ‘chatter’  :  ra-rap- ;  lap-  ‘prate’  :  Id-lap -;  vac-  ‘speak’  :  vd-vac -; 
vad-  ‘speak’  :  va-vad-;  vas-  ‘be  eager’  :  vd-vas -;  vds-  ‘bellow’  :  vd-vas-;  s'vas- 
‘blow’  :  sd-svas -;  gr-  ‘wake’  :  jd-gr -;  dr-  ‘split’  :  da-dr-)  dhr-  ‘hold’  :  dd-dhr -; 


also  cal-  ‘stir’  :  ca-cal-  (AV.). 

2.  All  other  roots  containing  r  (and  dr-  and  dhr-  alternatively)  and 
several  with  medial  a  followed  by  r  /,  or  a  nasal,  reduplicate  with  -ar, 
-a/  or  -an,  -am.  Thus: 

a.  hr-  ‘commemorate’  :  car-kr-  and  car-kir -;  krs-  ‘drag’  :  car-krs-)  gr- 
‘swallow’  :  jdr-gur-  and  jal-gul-)  tr-  ‘cross’  :  tar-tr-  (RV.);  dr-  ‘split’  :  ddr-dr- 
and  dar-dir-)  dhr-  ‘hold’  :  ddr-dhr -;  hr  hi-  ‘make  strong’  :  bdr-brh -;  bhr-  ‘bear’ 
:  jar-bhr- 3 ;  mrj-  ‘wipe’  :  mar-mrj mrs-  ‘touch’  :  mar-  mrs-;  vrt-  ‘turn’  :  var- 
vrt-)  sr-  ‘flow’  :  sar-sr -;  hrs-  ‘be  excited’  :  jar-hrs-. 

b.  car-  ‘move’  :  car-car-  (AV.);  cal-  ‘stir’  :  -cal- cal-  (MS.)  beside  -cd-cal- 
(AV.);  phar-  ‘scatter’  (?)  :  par-phar-\  kram-  ‘stride’  :  cah-kram-)  gam-  ‘go’ :  jah- 
gatn-)  jambh -  ‘chew  up’  :  jah-jabh-)  tarns-  ‘shake’  :  tan-tas-)  dams-  ‘bite’  :  dan- 
das-  ;  nam-  ‘bend’  :  nan-nan;-)  yam-  ‘reach’  : yam-yam-)  stan-  ‘thunder’  :  tam- 
stan-  (AV.). 


1  Grassmann,  p.  1727,  gives  a  list  of  the 
desiderative  adjectives  in  • su  occurring  in 
the  RV.  (about  15);  four  occur  in  the  AV. : 

cikitsii-,  jighatsu -,  dipsu blbhalsii- ;  cp.  Whit¬ 
ney  1038. 


3  The  specific  meaning  of  the  formation 
is  wanting  in  the  intensives  of  gr-  ‘wake’, 
cit-  ‘perceive’,  nij-  ‘wash’,  vis-  ‘work’. 

3  The  palatal  yin  the  reduplication  is  like 
that  of  bhr- in  the  perfect  form  ja-bhara  (482  d). 


VII.  Verb.  Secondary  Conjugation. 


39i 


a.  A  few  intensives  show  irregularities  in  the  reduplicative  syllable;  thus  r-  ‘go’  : 
al-ar-  (dissimilation);  gah-  ‘plunge’  :  jah-gah -  (from  a  root  which  otherwise  has  no  nasal 
in  inflected  forms)1;  badh -  ‘oppress ’ :  bad-badh-  (only  example  of  a  final  mute  being  redu¬ 
plicated);  gur-  ‘greet’  and  bhur *  ‘quiver’  reduplicate  with  a:  jar-guy -  and  jar-bhur- 2. 

{}.  In  a  few  roots  containing  r  or  r  the  radical  syllable  varies;  thus  gr-  ‘swallow’  : 
jar-gur -  and  jal-gul- ;  rur-  ‘move’  :  car-cur-  beside  car-car-',  tr -  ‘cross’ :  tar-tur-  beside  tar-tar-. 

3.  Over  twenty  roots  with  final  or  penultimate  nasal,  r,  or  u,  inter¬ 
pose  an  T  (or  i  if  the  vowel  would  be  long  by  position)  between  the  redu¬ 
plicative  syllable  and  the  root: 

a.  kratid-  ‘cry  out’  :  kan-i-krand-  and  kan-i-krad-\  gam -  ‘go’  :  gan-T-gam- 
(but  gati-i-gm-at) ;  pan -  ‘admire’  :  pan-T-pan~\  phan-  ‘spring’  :  pdn-T-phan-)  scand- 
‘shine’  :  can-i-scad -;  san-  ‘gain’  :  san-I-san -;  skand-  ‘leap’  :  kan-i-skand-  and  can- 
i-skad-\  syand-  ‘flow’  :  san-i-syad-;  svan-  ‘sound’  :  san-i-svan -;  hati-  ‘slay’  :  ghan- 
i-ghati-. 

b.  kr-  ‘make’  :  kar-i-kr-  and  car-i-kr-  (AV.)  3;  tr-  ‘cross’  :  tar-T-tr -;  bhr- 
‘bear’  :  bhar-i-bhr- ;  vr-  ‘cover’  :  var-T-vr vrj -  ‘twist’  :  var-T-vrj- ;  vrt-  'turn’  : 
var-T-vrt-. 

c.  tu-  ‘be  strong’  :  tav-J-tu dhu-  ‘shake’  :  dav-i-dhu- ;  mi -  ‘praise’  :  ndv- 
T-nu -;  dyut-  ‘shine’  :  ddv-i-dynt-. 


a.  Primary  Form.  Present  Indicative. 

546.  With  the  exception  of  eight  or  nine  verbs,  which  take  a  secondary 
form  (inflected  in  the  middle  only  and  identical  in  appearance  with  a  passive), 
the  intensive  is  inflected  like  the  third  conjugational  class.  The  only  difference 
is  that  I  may  be  inserted  between  the  root  and  terminations  beginning  with 
consonants;  it  is  common  in  the  1.  and  3.  sing.  ind.  act.,  and  is  also  some¬ 
times  found  to  occur  in  the  2.  3.  du.  ind.  and  the  2.  3.  sing,  imperative  and 
imperfect  active4.  The  forms  actually  found,  if  made  from  the  intensive  of 
nij-  ‘wash’,  would  be  the  following  in  the  indicative: 

Active.  .Sing.  1.  nmej-tni  and  nenej-T-mi .  2.  nenek-si.  3.  nenek-ti  and 

7ie?iej-T-ti.  —  Du.  2.  nenej-T-thas 5.  3.  nenik-tds.  —  PI.  1.  nenij-mas  and  tietnj- 

tnasi  (AV.).  3.  7ienij-ati. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  nenij-e.  3.  nenik-te.  —  Du.  3.  nenij-dtc.  —  PI.  3.  ?ienij-ate. 

The  forms  actually  met  with  are: 

Active.  Sing.  r.  carkarmi ,  vevesmi  (AV.);  cakasimi ,  johavimi ,  dardar- 
l7n  i.  —  2.  alar  si,  jdgarsi  (Kh.  11.  3),  ddrdarsi ,  ddrdharsi.  —  3.  dlarti,  kdi7ii- 
kra7iti ,  ga7iTganti,  jahghanti ,  varTvarti  and  vdrvaidi 6;  -calcallti  (MS.  in.  131); 
carcarTti  (AV.),  c&kaslti ,  jarbhurJti ,  jalguliti  (TS.),  jdhavlti,  tartariti ,  dardariti , 
dodhaviti,  7idnna77uti 7,  ndnainti ,  pdpatiti ,  bobhaviti ,  yamyatmti,  rarajiti  (AV.), 
rdraplti ,  rdraviti ,  IdlapTti  (AV.),  vavadlti ,  sosavlti. 

Du.  2.  ta7'tarlthas 8.  —  3.  jarbhrtds. 

PI.  1.  nomimas  and  7i07iU77iasi  (AV.).  —  3.  jagrati  (AV.),  ddvidyutati , 

nanadati ,  bharibhrati ,  varvrtati. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  joguve.  —  3.  tetikte,  dedistc ,  ndimate 9,  neniktc \ 


1  Though  it  has  in  nominal  derivatives; 
see  Whitney,  Roots,  s.  v.  ;  cp.  Bur- 
CHARDI,  BB.  19,  179;  V.  NEGELEIN  79. 

2  Cp.  p.  390,  note  3. 

3  In  the  participle  karikr-at  and  -carikr-at 
(AV-)‘ 

4  This  f  never  occurs  if  the  reduplication 
contains  thus  no-nav-T-ti  and  nav-i-no-t, 
but  never  *navT-nav-l-ti.  Cp.  Delbruck, 
Verbum  p.  1 3 1 ;  v.  Negelein  79. 

5  For  *nenik-tJias\  the  only  2.  du.  which 
occurs  is  tartar-T-thas  for  *  tarty -thas. 


6  For  varvart-ti ,  varivart-ti\  cp.  Grassmann, 
s.  V.  W'/. 

7  See  note  9. 

8  Cp.  note  5. 

9  With  loss  of  nasal  («  =  sonant  nasal)  for 
*na7inan-te{\.  1406).  Aufrecht,  RV2.,  and  Max 
Muller,  RV2. , write  namna-te{y\?,o  Padapatha); 
but  the  participle  nannamat  (vm.  438)>  Auf¬ 
recht  Ttdnn-,  Max  Muller  ndmn-\  the  3.  sing. 
naunamitiiy.  83s)  Aufrecht2,  namnanuti  Max 
Muller2;  similarly  ndnnamane(x.  821)  Auf¬ 
recht,  ndmnamdne  Max  Muller  (also  Pp.). 


392  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

sarsrte;  with  -e  for  -te:  cekite ,  jdngahe ,  joguve ,  badbadhe 'l  and  babadhe , 
yoyuve ,  sarsre.  —  Du.  3.  sarsrate.  —  PI.  3.  dedisate. 

547.  a.  Subjunctive.  Active.  Sing.  1.  janghanani.  —  2.  jdgardsi 2 
(AV.);  janghanas ,  jalgulas.  —  3.  caniskadat,  cdrkrsat ,  cekitat ,  jdnghanat , 
jdgarat  (AY.),  dardirat ,  davidyutat ,  parpharat ,  bdrbrhat ,  viarmrjat,  mar m fiat , 
sanisvanat.  —  Du.  1 .  j aiighanava.  —  PI.  1.  carkirdma ,  vevidama.  —  3.  carkiran , 
('commemorate’),  cdkasan 2  (AV.),  papatan ,  sosucan. 

Middle.  Du.  3.  tantasaite.  —  PI.  3.  jdhghananta ,  jarhrsanta ,  nonuvanta , 
m  armrj ant  a ,  so  sue  ant  a . 

b.  Optative.  No  certain  form  occurs  in  the  RV. 3,  and  only  two  or 
three  in  other  Samhitas:  Sing.  3.  vevisydt  (AV.).  —  PI.  1.  jagrydma  (VS. 
TS.  MS.),  jdgriyama  (TS.  1.  7.  io1). 

c.  Imperative.  Examples  of  forms  of  all  the  2.  and  3.  persons  are 
found  excepting  the  3.  pi.,  but  no  middle  form  has  been  met  with. 

Active.  Sing.  2.  carkrdhi  (AV.)  ‘remember’,  jdgrh'i ,  dardrhi,  da  dr  hi, 
nenigdhi  (AV.),  barbrhi 4;  j aiighamhi  (AV.),  cdkasihi  (VS.  TS.),  tamstamhi 
(AV.).  —  With  -faf:  carkrtdt ,  jagrtat 5.  —  3.  dardartu ,  marmartu ,  vevestu 
(AV.);  vavadltu  (AV.),  johavitu  (AV.).  —  Du.  2.  jagrtam.  —  3.  jdgrtam 
(AV.).  —  PL  2.  jclgrta  (AV.),  cahkramata 6. 

548.  Participle.  Active,  kdnihradat -,  karikrat ghanighnat -,  -edrikrat- 
(AV.),  cdkasat -,  cekitat jdnghanat-,  jdrbhurat-,  jdgrat-,  d dr  i  dr  at-  (TS.  iv.  5.  10'), 
ddrdrat -,  davidyutat-,  ndnnamat-,  nfinadat -,  panipnat -,  pdmphanat-,  pepisat-, 
bdbhuvat-  (AV.),  marmrjat-,  yoyuvat-  (yu-  ‘ward  off’),  rerihat-,  rdruvat-,  vdvasat- 
(' vas -  ‘roar’),  vevisat-,  sbsucat -,  sesidhat -. 

Middle7,  cekitdna -,  jdhjabhana-  (AV.),  jarbhurdna jdrhrsdna-,  ddndas- 
dna-,  nannamdna-,  pepisdna-  (AV.  TS.),  bdbadhdna -,  memydna -,  yoyuvdna- 
(yu-  ‘join’),  rorucana -,  sdsucana -,  sdrsrdna-. 

a.  The  participles  badbadhand-  and  ?narni>jdnd-  (beside  niarmrjdna-), 
though  irregularly  accented,  unmistakably  belong  to  the  intensive,  kdnikrat 
once  (ix.  6320)  appears  as  an  abbreviated  form  of  kdnikrad-at.  The  participle 
j dnghan-at-  syncopates  the  radical  vowel  in  the  gen.  sing.:  jdhghn-at-as ;  an¬ 
other  form  of  the  intensive  participle  from  the  same  root  syncopates  the  radical 
vowel  throughout:  ghanighn-at-\  also pdnipn-at-.  The  obscure  form  cakdm  (x.  291) 
may  be  the  nom.  of  an  intensive  participle  with  anomalous  accent  for  cdhan-at 8. 

5 49.  Imperfect.  Altogether  (including  unaugmented  forms,  some  of 
which  are  used  injunctively)  about  thirty  forms  of  the  imperfect  occur,  among 
them  only  four  examples  of  the  middle.  In  the  active  all  persons  are  re¬ 
presented  except  the  1.  du.  and  the  2.  pi.;  but  in  the  middle  only  the  3.  sing, 
and  pi.  are  met  with. 

Active.  Sing.  1.  acakasam ;  dedisam.  —  2.  ajdgar ,  adardar ;  dardar. — 
3.  adardar ,  adardhar,  avarlvar ;  kdniskan ,  dardar ,  ddvidyot ,  navinot ;  djohavit , 
ayoyavJt ,  droravit ,  avavacit. 

Du.  2.  adardrtam .  —  3.  avavasitam.  —  PL  1.  marmrjma .  —  3.  acarkrsur 
(AV.),  djohavur ,  adardirur ,  anonavur. 


1  With  irregular  ’accent. 

2  With  double  modal  sign. 

3  Cp.  Whitney  1009  a. 

4  For  barbrh-hi,  the  final  h  being  dropped 
after  being  cerebralized  before  * dhi  :  *barbrz - 
(//«'  (58,  I  b,  a;  62,  4  e). 

5  This  form  occurs  once  in  the  AV.  as  a 
1.  person:  cp.  Whitney  joii  a. 

6  With  anomalous  connecting  -<2-  for 

*cahkran-ta . 


7  The  participles  rarah-and- ,  raraks-dna 
and  jahrs-dna-  (beside  j arhrs-dna-)  are  pro¬ 
bably  perfect  participles,  although  no  other 
perfect  forms  with  a  in  the  reduplicative 
syllable  occur  from  these  roots  [rah-,  raks-, 
hrs-);  cp.  Whitney  1013. 

8  I  regard  it  as  3.  sing.  perf.  inj.  = 
*cakdn-t (488).  Cp.  Bartholomae,  IF.  7,  in, 
Grassmann,  under  the  root  Az- ;  Whitney, 
Sanskrit  Grammar  1013  b;  Roots  17. 


VII.  Verb.  Secondary  Conjugation.  393 

Middle.  Sing.  3.  adedista ,  dnannata'1.  —  PL  3.  marmrjata2. 

550.  a.  Perfect.  A  few  perfect  forms  with  intensive  reduplication  and 
present  sense  are  met  with: 

Active.  Sing.  1.  jagara.  —  3.  jag  dr  a,  davidhava  {dhu-  ‘shake’), 
nonava 3  {nu-  ‘praise’). 

The  only  perfect  participle  occurring  is  jagrvdms-. 

b.  Aorist.  The  only  trace  of  an  aorist  being  formed  from  the  intensive 
is  cdrkr-s-e  ‘thinks  of’,  3.  sing,  mid.,  formed  like  hi-s-e  and  stu-s-e .  It  occurs 
three  times  in  the  RV.,  always  with  a  present  sense. 

c.  Causative.  A  causative  formed  from  the  intensive  is  once  found  in 
the  participle  varTvarj-ayant-T-  (AV.)  ‘twisting  about’  (j/u/y-). 

b.  Secondary  Form. 

551.  The  rare  secondary  form  of  the  intensive  is  identical  in  meaning 
with  the  primary.  In  form  it  is  indistinguishable  from  a  passive,  the  suffix 
-yd  being  added  to  the  primary  stem  and  the  inflexion  being  the  same  as 
that  of  the  passive.  Altogether  about  a  dozen  forms  have  been  met  with 
from  nine  roots.  The  only  persons  represented  are  the  2.  and  3.  sing,  and 
3.  pi.  indicative;  and  there  is  also  a  present  participle.  The  forms  actually 
occurring  are  the  following: 

Present  indicative.  Sing.  2.  coskuydse.  —  3.  dedisyate  (AV.  VS.), 
nemydte  (VS.),  marmrjydte ,  rerihyate ,  vevijydte ,  veiny  ate.  —  PI.  3.  tarturyante 
(V 1  mar mrjy  ante. 

Participle,  carcuryamana-  (} dear-),  nenTydmana marmrjydmana-. 

3.  The  Causative. 

Delbruck,  Verbum  p.209 — 216.  —  Avery,  Verb-Inflection  262—268.  —  Whitney, 
Sanskrit  Grammar  p.  379 — 386;  Roots  235  b  —  v.  Negelein  44—48. 

552.  The  causative  verb  expresses  that  its  object  is  caused  to  perform 
the  action  or  to  undergo  the  state  denoted  by  the  root;  e.  g.  pdram  evd 
paravdtam  sapdtmm  gamayamasi  (x.  1454)  ‘we  cause  our  rival  to  go  to  the 
far  distance’.  It  is  by  far  the  commonest  of  the  secondary  conjugations,  being 
formed  from  over  200  roots  in  the  Samhitas;  but  of  about  150  causative 
stems  appearing  in  the  RV.  at  least  one-third  lack  the  causative  meaning. 
The  stem  is  formed  by  adding  the  suffix  -ay a  to  the  root,  which  as  a  rule 
is  strengthened.  Those  verbs  in  which  the  root,  though  capable  of  being 
strengthened,  remains  unchanged,  have  not  a  causative4,  but  an  iterative  sense, 
being  akin  in  formation  to  denominatives 5  (which  sometimes  even  have  the 
causative  accent).  The  whole  group  may  originally  have  had  this  meaning, 
from  which  the  causative  sense  was  developed  till  it  became  the  prevalent 
one6.  This  may  perhaps  account  for  an  iterative  formation,  the  reduplicated 
aorist,  having  specially  attached  itself  to  the  causative.  Both  the  iterative 
and  the  causative  form  are  occasionally  made  from  the  same  root;  e.  g. 
patdya-ti  ‘flies  about1  and  patdya-ti  ‘causes  to  fly’  beside  the  simple  verb 
pdta-ti  ‘flies’. 


1  See  p.  391,  note  9.  MS.  (i.  86);  the  latter  form  is  irregular  in 

2  avavasanta  (J /vas-)  is  probably  a  plu-  accent.  Cp.  Bohtlingk’s  Lexicon,  s.  v. 

perfect  (p.  365,  top).  3.  IT. 

3  Whitney  1018  quotes  also  dedrava  {dru-  4  Cp.  Whitney  1042  b. 

‘run’)  from  the  TS.,  and  yoydva  (yu-  ‘sepa-  5  Cp.  v.  Negelein  44. 

rate’),  and  lelaya  ( ll •  ‘be  unsteady’)  from  the  6  Cp.  Brugmann,  KG.  698. 


394 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


553.  The  root  is  strengthened  in  different  ways  according  to  the  nature 
and  position  of  its  vowel. 

Initial  or  medial  /  u  r  /  (if  not  long  by  position)  take  Guna ;  thus 
a.  cit-  ‘perceive’  :  cet-aya-  ‘teach’;  mih -  ‘mingere’  :  meh-aya-  ‘cause  to  rain’;  ris- 
‘be  hurt’  :  res-aya-  ‘injure’;  vid-  ‘know’  :  ved-aya-  ‘cause  to  know’;  vip-  ‘tremble’ 
:  vep-dya-  ‘shake’;  vis-  ‘enter’  :  ves-dya-  ‘cause  to  enter’;  vist-  ‘wrap’  :  vest-ay  a- 
(AV.)  ‘involve’;  sni/i-  ‘be  moist’  :  sneh-aya -  ‘destroy’; 

b.  kup-  ‘be  agitated’ :  kop-dya-  ‘shake’ ;  krudh-  ‘be  angry’:  krodh-dya-  ‘en¬ 

rage’;  ksud-  ‘be  agitated’ :  ksod-aya-  ‘shake’;  gluts-  ‘sound’  :  ghos-dya-  ‘proclaim’; 
cud-  ‘impel’  :  cod-ay  a-,  id.;  jus-  ‘enjoy’  :  jos-dya-  ‘caress’;  jyut-  ‘shine’  :  jyot-dya- 
(A V.)  ‘enlighten’;  tus-  ‘drip’  :  tos-aya-  ‘bestow  abundantly’;  dyut-  ‘shine’  :  dyot- 
aya-  ‘illumine’;  pus-  ‘thrive’  :  pos-aya-  ‘nourish’;  budh-  ‘be  awake’  :  bodh-dya- 
‘ waken’;  muh -  ‘be  dazed’  :  moh-dya-  ‘bewilder’;  yudh-  ‘fight’  : yodh-dya-  ‘cause 
to  fight’;  yup-  ‘efface’  : yop-dya-,  id.;  rue -  ‘shine’  :  roc-dya-  ‘illumine’;  rud- 
‘weep’  :  rod-dya-  ‘cause  to  wail’;  ruh-  ‘rise’  :  ro/i-dya-  ‘raise’;  lubh-  ‘desire 

eagerly’  :  lobh-dya-  ‘allure’;  sue-  ‘flame’  :  soc-dya-  ‘set  on  fire’;  sub/i-  ‘shine’  : 

sobh-aya-  (AV.)  ‘adorn’;  sits-  ‘grow  dry’  :  sos-dya-  (AV.)  ‘make  dry’; 

c.  rd-  ‘dissolve’  (intr.) :  ard-dya-  ‘destroy’;  krs-  ‘be  lean’:  kars-dya -  ‘emaciate’; 

tip-  ‘be  pleased’  :  tarp-dya-  ‘delight’;  drs-  ‘see’  :  dars-aya-  (AY.)  ‘show’;  nrt- 
‘dance’  :  nart-dya-  ‘cause  to  dance’;  brh-  or  vrh-  ‘tear’  :  barh-aya-  ‘thrust’; 
mrc-  ‘injure’  :  marc-dya-,  id.;  mrj-  ‘wipe’  :  marj-aya -,  id.;  vrj-  ‘turn’  :  varj-aya- 
(AV.)  ‘cause  to  turn’;  vrt-  ‘roll’  :  vart-dya-  ‘cause  to  revolve’;  vrdh-  ‘grow’  : 

vardh-dya-  ‘augment’;  vrs-  ‘rain’  :  vars-dya-  ‘cause  to  rain’;  srdh-  ‘be  bold’  : 

sard/i-aya -  ‘cause  to  be  bold’;  Zirs-  ‘be  excited’  :  hars-dya-  ‘excite  ; 

d.  kip-  ‘be  adapted’  :  ka/p-dya-  ‘arrange’. 

554.  The  following  verbs,  mostly  lacking  the  causative  meaning,  leave 
the  root  unchanged:  il-  ‘be  quiet’  :  il-dya-  (AV.)  ‘cease’;  cit-  ‘observe’  :  cit- 
dya-  ‘stimulate’  (also  cet-aya-') ;  ris-  ‘be  injured’  :  ris-aya-  id.  (beside  res-aya -); 
vip-  ‘quiver’  :  vip-dya-  ‘agitate’  (also  vep-ayaj ; 

tuj-  ‘be  eager’  :  tuj-dya-  id.;  tur-  ‘overwhelm’  :  tur-dya-  id.;  tus-  ‘be  content’ 
:  tus-dya-  id.;  dyut-  ‘shine’  :  dyut-aya-  id.  (beside  dyot-aya-  ‘illumine’);  ruc- 
‘shine’  :  ruc-aya-  id.  (beside  roc-dya-  ‘illumine’);  sue-  ‘shine’  :  suc-dya-  id.  (beside 
soc-dya-  ‘illumine’);  subh-  ‘shine’  :  subh-dya-  id.  (also  sobh-aya-  ‘adorn’  AV.). 
The  vowel  is  lengthened  in  dus-  ‘spoil’  :  dus-aya-  id. 

krp-  ‘lament’  :  krp-aya-  id.;  mrd-  ‘be  gracious’  :  mrl-dya- 1  id.;  sprh-  ‘be 
eager’  :  sprh-aya-  id.  In  the  case  of grabh-  ‘grasp’,  the  root  is  even  weakened: 
grbh-dya-  id. 

a.  Vowels  long  by  nature  or  position  remain  unchanged,  but  the 
stem,  in  this  case,  usually  has  the  causative  sense:  ihg-  ‘move’  :  ihg-dya-  ‘set 
in  motion’;  iks-  ‘see’  :  iks-aya-  ‘cause  to  see’;  ihkh-  ‘swing’  :  uikh-dya-  ‘shake’; 
Tr-  ‘set  in  motion’  :  ir-dya-  id.;  jiv-  ‘live’  :  jiv-aya-  ‘animate’;  dip-  ‘shine’  :  dlp- 
dya-  ‘kindle’;  pTd-  ‘press’  : pld-aya-  (AV.)  ‘distress’;  vld-  ‘be  strong’  (in  vTl-ii- 
‘strong’)  :  vil-dya-  ‘make  strong’2; 

uks-  ‘grow  up’  :  uks-aya-  ‘strengthen’;  kud-  (does  not  occur  in  the  simple 
form)  :  kul-aya-  ‘scorch’;  sundh-  ‘purify’  :  sundh-aya-  id.;  slid-  ‘make  pleasant’  : 
sud-aya-  id.;  sphurj-  ‘rumble’  :  sphurj-aya-  id.; 

drmh-  ‘make  firm’  :  drmh-aya-  (AV.)  ‘hold  fast’; 

a.  Two  roots  with  medial  T  take  Gun^:  srTv-  ‘fail’  :  srev-dya -  beside  srlv-aya- 3  (AV.) 
‘lead  astray’;  hid-  'be  hostile’  :  helaya-  in  the  participle  a-helayant -  ‘not  angry’;  while 


1  Cp.  v.  Negelein  46,  note  I.  |  3  In  AV.  vi.  732  all  the  Mss.  but  one  have 

2  Delbruck  189,4  regards  vilaya -  as  a  \sriv-, 
denominative. 


VII.  Verb.  Secondary  Conjugation. 


395 


two  others  already  have  it  in  the  root:  rej-  ‘tremble’  :  rej -ay  a-  ‘shake’;  ?ned-  ‘be  fat’  : 
med-dya-  ‘fatten’. 

555.  An  initial  or  a  medial  a  (if  not  long  by  position)  is  lengthened 
in  some  thirty  roots:  am-  ‘be  injurious’  :  am-dya -  ‘be  injured’;  /cam-  ‘desire’  : 
Icdm-aya-  ‘love’;  cat-  ‘hide  oneself’  :  cat-dya-  ‘drive  away’;  chad-  ‘cover’1  :  chad- 
dya-  id.;  tan-  ‘stretch’  :  tan-ay  a-  (AV.)  ‘make  taut’;  tap -  ‘burn’  :  tap-dya-  (AV.) 
‘cause  to  burn’;  tras-  ‘be  terrified’  :  tras-aya-  (AV.)  ‘terrify’;  nas-  ‘be  lost’  : 
nas-aya-  ‘destroy’;  pad-  ‘go’,  ‘fall’  :  pad-dya-  ‘cause  to  fall’;  phan-  ‘bound’  :  phan- 
aya-  ‘cause  to  bound’;  bhaj-  ‘divide’  :  bhdj-aya-  ‘cause  to  share’;  bhras-  ‘fall’ 

:  bhras-dya-  ‘cause  to  fall’;  man-  ‘think’  :  man-aya- 2  (AV.)  ‘esteem’;  yat-  ‘stretch’ : 
yat-dya-  ‘unite’;  yam-  ‘guide’  \yam-aya-  CPp.ydm-)  ‘present’;  lap-  ‘prate’ :  lap-ay a- 
(AV.)  ‘cause  to  cry’;  vat-  ‘apprehend’  :  vat-ay  a-  ‘inspire’;  van-  ‘win’  :  vdn-aya- 
(A V.)  ‘conciliate’  (Pp.  van-);  vas-  ‘dwell (  :  vds-aya-  ‘cause  to  stay’;  vas-  ‘wear’ 

:  vds-aya-  ‘clothe’;  vas-  ‘shine’ :  vds-aya-  ‘illumine’;  sat- 3  ‘cut  in  pieces’ :  sat-dya- 
(A V.)  id.4;  svas-  ‘snort’ :  svds-aya-  (AV.)  ‘cause  to  resound’;  spas'-  ‘see’  :  spds-dya- 
‘show’;  svap-  ‘sleep’ :  svap-aya-  ‘send  to  sleep’. 

a.  Five  or  six  other  causatives  optionally  retain  the  a:  gam-  ‘go’  : 
gam-dya-  and  gam-aya-  (RV1.)  ‘bring’;  das-  ‘waste  away’  :  das-aya-  and  das-aya- 
(AV.)  ‘exhaust’;  dhvan-  ‘disappear’  :  dhvan-aya-  (RV.)  and  dhvan-aya-  (RV.) 
‘cause  to  disappear’;  pat-  ‘fall’  :  pat-dya-  ‘fly  about’  (in  RV.  only  once,  1.  1697, 
‘cause  to  fall’)  and  pat-dya-  ‘cause  to  fall’;  mad-  ‘be  exhilarated’ :  mad-dya-  (AV.) 
and  mad-dya-  ‘rejoice’;  ram-  ‘rest’  :  ram-dya-  and  ram-dya-  ‘cause  to  rest’. 

556-  Some  twenty-five  roots  with  initial  or  medial  a  (short  by  position) 
remain  unchanged,  as  the  causative  meaning  is  mostly  absent:  an-  ‘breathe’ 

:  -an-dya-  (AV.)  ‘cause  to  breathe’;  chad-  ‘seem’  :  chad-dya -  id.;  jan-  ‘beget’  : 
jan-dya-  id.;  tvar-  ‘make  haste’  :  tvar-dya-  (AV.)  ‘quicken’;  dam-  ‘control’ 

:  dam-ay  a-  id.;  dhan-  ‘set  in  motion’  :  dhan-dya-  id.;  dhvas-  ‘disperse’  (intr.)  : 
dhvas-dya-  ‘scatter’  (tr.);  nad-  ‘roar’  :  nad-dya-  ‘cause  to  resound’;  nam-  ‘bend’ 
(tr.  and  intr.)  :  nam-aya-  ‘cause  to  bend’,  ‘strike  down’;  pan-  ‘admire’  :  pan-ay a- 
id.;  prath-  ‘spread  out’  :  prath-dya-  id.;  mah-  ‘be  great’ :  mah-dya-  ‘magnify’;  raj- 
‘colour’  :  raj-aya-  (AV.)  id.;  ran-  ‘rejoice’  :  ran-dya-  id.  and  ‘gladden’;  vyath- 
‘waver’  :  vyath-dya-  ‘cause  to  fall’;  sam-  ‘be  quiet’  :  sam-dya-  (AV.)  ‘appease’; 
snath-  ‘pierce’  :  snath-ay  a-  id.;  s'rath-  ‘loosen’  :  srath-aya-  id.;  stan-  ‘thunder’  : 
stan-dya-  id.;  svad-  ‘enjoy’,  ‘sweeten’  :  svad-dya-  id.;  svan-  ‘sound’  :  svan-aya- 
id. ;  svar-  ‘sound’  :  svar-aya-  (AV.)  id. 5 

a.  If  long  by  nature  or  position  medial  a  remains  unchanged,  the 
causative  sense  being  more  often  lacking  than  present:  thus  arc-  ‘shine’  :  arc- 
ay  a-  ‘cause  to  shine’;  has-  ‘appear’  :  kas-dya-  (AV.)  ‘cause  to  be  viewed’; 
krand-  ‘roar’  :  krand-dya-  ‘cause  to  roar’;  calcs-  ‘see’  :  caks-aya-  ‘cause  to  appear’; 
chand-  ‘seem’  :  c  hand-ay  a-  id.;  jambh-  ‘chew  up’,  ‘crush’  :  jambh-dya-  id.;  tams- 
‘set  in  motion’  :  tams-dya-  id.;  dambh-  ‘destroy’  :  dambh-dya -  id.;  badh-  ‘oppress’ 
:  badh-aya-  (AV.)  ‘force’;  bhaks-  ‘partake  of’  :  bhaks-dya -  id.;  mamh-  ‘bestow’  : 
mamh-dya  id.;  ma?id-  ‘gladden’  :  mand-dya-  ‘satisfy’;  yac-  ‘ask’  : yac-dya-  (AV.) 
‘cause  to  be  asked  for’;  ramh-  ‘hasten’  :  ramh-dya-  (AV.)  id.;  randh-  ‘make 
subject’ :  randh-dya-  id.;  raj-  ‘rule’  :  raj-aya-  (AV.  TS.)  ‘be  king’;  radii-  ‘succeed’ 
:  radh-aya-  (AV.)  ‘make  successful’;  vales-  ‘grow’  :  vaks-aya-  ‘cause  to  grow’; 


1  Finite  forms  of  the  simple  root  chad-  do 
not  occur;  the  part,  channa -  is  found  in  B. 

2  In  AV.  XV.  io2  the  reading  should  be 
mdnayet\  see  Whitney’s  note. 

3  In  AV.  iv.  184  sapaya ,  which  would  be 

the  causative  of  sap-,  is  probably  a  wrong 

reading;  cp.  Whitney’s  note. 


4  No  form  or  derivative  of  the  simple 
root  sat-  occurs  in  V. ;  see  Whitney,  Roots, 
s.  v.  sat. 

5  Occurring  only  in  the  participle  svarayatit- 
am  (AV.  xm.  22 3),  which  Whitney  translates 
‘shining’. 


I. 


Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


sa/ns-  ‘proclaim’ :  sams-dya-  ‘cause  to  proclaim’;  svanc-  ‘spread’ :  svahc-dya-  ‘cause 
to  spread  out’;  syand-  ‘flow’  :  syand-aya-  id.;  srams -  ‘fall’  :  srams-aya-  (AY.) 
‘cause  to  fall’. 

557.  Final  i,  u,  r  take  Guna  or  Vrddhi,  the  latter  being  commoner. 

a.  The  only  example  of  a  causative  stem  from  a  root  ending  in  an  i- 
vowel  is  that  of  ksi-  ‘possess’,  which  takes  Guna:  ksay-dya -  ‘cause  to  dwell 
securely’. 

b.  Final  u  takes  Guna  or  Vrddhi:  cyu-  ‘waver’  :  cydv-aya-  ‘shake’;  dru- 
‘run’  :  drav-aya-  ‘flow’  and  drav-dya -  ‘cause  to  flow’;  bhii-  ‘become’  :  bhdv-aya - 
(AV.)  ‘cause  to  become’;  yu-  ‘separate’  : yav-aya-  and ydv-aya-  id.;  sru-  ‘hear’ 

:  srav-dya-  and  srav-aya-  ‘cause  to  hear’;  sru- 1  ‘dissolve’  :  srav-dya-  and  srav- 
aya-  (Pp.  srav-)  ‘cause  to  move’;  sru-  ‘flow’  :  srdvaya-  (AV.)  ‘cause  to  flow’. 

c.  Final  r  usually  takes  Vrddhi;  thus  ghr-  ‘drip’  :  ghdr-aya-  (AV.)  ‘cause 
to  drip’;  dhr-  ‘hold’  :  dhar-dya-  id.;  pr-  ‘pass’  : par-dya-  id.;  pr-  ‘fill’  : pur-dya- 
(AV.)  ‘fulfil’;  mr-  ‘die’  :  mdr-aya-  (AV.)  ‘kill’;  vr-  ‘confine’  :  var-aya-  id.  Two 
causatives  have  the  Guna  as  well  as  the  Vrddhi  form:  jr-  ‘waste  away’  :  jar- 
dya-  and  jar-ay  a-  (Pp  .jar-)  ‘wear  out’,  ‘cause  to  grow  old’;  sr-  ‘flow’  :  sar-dya- 
id.  and  sdr-aya-  ‘cause  to  flow’.  One  root  in  -r  takes  Guna  only:  dr-  ‘pierce’ 
:  dar-dya-  ‘shatter’. 

558.  Roots  ending  in  -a  form  their  causative  stem  by  adding  - pdya ; 
thus  ksd-  ‘burn’  :  ksa-paya-  (AV.)  id.;  gld-  ‘be  weary’  :  gld-paya-  (Pp.  gldp-) 
‘exhaust’;  da-  ‘give’  :  da-pay  a-  (AV.)  ‘cause  to  give’;  dha-  ‘put’  :  dha-pdya- 
‘cause  to  put’;  dha-  ‘suck’  :  dha-pdya-  ‘suckle’;  mid-  ‘relax’  (intr.)  :  mla-pdya- 
(AV.)  ‘relax’  (tr.) ;  vd-  ‘blow’  :  va-pdya-  ‘fan’;  stha-  ‘stand’  :  sthd-paya-  ‘set  up’; 
snd-  ‘wash’  (intr.)  :  snd-pdya- ( bathe’  (tr.)2.  In  three  roots  the  d  is  shortened: 
jha-  ‘know’  :  jha-paya-  (AV.)  ‘cause  to  know’;  srd-  ‘boil’  :  sra-paya-  (AV. 
TS.)  ‘cook’;  snd-  ‘wash’  :  sna-pdya-  (AV.)  beside  snd-pdya-  ‘bathe’  (tr.). 

a.  A  few  roots  ending  in  other  vowels  take  -paya.  Two  stems  are 
formed  by  adding  the  suffix  to  the  gunated  root:  ksi-  ‘possess’  :  kse-paya- 
‘cause  to  dwell’  beside  ksay-dya- ;  r-  ‘go’  :  arpaya -  ‘cause  to  go’.  In  the  VS. 
two  roots  in  i  substitute  a  for  that  vowel  before  -paya:  ji-  ‘conquer’  :  jdi-paya- 
‘cause  to  win’;  sri-  ‘resort’  :  (ud-) sra-paya-  (VS1.)  ‘raise’. 

a.  Two  roots  with  initial  p  and  ending  in  - a  do  not  form  their  causative  stem  with 
- paya ,  but  add  the  ordinary  suffix  -ay  a  with  interposed  y:  pa.  ‘drink’  :  pay- ay  a-,  ‘cause  to 
drink’;  pya-  ‘overflow’  :  {adpyay-aya-  (A V.)  ‘fill  up’.  This  seeming  irregularity  is  doubtless 


due  to  the  original  form  of  the  root'3 


Inflexion. 


559.  The  causative  is  inflected  regularly  like  the  verbs  of  the  a-  con¬ 
jugation  in  both  voices.  It  is  to  be  noted,  however,  that  in  the  1.  pi.  pres, 
the  termination  -masi  occurs  in  the  RV.  and  AV.  ten  times  as  often  as  mas ; 
that  in  the  2.  pi.  no  forms  in  -thana  are  met  with;  and  that  in  the  3.  sing, 
mid.  e  never  appears  for  -ate. 

a.  The  forms  of  the  present  indicative  active  and  middle,  which 
actually  occur,  would  if  made  from  kalpaya-  be  the  following: 

Active.  Sing.  1.  kalpayami .  2.  kalpayasi.  3.  kalpdyati. — Du.  2.  kalp- 
dyathas.  3.  kalpayatas.  —  PI.  1.  kalpayamasi  and  kalpayamas.  2.  kalpdyathd. 
3.  kalpdya?iti. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  kalpdye.  2.  kalpdyase.  3.  kalpdyate.  — -  D11.  2.  kalpd- 
yethe .  3.  kalpaycte.  * —  PI.  1.  kalpayamahe.  3.  kalpdyante. 

Forms  that  occur  elsewhere  in  the  present  system  are  the  following: 


1  This  root,  of  which  only  three  forms 

occur  in  the  RV.,  seems  to  be  only  a  varied 

spelling  for  sru-  ‘flow’. 


2  The  causative  stem  ha-paya-,  from  hd- 
‘forsake’  is  presupposed  by  the  aorist  fthipas. 

3  See  above  27  a  1  and  4. 


VII.  Verb.  Secondary  Conjugation.  397 

b.  Subjunctive.  Active.  Sing.i.  cetdyani (TS.  111.  2.  io2;  VIS.  iv.  5s),  randha- 
ydni.  —  2.  coddyasi ,  mrldyasi,  randhdyasi (AV.),  vartayasiipYS.  vii. 4. 201) ;  panayas 
(A V.),  _y<7z^Ty<7.f(AV.),  yodhayls.  —  3.  tf/Y/<7y.7//(AV.),  kalpdyati,  tarpaydti{ AV.), 
padayati  (AV.),  pdrayati,  purayati  (AV.),  mar  ay  at  i  (AV.),  mrldyati ,  rajayati  (TS. 
11.  4.  142),  sudayati ;  ka  l pay  at  (AV.),  codayat,  pardyat,  marcayat ,  sadayat,  saydylt 
(TS.  1.  8.  62).  —  Du.  1.  Trayava .  —  2.  dhapayat/ias  (AV.),  padayathas  (AV.), 
vasayathas ( AW),  sadayatkas ( A V.). —  3.  kulaydtas .  —  PI.  1.  Jraydma ,  dhdraydma . 
— -  2.  chaddyatha ,  vardhayat/ia  { AV.).  —  3.  srapdyan  (TS.iv.  1.  51). —  Middle. 
Sing.  2.  kamdyase ,  coddyase,  josdyase ,  maddyase ,  yatayase ,  madayathas  ( AV. 
iv.  2  56).  —  3.  codaydte ,  chandayate ,  dharayate,  maddyate ,  vartaydte ;  inkhdyatai 
(AV.),  cetayatai  (TS.  1.  1.  132),  dhdrayatai  (AV.),  rdjaydtai  (AV.),  vdraydtai 
(AV.).  —  Du.  1.  ihkhaydvahai ,  kalpayavahai ,  janayavahai  (AV.).  —  3.  mada- 
yaite.  —  PI.  2.  kamdyadhve ,  madayadhve ;  madayad/ivai. 

c.  Optative.  This  mood  is  very  rare,  only  four  forms  occurring  in  the 
RV.  and  two  in  the  AV.  Sing,  i.janayes  (Kh.n.  104),  dharayes.  —  3.  manayet 
(AV.),  vadayet  (AA.m.  2.5),  vesayet  (AV.),  sprhayet.  —  Pl.i.  citdyema,  marjayema . 

d.  Imperative.  Forms  of  this  mood  are  common,  nearly  120  occurring 
in  the  RV.;  of  these,  however,  quite  one  half  are  in  the  2.  sing.  act.  No 
forms  of  the  3.  sing,  and  du.  mid.  are  met  with  in  the  RV  No  impv.  in 

is  found  in  the  RV.  and  only  one  in  the  AV. :  2.  sing,  dhdrayatat x.  The 
forms  actually  occurring,  if  made  from  kalpaya-,  would  be  the  following: 

Active.  Sing.  2.  kalpaya  and  kalpayatdt  (AV.).  3.  kalpayatu.  —  Du.  2. 
kalpayatam.  3.  kalpayatam.  —  PI.  2.  kalpdyata.  3.  kalpdyantu. 

Middle.  Sing.  2.  kalpayasva.  —  Du.  2.  kalpdyetham.  —  PI.  2.  kalpaya - 
dhvam.  3.  kalpayantdm. 

e.  Participles.  The  active  participle  in  -ant,  with  fern,  in  -r,  is  common; 
e.  g.  jan-dyant -,  f.  jan-dyant-l -  ‘producing’.  The  middle  participle,  which  is 
always  formed  with  -mdna,  is  rare.  In  the  RV.  are  found  only  ma/idya- 
mana -  ‘glorifying’,  ydtaya-mdna-  ‘reaching’,  vardhaya-mana-  ‘increasing’,  and 
in  the  AV.  only  kamdya-mana -  ‘desiring’;  in  the  'PS.  (iv.  2.  62)  catdya-mana-. 

f.  Imperfect.  Forms  of  this  tense,  both  augmented  and  unaugmented, 
are  frequent.  In  the  RV.  some  130  occur  in  the  active,  about  two-thirds  of 
which  are  in  the  2.  and  3.  sing.  Middle  forms  are  rare  except  in  the  3.  pi. 
In  the  active  the  1.  and  3.  du.,  and  1.  and  2.  pi.  are  wanting;  in  the  middle 
all  the  1.  persons  and  the  3.  du.  are  unrepresented.  Some  50  unaugmented 
forms  are  used  as  injunctives  in  the  RV. 2.  The  forms  actually  occurring,  if 
made  from  jandya -,  would  be  the  following: 

Active.  Sing.  1.  ajanayani)  janayam.  2.  ajanayas;  jandyas.  3.  djanayat ; 
pan  ay  at.  —  Du.  2.  djanayatam.  —  PI.  3.  dj an  ay  an ;  janayan. 

Middle.  Sing.  2.  ajanayathas ;  pandyathas.  3.  djanayat  a ;  janayata . 

Du.  2.  ajanayetham.  —  PI.  2.  apanayadhvam.  3.  dj  an  ay  ant  a ;  janayanta. 

560.  Outside  the  present  system  very  few  causative  forms  occur. 
These  are  found  in  the  following  formations. 

a.  Future.  Only  four  forms  occur  in  the  RV.  and  AV.  Active. 

Sing.  1.  dusayisydmi  (AV.).  3.  dharayisydti.  —  Middle.  Sing.  2.  vasayisydsc 

‘wilt  adorn  thyself’.  3.  varayisyate  (AV.)  ‘will  shield’. 

b.  Perfect.  The  only  example  of  a  periphrastic  perfect  occurring  in 
the  Samhitas  is  made  from  a  causative  stem:  gam  ay  din  cakara  (AV.). 

c.  Aorist.  The  reduplicated  aorist  has  attached  itself  to  the  causa¬ 
tive,  probably  because  the  intensive  character  of  the  reduplicated  form  became 

1  In  K.  the  forms  yamayatat  and  cydvayatat  2  See  AVERY  264. 
occur;  and  in  pi.  2.  the  unexampled  ending 
• dhvat  in  varayadhvat :  Whitney  1043  d. 


398  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


associated  with  the  originally  iterative  meaning  of  the  causative.  But  in  form 
it  is  unconnected  with  the  causative  stem,  being  derived  directly  from  the 
root;  and  more  than  one-third  of  the  verbs  which  form  it  in  the  RV.,  and 
about  one-fifth  in  the  AY.,  have  no  causative  stem  in  -ay a.  There  are,  how¬ 
ever,  eight  forms  which  are  actually  made  from  the  causative  stem:  Sing.  1. 
arp-ip-am  (A  V.)  from  ar-paya-\  2.  jlhip-as  from  ha-pay  a-1  ‘cause  to  depart’; 
atisthip-as  and  3.  atisthip-at  from  sthd-paya-  ‘fasten’;  ajijhip-at  (TS.)  from  jha- 
paya-  ‘cause  to  know’;  PI.  2.  djijap-ata  (VS.)  from  jdpaya-  ‘cause  to  conquer’ 
(V» ;  Sing.  2.  act.  bib  his- as  (TS.)  and  mid.  bibhis-athas  from  bhi-saya-  ‘frighten’, 
anomalous  causative  of  bhi-  ‘fear’. 

a.  There  are  besides  three  /s-aorists  formed  from  the  causative  stem: 

7 yathay-Ts  (AV.)  from  vyathaya-  ‘disturb’;  ailay-lt  (AY.)  from  ilaya-  ‘has  quieted 
down’;  dhvanay-Tt 2  from  dhvanaya-  ‘envelope’. 

561.  Nominal  derivatives,  a.  The  only  present  passive  participle 
appears  in  the  form  bhaj-yd-mana-  (AV.  xii.  528).  There  are  also  a  few  past 
participles:  ghar-i-ta-  (AV.)  ‘smeared’;  cod-i-td-  ‘impelled’;  -ves-ida-  (AV.) 
‘caused  to  enter’. 

b.  A  few  gerundives  in  -dyya  are  formed  from  causative  stems:  trayay- 
dyya-  ‘to  be  guarded’;  panay-dyya-  ‘admirable’;  sprhay-dyya-  ‘desirable’3. 

c.  Ten  infinitives  formed  with  -dhyai  from  the  causative  stem  are  met 
with  in  the  RV.:  isdyadhyai,  Trayadhyai ,  t  ams  ay  d  dhyai,  nasayddhyai ,  manda- 
yddhyai ,  madayddhyai,  risayddhyai ,  v  art  aye  i  d hy  a  i ,  v  a jay  d  d hy  a  i,  syajidayd  dhyai 4. 

d.  Four  gerunds  formed  with  -tva  from  causative  stems  are  met  with 
in  the  AV. :  arpay-i-tvd ,  ha /pay -idl'd,  saday-idvd ,  sramsay-i-tvd . 

e.  Finally  several  ordinary  nouns  are  derived  from  the  causative  stem 
with  various  suffixes;  a  few  verbal  nouns  in  -ana:  dip-ana-  (AV.) ‘thrusting’; 
-bhi-s-aiia-  ‘frightening’;  one  or  two  agent  nouns  in  -tr,  f.  -tr-i :  coday-i-tr-l- 
‘stimulator’;  bodhay-idr-  ‘awakened;  a  few  adjectives  in  -a.  as  second  members 
of  compounds:  ati-pdrayd-  ‘putting  across’;  ni-dharaya-  ‘putting  down’;  vacam- 
Tiikhayd-  ‘voice-impelling’;  visvam-ejaya-  ‘all-stimulating’;  an  adjective  in  -dfu: 
patay-ald-  (AV.)  ‘flying’;  five  adjectives  in  -isnu:  tdpay-ismi-  ‘tormenting’; 
namay-isnu-  ‘bending’;  patay-isnd-  ‘flying’;  pdray-isnu-  ‘rescuing’;  maday-isnu- 
‘intoxicating’;  seven  adjectives  in  - itnu :  -amay-itnu-  ‘making  ill’;  tanay-itnu- 
‘thundering’ ;  dravay-itmi-  ‘speeding’ ;  posay-itnu-  ‘nourishing’;  maday-itnu -  ‘intoxi¬ 
cating’;  sfiday-itnu-  ‘streaming  sweetness’;  stanay-itnu-  m.  ‘thunder’;  and  three 
adjectives  in  -u:  dharay-ii-  ‘streaming’5;  bhdvay-u-  ‘animating’;  manday-ii- 
‘rejoicing’. 


Delbruck,  Verbum  p.  201 
Whitney,  Sanskrit  Grammar  1053 — 1068. 
Cp.  Brugmann,  KG.  693 — 696. 


The  Denominative. 

209,  216 — 218.  —  Avery,  Verb-Inflection  272—274. — 
v.  Negelein,  Zur  Sprachgeschichte  40—44.  — 


562.  The  denominative  is  nearly  always  formed  from  a  nominal  stem 
with  the  suffix  -ya.  The  latter  is  normally  accented;  but  a  certain  number 
of  unmistakable  denominatives,  such  as  mantra-yade  ‘takes  counsel’,  have  the 
causative  accent  and  thus  form  a  connecting  link  between  the  regular  denomi¬ 
natives  and  the  causatives6.  The  formation  is  a  frequent  one,  more  than  a 
hundred  denominative  stems  occurring  in  the  RV.,  and  in  the  AV.  about 


1  The  stem  ha-paya-  does  not  itself  other¬ 
wise  occur  in  V. ;  cp.  p.  396  note  2. 

2  The  TS.  iv.  6.  g2  has  instead  dhvanayit. 

3  See  below  579. 

4  Cp.  Delbruck,  Verbum  211 ;  and  below 
585.  7; 

5  Whitney,  Roots,  s.  v.  dhy ;  according  to 


BR.  and  Grassmann  to  be  analyzed  as 
dharayu-. 

6  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  de¬ 
nominative  suffix  -ya  is  identical  with  that 
of  the  causative  as  well  as  that  of  the  verbs 
of  the  fourth  class;  cp.  Whitney  1055  a; 
v.  Negelein  44;  Brugmann,  KG.  690,  694. 


VII.  Verb.  Secondary  Conjugation. 


399 


thirty  (or  about  fifty  if  those  which  form  present  participles  or  derivative 
nouns  only  are  included).  The  general  meaning  of  the  denominative  is  that 
the  subject  expressed  by  the  inflexion  stands  in  some  relation  to  the  noun 
from  which  the  stem  is  formed.  It  may  usually  be  rendered  by  ‘be  or  act 
like’;  ‘regard  or  treat  as’;  ‘turn  into  or  use  as’;  ‘wish  for’. 

Denominatives  formed  with  -ya  are  best  classified  according  to  the  final 
of  the  nominal  stem  to  which  the  suffix  is  added. 

563.  Stems  in  -a,  which  usually  remains  unchanged;  thus  amitra-yd- 
‘act  like  an  enemy’,  ‘be  hostile’;  indray  a-  ‘behave  like  Indra’;  ksemaya-  ‘take 
a  rest’;  jar  ay  a-  ‘treat  like  a  lover’,  ‘caress’;  deva-yd-  ‘serve  the  gods’; 
yusma-ya-  ‘seek  you’;  vasna-ya-  ‘deal  with  the  price’,  ‘bargain’. 

With  the  causative  accent:  ( paryjankhaya- 1  ‘clasp  (round)’;  arthd-ya- 
‘have  as  a  desire’;  rtd-ya -  ‘act  according  to  sacred  order’;  kuldydya-  ‘build 
a  nest’;  inlay  a-  ‘bring  together’;  pd/d-ya-  (AV.)  ‘act  as  guardian’,  ‘protect’; 
mantra-ya-  ‘take  counsel’;  mrgd-ya-  ‘treat  as  a  wild  animal’,  ‘hunt’;  vavra-ya; 
‘put  in  hiding’,  ‘shrink  from’;  vdjd-ya-  ‘act  like  a  steed’,  ‘race’  (beside  vaja-yd-) - 
vird-ya-  ‘play  the  man’;  sa-bhagdya -  (AV.)  ‘apportion’1 2 3 4 5. 

ci.  One  or  two  denominatives  are  from  nominal  stems  extended  with  -a:  is-d-ya- 
‘have  strength’  (is-)  ^ ;  iirj-a-ya -  ‘have  strength’  (urj-)  h 

a.  The  -a  is,  however,  often  lengthened:  agkdya-  ‘plan  mischief’; 
ajira-ya-  ‘be  swift’;  amitra-yd -  (AV.)  ‘be  hostile’  (lJp.  -dyd-) ;  asva-yd-  ‘desire 
horses’;  rtd-ya -  ‘observe  sacred  order’  (beside  rtd-ya-)-,  tilvildyd-  ‘be  fertile’; 
tudd-ya-  ( AV.)  ‘thrust’;  dhupa-yd- 5  (MS.  AV.)  ‘be  like  smoke’,  ‘fume’;  priyd-yd- 
‘become  friends’;  mathd-yd-  (AV.)  ‘shake’;  musd-ya- 6  (AV.)  ‘steal’;  yajnd-yd- 
‘sacrifice’;  rathird-ya-  ‘be  conveyed  in  a  car’;  randhandya -7  ‘make  subject’; 
vrsd-ya-  ‘act  like  a  bull’8;  samd-ya-  ‘be  active’  (sdmaj ;  subhdyd-  ‘be  beauti¬ 
ful’9;  srathd-ya-  ‘make  loose’  (Pp.  -ay a-) I0;  satvand-ya-  (AV.)  ‘act  like  a 
warrior’;  sumnd-ya-  ‘show  benevolence’;  skabhd-yd-  ‘make  firm’.  In  most  of 
these  examples  the  Pada  text  has  a  short  a. 

a.  The  denominative  oja-ya-  ‘employ  force’  is  formed  from  oja shortened  for  ojas- 
‘strength’. 

b.  The  -a  of  the  nominal  stem  is  sometimes  changed  to  -7 :  adhvarl-yd- 
‘perform  the  sacrifice’  (adhvard-)\  cararu-ya-  ‘follow  a  course’  ( carana -), 
‘pursue’;  tavisjyd-  ‘be  strong’  ( tavisa -);  putrT-yd-  ‘desire  a  son’  (putrd-); 
rathi-yd-  ‘drive  in  a  car’  ( rdtha -);  sapat/u-yd-  (AV.)  ‘utter  a  curse’  ( sapdtha -). 
In  nearly  every  instance  here  the  Pada  text  has  I.  Even  in  the  Samhita  text 
the  AV.  has  putriya -  ‘desire  a  son’,  and  the  RV.  the  denominative  participle 
(with  shifted  accent)  anni-yant-  ‘desiring  food’  (diina-). 

a.  For  the  -a  of  the  nominal  stem  e  is  substituted  in  vare-ya-  ‘play  the  wooer’ 
(vara-),  ‘woo’. 

c.  The  final  of  the  nominal  stem  is  sometimes  dropped11:  adhvaryd- 
‘perform  sacrifice’  (beside  adhvarT-yd-) ;  krpan-yd-  ‘be  eager’;  tavisya-  ‘be 


1  Regarded  as  a  causative  by  Grassmann, 
s.  v.  ankh. 

2  DelbrUCK  189,  I  regards  the  form 
hdstayatas  as  a  denominative;  but  the  accent 
would  be  unique:  its  explanation  by  BR. 
and  Grassmann  as  a  compound,  hdsla-yatas 
‘wielded  by  the  hand’,  is  doubtless  the 
correct  one. 

3  Cp.  Delbruck  189,  2. 

4  Grassmann  regards  this  verb  as  a 
causati  ve :  see  Worterbuch,  s.  v.  urjdy . 

5  See  Whitney’s  note  on  AV.  iv.  196. 


6  See  Whitney  on  AV.  iv.  212. 

7  Based  on  randhana  ,  an  assumed  deri¬ 
vative  of  the  root  randh-. 

8  Beside  vysan-yd-,  from  vrsa -,  the  form 
which  vf$an-  assumes  before  terminations 
or  before  second  members  of  compounds 
beginning  with  consonants. 

9  From  subha-,  an  assumed  derivative  of 
subh-  ‘shine’. 

i°  There  is  also  a  causative  form  srathdya 
from  srath-  ‘loosen’. 

1 1  Cp.  v.  Negelein  40. 


400 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar 


mighty’  (beside  tavisl-ya-);  turan-yd-  ‘be  speedy’;  daman-ya- 1  ‘overpower’; 
bhuran-ya -  ‘be  active’;  vithur-ya-  ‘stagger’;  saran-ya-  ‘hasten’.  There  are  several 
other  denominatives  which  presuppose  nouns  in  -ana :  thus  dZiisan-ya -  ‘pay 
attention’;  risan-yd-  ‘commit  faults’;  ruvan-ya -  ‘roar’;  huvan-ya-  ‘call’.  The 
derivation  of  isan-yd-  beside  isana-ya -  ‘impel’  is  perhaps  similar;  but  the 
nominal  stem  on  which  this  denominative  is  based  may  be  isani-  ‘impulse’2. 

564.  Stems  in  -a,  which  usually  remains  unchanged:  gopd-ya-  ‘act  as 
herdsman’,  ‘protect’;  jmd-ya -  ‘speed  to  earth’;  ducc/iuna-yd-  ‘desire  mischief’3; 
prtana-yd -  ‘fight’;  bZiandana-yd-  ‘strive  for  glory’;  mana-ya-  ‘feel  attachment’; 
rasand-yd-  (AV.)4 5  ‘put  on  a  girdle’.  Similar  stems  are  to  be  assumed  in 
rgkd-ya -  ‘tremble’,  and  hrnd-ya-  ‘be  wrathful’;  and  dZiiya-yd-  ‘pay  attention’ 
is  based  on  dZiiyd-1  —  dhi-  ‘thought’. 

a.  The -a  of  the  nominal  stem  is  once  shortened,  if  krpa-ya-  (RV1.)  ‘mourn’6  is  a 
denominative  and  different  from  the  causative  krpdya -  (554).  The  a  is  dropped  in 
prtan-ya -  ‘fight’  beside  prtana-yd-. 

a.  There  are  more  than  a  dozen  denominatives  with  d  preceding  -ya-, 
without  any  corresponding  noun  in  a;  thus  asd-yd-  ‘attain’ 7 ;  tuda-yd-  (AV.) 
‘thrust’;  dama-yd-  ‘tame’7;  nasa-ya -8  (x.  406)  ‘reach’;  pand-ya -  ‘boast  of’; 
z -asd-yd-  ‘invest  oneself  with’;  vrsa-ya-  ‘cause  to  rain’9.  Seven  such  denomi¬ 
natives,  however,  appear  beside  present  bases  according  to  the  ninth  class  in 
-nd:  grbZid-ya-  ‘seize’  (grbZi-nd-) ;  mathd-ya-  ‘shake’  {mat/i-nd-'))  prusd-yd-  ‘drip’ 
{prus-ndnt-,  VS.);  nmsd-yd-  ‘steal’  (mus-nd-) ;  sratZia-ya-  ‘loosen’  {sratZi-nd-) ; 
skabfia-yd-  ‘fasten’  ( sZtabZi-nd -);  stabZid-ya-  ‘support’  ( stabZi-nd -). 

565.  Stems  in  -/,  which  is  nearly  always  lengthened  (though  usually 
short  in  the  Pada  text):  aratl-yd-  (RV.  VS.)  ‘be  malevolent’,  but  ardti-yd- 
(AV.  and  RV.  Pp,);  kavl-ya-  ‘be  wise’;  j am-yd -  ‘seek  a  wife’,  but  jani-yd- 
(AV.);  dur-grbZiT-ya-  ‘be  hard  to  grasp’;  maZu-yd-  ‘be  delighted’;  rayi-yd- 
‘desire  wealth’;  saZtZiT-yd-Z0  ‘seek  friendship’. 

a.  In  a  few  instances  the  i  is  either  treated  as  a  or  takes  Guna  of  which  the  final 
element  is  dropped  (-a-ya  =  -ay -yd) :  thus  isana-ya-  ‘set  in  motion’  [isani-  ‘impulse’);  kiria-ya - 
(AV.)'  ‘make  mention  of’  [kirii- ) ;  ahuna-yd-  ‘resound’  {dhiini-  ‘sounding’);  susva-yd-  and 
susva-ya-  ‘flow’  ( susv-i -11  ‘pressing’).  Perhaps  formed  in  the  same  way  are  srudhJ-yd- 
‘obey’  and  hrm-yd -  ‘be  angry’  12. 

pdtya-  ‘be  a  lord’,  ‘rule’,  probably  in  origin  a  denominative  of  pati-  ‘lord’,  is 
treated  like  a  verb  of  the  fourth  class  as  if  from  a  root  pat-. 

566.  Stems  in  -u,  which  (except  gdtu-ya-  twice)  is  always  long  (though 
always  short  in  Pp.):  asu-ya-  ‘grumble’;  rju-ya-  ‘be  straight’;  kratu-ya-  ‘exert  the 
intellect’;  gdtu-ya-  and  gdtu-ya-  ‘set  in  motion’;  pitu-yd-  ‘desire  nourishment’; 
valgu-ya-  ‘treat  kindly’;  vasu-yd-  ‘desire  wealth’;  satru-yd-  ‘play  the  enemy’, 
‘be  hostile’;  sukratu-ya-  ‘show  oneself  wise’.  Moreover,  isu-ya-  ‘strive’,  may 
be  derived  from  isu-  ‘arrow’;  and  nouns  in  -u  are  presupposed  by  ahku-yd - 
‘move  tortuously’,  and  stabZiu-yd-  ‘stand  firm’. 

a.  In  go-,  the  only  stem  in  -0,  the  diphthong  becomes  -av  before  the 
denominative  suffix:  gav-yd-  ‘desire  cows’. 


1  From  an  assumed  adjective  derivative 
damana-. 

2  Cp.  Delbruck  189,  4. 

3  The  Pada  text  wrongly  duccZiunayd-. 

4  Cp.  Whitney’s  note  on  AV.  xiv.  274. 

5  Which  perhaps  became  an  independent 
noun  through  the  influence  of  the  instru¬ 
mental  form  in  such  compounds  as  dhiyd-jZir- 
‘growing  old  in  devotion’. 

6  Cp.  Grassmann,  s.  v.  krpay. 

7  Cp.  Delbruck  199  (p.  217,  middle). 


8  Delbruck,  1.  c.,  regards  nasdya-  (x,  406) 
as  a  denominative,  BR.  as  causative  of  nas-. 

9  To  be  distinguished  from  vysdyd-  ‘act 
like  a  bull’. 

10  Cp.  v.  Negelein  41  (middle). 

11  From  the  reduplicated  root  sn-  ‘press’. 
*2  According  to  Delbruck  205,  p.  57,  also 

duhTya-  in  the  forms  duhiydt  and  dnhiydn 
(optatives  Grassmann,  Worterbuch,  and 
Whitney,  Roots,  s.  v.  dub).  Cp.  450,  a  5. 


VII.  Verb. 


Secondary  Conjugation 


401 


567.  Consonant  stems  usually  remain  unchanged  before  the  suffix. 

a.  The  only  stem  ending  in  -j  is  bhisdj-  ‘physician’ :  bhisaj-ya-  £plav  the 
physician’,  ‘heal’. 

b.  There  is  one  denominative,  isudh-ya-  ‘implore’,  which  seems  to  pre¬ 
suppose  a  stem  in  - dh ,  viz.  isudh -1,  but  is  probably  a  denominative  from 
isu-dhi-  (like  pdtya-  ‘from  pdti-)  ‘put  in  the  arrow’,  ‘aim’ 2. 

c.  Denominatives  formed  from  stems  in  -n  are  uksan-yd-  ‘act  like  a  bull’; 
udan-yd -  ‘irrigate’;  brahman-yd-  ‘be  devout’  (‘act  like  a  brahman1);  vrsan-ya- 3 
‘act  like  a  bull’,  ‘be  lustful’. 

d.  A  denominative  formed  from  a  stem  in  -ar  is  vadhar-ya-  'hurl  a 
bolt’  ( vddhar -).  Stems  in  -ar  are  further  presupposed  in  rathar-yd-  ‘ride  in 
a  car’;  srathar-ya-  ‘become  loose’;  sapar-yd-  ‘worship’. 

e.  The  consonant  stems  most  frequently  used  to  form  denominatives  are 
those  in  -as:  apas-yd-  ‘be  active’;  avas-yd-  ‘seek  help’;  canas-yd-  ‘be  satisfied’; 
duvas-ya-  ‘adore’;  namas-ya-  ‘pay  homage’;  nr-manas-yd-  ‘be  kindly  disposed 
to  men’;  manas-yd-  ‘bear  in  mind’;  vacas-ya-  ‘be  audible’;  varivas-yd-  ‘grant 
space’;  sravas-ya- 4  ‘hasten’;  sa-canas-yd-  ‘cherish’;  su-manas-ya-  ‘be  gracious’; 
sv-apas-yd-  ‘act  well’.  Stems  in  -as  are  further  presupposed  by  iras-ya-  ‘be 
angry’;  dasas-ya-  ‘render  service  to’;  panas-ya-  ‘excite  admiration’;  sacas-ya- 
‘receive  care’.  A  few  denominatives  have  further  been  formed  from  stems  in 
-a  following  the  analogy  of  those  in  -as;  thus  makhas-ya-  ‘be  cheerful’ 
(makha-)  and  su-makhas-yd-  (TS.)  ‘be  merry’;  manavas-ya-  ‘act  like  men’ 
( manava -).  The  stem  avis-yd-,  appearing  in  the  participle  avisyant-  ‘helping 
willingly’,  apparently  a  denominative  (beside  avisyd-  ‘desire’,  avisyu-  ‘desirous’), 
seems  to  be  formed  from  *av-is-  =  dv-as-  ‘favour’5. 

f.  A  few  denominatives  are  formed  from  stems  in  -us:  tarus-yd-  ‘engage 
in  fight’  ( tdr-us -) ;  vanus-ya-  ‘plot  against’  ( van-us -  ‘eager’) ;  vapus-ya-  ‘wonder’ 
( vdp-us -  ‘marvellous’).  This  analogy  is  followed  by  uru-s-yd-  ‘seek  wide  space’ 
from  a  stem  in  -u  (uni-  ‘wide’). 

568.  There  are  a  few  denominative  forms  made  without  a  suffix  direct 
from  nominal  stems,  but  they  nearly  always  have  beside  them  denominative 
stems  in  -ya;  thus  bhisak-ti  (viii.  79s)  ‘heals’  3.  sing,  from  bhisdj-  ‘act  as  phy¬ 
sician’  (also  m.  ‘physician’);  a-bhisnak  (x.  13 15),  3.  sing.  impf.  of  bhisnaj-  ‘heal’. 
Similarly  there  appear  the  forms  sing.  2.  isana-s ,  3.  isana-t ,  pi.  3.  isana-nta 
beside  isan-ya-;  pi.  3.  krpdna-nta  beside  krpan-yd-;  pi.  1.  taruse-ma ,  3.  tarusa-nte , 
tarusa-nta  beside  tarus-yd-;  pi.  3  vanusa-nta  beside  vanus-ya-.  Possibly  the  form 
vdnanvati  is  a  denominative  meaning  ‘is  at  hand’,  from  a  noun  *z >an-a?iu-,  beside 
the  simple  verb  van-  ‘win’6. 

Inflexion. 


569-  The  denominative  is  regularly  inflected  throughout  the  present 
system  according  to  the  a-  conjugation  in  both  voices.  The  commonest  form 
is  the  3.  sing,  active  and  middle. 

The  forms  of  the  present  indicative  active  and  middle  that  actually 
occur  would,  if  made  from  manas-yd-  ‘bear  in  mind’,  be  the  following: 

Active.  Sing.  1.  manasydmi  (AV.).  2.  manasyasi.  3.  manasydti.  — 

Du.  2.  manasyathas.  3.  ma?iasyatas.  —  PI.  1.  nia?iasydmasi  and  manasyfimas. 
2.  manasyatha.  3.  manasyanti. 

Middle.  Sing.  1.  ?nanasye.  2.  manasyasi.  3.  manasyate.  —  Du.  2. 
manasyethe.  3.  manasyete  (AV.).  —  PI.  1.  manasydmahe.  3.  manasyante. 


1  Cp.  Delbruck  194. 

2  Cp.  Grassmann,  s.  v.  isudhy. 

3  Beside  vrsaya-;  cp.  p.  399,  note  8. 

4  According  to  BR.  derived  from  sravas- 

Lndo-arische  Philologie.  I,  4. 


from  sru-  —  sru-  ‘flow’,  but  Grassmann 
from  sru-  ‘hear’. 

5  Cp.  Grassmann,  s.  v.  avisy. 

6  Cp.  Delbruck  p.  218. 


26 


402  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  ATdic  Grammar. 

Forms  that  actually  occur  elsewhere  in  the  present  system  are  the 
following: 

a.  Subjunctive.  Active.  Sing.  1.  ?iamasyd.  —  2.  urusyds,  kirtdyas 
(AV.),  sravasyds.  —  3.  apasydt ,  aratiydt  (TS.  iv.  1.  103;  VS.  XI.  80),  aratiydt 
(AV.),  urusydt ,  caranydt  (AV.),  durasyat  (AV.),  duvasydt ,  prtanydt ,  vanusydt , 
vareydt,  vasuydt ,  sravasydt ,  saparydt.  —  Du.  3.  varivasydtas.  —  PI.  3. 
prtanyan  (AV.),  sap  ary  An,  saranydn.  —  Middle.  Sing.  2.  arthdyase ,  iiilaydse.  — 
3.  ankhdyate. 

b.  Injunctive.  Active.  Sing.  2.  irasyas ,  risanyas ,  ruvanyas.  —  PI.  3. 
turanyan ,  duvasya?i,  narnasyan ,  saparyan.  —  Middle.  Sing.  3.  pandyata.  — 
PI.  3.  rghdyanta ,  rtayanta,  krpananta ,  tar  us  ant  a,  dhunayanta  l,  rue  ay  ant  a, 
v  anus  ant  a,  susvdyanta. 

c.  Optative.  Active.  Sing.  2.  dasasyes.  —  3.  urusyet ,  caranyet  (TS. 
1. 8. 2  2 x),  dasasyet,  duvasyet.  —  PI.  1.  isayema,  tarusema ,  saparye'ma.  — 
Middle.  Sing.  3.  manasyeta  (AV.). 

d.  Imperative.  Active.  Sing.  2.  is  any  a,  urusya,  gdtuya ,  gurdhaya , 

gopayd  (AV.  TS.),  grbhdya ,  das'asyd,  duvasya ,  namasyd ,  varivasyd ,  vdjaya 
(TS.  1.  7.  81),  srathdya ,  sapary  a.  —  3.  urusyatu ,  gopdyatu2  (AV.),  bhisajyatu 
(TS.  v.  2.  122).  —  Du.  2.  urusydtam ,  gopdydtam ,  canasydtam ,  dasasydta?n.  — 
3.  urusydtam.  —  PI.  2.  isanyata,  urusyata ,  grbhdydta  (AV.),  gopdyata  (AV.), 
dasasyata ,  duvasyata ,  namasydta ,  risanyata ,  saparyata.  —  3.  urusyantu, 

gopayantu  (AV.),  varivasyantu.  —  Middle.  Sing.  2.  arthayasva ,  vTrdyasva 
(AV.  TS.),  vrsayasva  (AV.).  —  PL  2.  tilvilayddhvam ,  virdyadhvam.  — 
3.  dhunayantam. 

e.  Participle.  The  present  participle  active  in  -ant  (with  fern.  -ant-T) 
is  very  common,  while  the  middle  form  in  -?ndna,  occurs  fairly  often. 

a.  Examples  of  the  active  are  agkdydnt-,  ankuyant-,  adhvarlyant-,  amitra- 
yant aratlyant asvayant -,  is  any  dint-,  is  ay  ant-  and  is  ay  ant-,  isuydnt udan- 
ya?it-,  urjayant -,  rghayant -,  rtdyant-,  rtdydnt-,  gavydnt-,  gopdyant-  (AV.), 
tavisTyant-,  dasasyant-,  duvasyant-,  dev  ay  ant-,  namasydnt- ,  pdlayant-  (AV.), 
putrlyant-,  prtanaydnt-,  prtanydnt-,  bhandanayant-,  bhuranya?it-,  mathayant-, 
musaydnt -,  yajhaydnt-,  yusmaydnt-,  rathirdyant-,  rathiydnt-,  vasuyant-,  vasna- 
yant-,  vajdyant-  and  vajaydnt-,  vrsanyant -,  satruyant sikdyant-  (VS.)  ‘dripping’, 
sakhiydnt-,  satvandydnt-  (AV.),  saparyant-,  sumnaydnt-,  susvayant -,  hrnaydnt- 
‘angry’. 

Examples  of  the  middle  are  rghdydmana-,  rjuydmdna-,  ojayamana-, 
kanduydmana-  (TS.),  kavTyamana-,  caraniyamdna-,  tavisydmana-,  priyayamana- 
(AV.);  {a-prati-)manyuyamdna-  (AV.),  rasanaydmdna-,  vrsdyamdna-,  sa?nanayd- 
indna-,  sumakhasydtmdna-  (TS.),  sumanasydmdna-,  stabhuyamana-,  svapasyd- 
nidna-,  hrmydmana-  ‘angry’. 

f.  Imperfect.  Active.  Sing.  2.  arandhandyas.  —  3.  aprtanyat, 

dskabhdyat  (AV.) ;  urusyat,  damanyat ,  dhupdyat  (AV.) ;  abhisnak.  —  Du.  3. 
urusydtam.  —  PI.  3.  anamasyan,  asaparyan ;  turanyan ,  vapusyan,  saparyan 
(TS.  11.  2.  124).  —  Middle.  Sing.  3.  dpriydyata.  —  Du.  2.  avirayethdm.  — 
PI.  3.  isanayanta. 

570.  Outside  the  present  system  no  denominative  form  occurs  in 
the  RV.  except  unayts  (  +  AV.),  2.  sing.  A-  aorist  (used  injunctively  with  md) 


1  The  form  bhuraj 'anta(yv .  435)  is  according 
to  pw.  =  bhrajanta  for  bhrajjanta  (bhrajj-  ‘be 
roasted’).  Cp.  note  in  Oldenberg’s  Rgveda. 

2  This  denominative  is  derived  from  the 

very  frequent  go-pa-  ‘cowherd’,  of  which 

two  transition  forms  according  to  the  a- 


declension  {go-pa-)  occur  in  the  RV.  To 
the  denominative  must  be  due  the  secon¬ 
dary  root  ‘protect’  {jugupur  once,  gupita- 
twice  in  the  RV.).  Cp.  p.  358,  note  !3.  How 
gup-  should  be  a  denominative  of  ‘cow’ 
(v.  Negelein  43,  note  5)  is  not  clear. 


VII.  Verb.  Nominal  Verb  Forms.  Past  Passive  Participles.  403 


from  unaya-  ‘leave  unfulfilled’  ( Una -).  A  few  other  forms  occur  in  the  later 
Samhitas.  Thus  the  AV.  has  the  peculiar  form  asaparyait  (AV.  xiv.  220)1, 
probably  3.  sing,  aorist,  with  -ait  for  -it2.  The  VS.  (11. 31)  has  the  3.  pi.  aorist 
d^a-vrsay-is-ata  ‘they  have  accepted’.  The  TS.  has  the  2.  pi.  aor.  pdpay-is-ta 
‘lead  into  evil’  (used  injunctively  with  md).  The  TS.  (in.  2.  83 4)  has  also  the 
future  participles  kanduyisyant-  ‘about  to  scratch’,  meghayisyant-  ‘about  to  be 
cloudy’,  sTkayisyant-  ‘about  to  drip’,  with  the  corresponding  perfect  participles 
passive  kanduyita -,  meg  hit  a-,  sikitd-. 

B.  Nominal  Verb  Forms. 

571.  A  large  number  of  nominal  formations  partake  of  the  verbal 
character  inasmuch  as  they  express  time  (present,  past,  or  future) ;  or  the 
relations  between  subject  and  object,  implying  transitive  or  intransitive  action, 
and  active,  middle,  or  passive  sense.  Such  formations  are  participles  (in¬ 
cluding  verbal  adjectives),  infinitives,  and  gerunds.  The  participles  formed 
from  tense-stems  having  already  been  treated3,  only  those  that  are  formed 
directly  from  the  root  remain  to  be  dealt  with.  These  are  the  verbal 
adjectives  which  have  the  value  either  of  past  passive  participles  or  of  future 
passive  participles  (otherwise  called  gerundives). 

a.  Past  Passive  Participles. 

572.  The  past  passive  participle  is  formed  by  adding,  in  the  great 
majority  of  instances,  the  suffix  -ta 4  (with  or  without  connecting  -/-),  or  far 
less  commonly  the  suffix  -nd  (directly)  to  the  root.  When  formed  from  a 
transitive  verb,  it  has  a  passive  as  well  as  a  past  sense;  e.  g.  as-  ‘throw’  : 
as-ta-  ‘thrown’;  da-  ‘give’  :  dat-td-  ‘given’.  But  when  formed  from  an  intransi¬ 
tive  verb,  it  has  a  neuter  past  sense;  e.  g.  gam-  ‘go’  :  ga-ta-  ‘gone’;  pat-  ‘fall’ 
:  pat-i-td-  (AV.)  ‘fallen’. 

573.  When  -ta  is  added  direct,  the  root  tends  to  appear  in  its  weak 

form.  Very  frequently,  however,  the  form  in  which  the  root  is  generally 
stated,  if  ending  in  vowels,  remains  unchanged,  while  those  ending  in  con¬ 
sonants  are  usually  modified  only  in  so  far  as  is  required  by  the  rules 
of  internal  Sandhi;  thus  j f mid- :  mla-td-  ‘softened’;  }rya  : ya-td-  ‘gone’;  \rra- 
:  ra-ta-  ‘given’;  1 f ji-  :  ji-td-  ‘conquered’;  p  s'ri-  :  sri-td-  ‘leaning  on’;  \rpm-  : 
prl-ta-  ‘rejoiced’;  ] fbhl-  :  bhi-td-  ‘frightened’;  Yyu-  1.  ‘yoke’  and  2.  ‘ward  off’ 
:  -yu-ta-;  Y sru-  :  sru-td-  ‘heard’;  p  stu-  :  stu-td-  ‘praised’;  yrbhu-  :  bhu-td-  ‘be¬ 
come’;  Y du~  :  hu-ta-  ‘called’;  Y k?~  :  kr-ta-  ‘made’;  pV/zr-  :  -bhr-ta-  ‘borne’; 
Yvr-  :  vr-ta-  ‘covered’  and  ‘chosen’;  YmTc~  :  mrk-ta- 5  (RV.)  ‘injured’;  p'firzV-  : 
sik-ta-  ‘poured  out’;  ]////-  :  tik-td -  ‘sharp’;  YyuJ~  : yuk-ta-  ‘yoked’;  ]/ mrj- 
:  mrs-td-  ‘rubbed’;  Y SVJ~  :  sT§-ta-  ‘discharged’;  ]/W/-  :  cit-td-  ‘perceived’;  ]/Vr/- : 
vrt-ta-  ‘turned’;  Y ma^~  ^  exhilarated’  :  ?nat-td-  (AV.);  jVV/z-  :  idSdhd-  ‘kind¬ 
led’;  | / krudh-  :  krud-dha-  ‘angry’;  \ tap-  :  tap-td-  ‘hot’;  | f rip-  :  rip-td-  (RV.) 
‘besmeared’;  y  dis-  :  dis-ta-  ‘shown’;  Y na^~  :  nas-td-  ‘lost’;  YJU?~  :  juHd-  (RV1.) 
‘gladdened’  and  jus-fa-  ‘welcome’;  Y pi?~  :  pis-ta-  ‘crushed’;  Y&as~  :  vi-kas-ta- 
‘split’;  Ysud-  :  gu-dha-b  ‘hidden’;  :  tr-dhd-  ‘crushed’;  |/Vtf//-  :  dag-dhd-  7 

‘burnt’;  \'dih-  :  dig-dhd-  (AV.)  ‘besmeared’;  Yduh-  :  dug-dha-  ‘milked’;  pV//-//- 


1  Cp.  v.  Negelein  41 ;  Bohtlingk,  ZDMG. 

52,  510  ff- 

2  As  in  the  AB.  form  ayrabhaisam  beside 
agrabhit ;  cp.  v.  Negelein  41,  note  2. 

3  See  under  declension  311 — 3 1 3,  and  in 
the  account  of  the  various  tenses  (present, 
perfect,  aorist,  future). 

4  Cp.  Reichelt,  BB.  27,  95  —  97. 


5  Only  in  the  compounds  a-mrkta-  and 
mrkta-vahas-. 

6  In  roots  in  - h  which  cerebralize  the 
suffix,  the  vowel  is  lengthened  as  compen¬ 
sation  for  the  loss  of  the  cerebral  z  :  cp. 
p.  51,  note  2. 

7  In  the  RV.  only  in  agni-dagdhd-  ‘burnt 
with  fire’. 


26* 


404 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache. 


4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


:  dr-dhd-  ‘firm’;  ] f druh- :  drug-dhd-  ‘hurtful’;  j/ hah- :  nad-dhd-  ‘bound’;  \muh- : 
mug-dha-  and  mu-dha-  (A V.)  ‘bewildered’;  ]/~ rih-  :  rT-dhd-  (RV.)  ‘licked’;  ]  ruh- 
:  ru-dhd-  (A V.)  ‘ascended’;  Y s  ah-  :  sa-dhd-  ‘overcome’. 

a.  Occasional  irregularities  in  the  form  of  the  root  are  not  due  to  the  ordinary 
rules  of  internal  Sandhi.  Thus  some  roots  show  an  interchange  of  vowel  and  semi-vowel: 
dTv -  ‘play’  :  dyu-ta-  (AV.);  slv-  ‘sew’  :  syii-ta-;  mlv-  ‘push’  :  -muta-  (VS.  AV.)  instead  of 
* myu-ta- 1 2 3 ;  hvr-  ‘make  crooked’  has  hru-td -  ‘crooked’,  beside  the  regular  -hvr-ta-  (RV.); 
sometimes  a  long  vowel  appears  in  the  root:  svad-  ‘sweeten’  :  svdt-ta- ;  gur-  ‘greet’: 
giir-ta sr-  ‘mix’  :  -slr-ta-,  beside  srT-ta-  from  srT-  ‘mix’,  the  usual  form  of  the  root;  dd- 
‘give’,  beside  the  regular  form  -da-ta-  in  tva-data-  (RV.)  ‘given  by  thee’,  otherwise  always 
has  dat-id -,  formed  from  dad-,  the  weak  form  of  the  present  base. 

574.  Roots  which  contain  the  syllables  yo ,  ra,  va  (initial  or  medial) 
are  generally  weakened  by  Samprasarana;  those  which  contain  a  nasal 
(medial  or  final),  by  dropping  it;  those  which  end  in  a  or  yd,  by  shortening 
the  former  to  T  or  i,  the  latter  to  T.  Thus: 

1.  yaj-  ‘sacrifice’  :  is-td-;  vyadh-  ‘pierce’  :  vid-dha-\  prach-  ‘ask’  :  prs-ta- ; 
bhras-  ‘fall’  :  bhrs-td-  beside  bhras-td-  (AV.);  vac-  ‘speak’  :  uk-td- ;  vap-  ‘strew’ 
:  up-td- ;  vas-  ‘shine’  :  us-td-;  vah-  ‘carry’  :  u-dha- ;  svap-  ‘sleep’  :  sup-ta- 
(AV.  VS.). 

a.  A  shortening  akin  to  Samprasarana  appears  in  av-  ‘favour’  :  -ii-ia-;  vd -  ‘weave’  : 
u-ta- ;  ira-  ‘boil’  :  sr-ta-  beside  srd-td-. 

2.  A  medial  nasal  is  dropped  in  ahj-  ‘anoint’  :  ak-ta-;  umbh-  ‘confine’ 
:  ub-dha-)  dams-  ‘bite’  :  das-td-  (AV.);  bamh-  ‘make  firm’  :  - bd-dha -;  simdh- 
‘purify’ :  sud-dhd-.  Final  n  and  rn  are  dropped  (the  radical  a  representing  the 
sonant  nasal)  in  ksan-  ‘wound’ :  - ksa-ta -;  tan-  ‘stretch’ :  ta-ta-\  man-  ‘think’ :  ma-ta- ; 
han-  ‘smite’  :  ha-ta -;  gam-  ‘go ’:ga-td-;  nam-  ‘bend’ :  na-ta-\  yam-  ‘reach’  : ya-td-. 

a.  A  few  roots  in  -an  have  d  instead  of  -anz :  khan-  ‘dig’  :  kha-td-’,  jan-  ‘be  born’  : 
jd-ta- ;  van-  ‘win’  :  -vd-ta-\  san-  ‘gain’  :  sa-ta-;  while  some  roots  in  -am  and  one  in  -an, 
retaining  the  nasal,  have  an:  dhvan-  ‘sound’  :  dhvantd-  (VS.  XXXIX.  7);  kram-  ‘stride’  :  krdn-td- 
(AV.);  sam-  ‘be  quiet’;  sdn-td-  (AV.);  sram-  ‘be  weary ’  :  sran-ta-;  dham-  ‘blow’  has  the 
irregular  dhmd-ta-  and  dham-i-ta-. 


3.  Final  a  is  shortened  to  T  in  gd-  ‘sing’  :  gl-td-;  dha-  ‘suck’  :  d/iT-td-; 
pd-  ‘drink’  :  pT-ta- 3 ;  to  i  in  da-  ‘bind’  :  -di-ta-\  dha-  ‘put’  :  -dhi-ta-  and  hi-td -; 
md-  ‘measure’  :  mi-td-;  sd-  ‘sharpen’  :  s'i-td- ;  sd-  ‘bind’  :  si-td-;  sthd-  ‘stand’  : 
sthi-td-. 

Final  yd  is  shortened  to  f  in  jya-  ‘overpower’  :  jl-td-  (AV.);  vyd- 
‘envelope’  :  vT-td-\  syd-  ‘coagulate’  :  sT-ta-. 


a.  Internal  shortening  of  a  to  i  appears  in  sas-  ‘order’  :  sis- fa  - ;  and  medial  a  entirely 
disappears  in  ghas-  ‘eat’  :  -gdha-  (TS.)  and  in  the  compounded  form  of  datta-  ‘given’, 
which  becomes  -t-ta-  :  deva-tta-  ‘given  by  the  gods’;  vy-a-tta-  (AV.  VS.),  n.  ‘the  opened 
mouth’;  parl-tta-  (VS.  IX.  9)  ‘deposited’;  -pratl-tta-  (AV .)  ‘given  back’.  The  same  syncopated 
form  appears  in  the  compound  participle  of  da-  ‘divide’  :  dva-tta -  (VS.)  ‘cut  off’. 

575.  When  -ta  is  added,  as  it  is  in  many  verbs,  with  connecting 
the  root  is  not  weakened  (excepting  four  instances  of  Samprasarana)4.  It  is 
thus  added  to  a  number  of  roots  ending  in  consonants  and  to  all  second¬ 
ary  verbs. 

a.  The  roots  to  which  it  is  thus  regularly  added  are  those  that  end: 

1.  in  two  consonants:  thus  uks-  ‘sprinkle’  :  uks-i-ta -;  ubj-  ‘force’  : 
ubj-i-td-  (AV.);  mnd-  ‘revile’  :  nind-i-ta-)  raks-  ‘protect’  :  raks-i-td- ;  sumbk- 
‘beautify’  :  -sumbh-i-ta-  (AV.);  hints-  ‘injure’  :  hims-i-td-  (AV.);  but  tabs-  ‘fashion’ 
has  tas-td-; 


1  See  above  50  b. 

2  Representing  the  long  sonant  nasal. 

3  The  more  correct  way  of  stating  these 

roots  would  be  gad-,  dhai-,  pai- ;  cp.  27  a. 


4  In  grbh-T-ta-  from grabh-  ‘seize’  and  grh- 
T-ta-  (AV.)  from  grab-  id. ;  uks-i-ta-  from  vaks- 
‘increase’;  ud-i-ta -  from  vad-  ‘speak’;  spth- 
i-ta-  from  srath-  ‘slacken’. 


VII.  Verb.  Past  Passive  Participles. 


405 


2.  in  voiceless  aspirates:  likh -  ‘scratch’  :  likh-i-td-  (A V.);  grath -  ‘tie  : 
grath-i-ta -;  ndth-  ‘seek  aid’  :  ndth-i-ta- ;  math-  ‘stir’  :  math-i-td-; 

3.  in  cerebral  d :  id-  ‘praise’  :  Tl-i-td-;  hid-  ‘be  hostile’  :  hil-i-ta- ; 

4.  in  semivowels:  car-  ‘move’  :  car-i-td-1;  jlv-  ‘live’  :  jiv-i-ta-. 

b.  The  suffix  is  also  added  with  -i-  to  a  number  of  roots  ending  in 
simple  consonants,  especially  sibilants,  about  which  no  rule  can  be  stated. 
Such  are  the  following  participles  arranged  according  to  the  final  of  the  root : 
ydc-  ‘ask’  :  yac-i-td-  (AV.);  pat-  ‘fall*  :  pat-i-td-  (AV.);  rad-  ‘dig’  :  rad-i-td-  (AV.) ; 
vad-  ‘speak’  :  ud-i-td- ;  vid-  ‘know’  :  vid-i-td-  (AV.)2 *;  dudh-  ‘stir  up’  :  dudh-i-ta- 
(RV.);  nadh-  ‘seek  aid’  :  nadh-i-td-;  badh-  ‘oppress’  :  badh-i-td -;  pan-  ‘admire’: 
pan-i-td-;  kup-  ‘be  agitated’  :  -hup-i-ta-;  gup -*  protect’  :  gup-i-td -  beside  gup-td- 
(AV.) ;  yup-  ‘obstruct’  :  yup-i-td-  (AV.) ;  rup-  ‘break’  :  -rup-i-ta- ;  drp-  ‘rave*  : 
-drp-i-ta-  and  -drp-ta- ;  lap-  ‘prate’  :  lap-i-td-  (AV.) ;  grabh-  ‘seize’  :  grbh-T-td-  and 
grab-  ‘seize’  \grh-T-td-  (AV.);  skabh-  ‘prop’  :  shabh-i-td-;  stabh-  ‘prop’ :  stabh-i-td-; 
dham-  ‘blow’  :  dham-i-td-  (beside  dhma-td -); 

as-  ‘eat’  :  as-i-ta -;  pis-  ‘adorn’  :  pis-i-td-  (AV.)  beside  pis-td-;  is-  ‘send’  : 


is-i-td-;  is-  ‘move’  :  -Ts-i-ta-;  tvis-  ‘be  stirred’  :  tvis-i-td-;  dhrs-  ‘dare’  :  dhrs-i-td- 
beside  dhrs-ta- ;  prus-  ‘sprinkle’  :  prus-i-td-;  mus-  ‘steal’  :  mus-i-td-\  hrs-  ‘be  ex¬ 
cited’  :  hrs-i-ta- ;  gras-  ‘devour’  :  gr as-i-ta-. 

a.  The  verb  hd-  ‘leave’  forms  its  past  participle  anomalously  (like  da -  ‘give’)  from 
the  reduplicated  present  base :  jah-i-ta-  (cp.  the  pres.  part,  jdh-at-'). 

ft.  In  the  AV.  is  once  (ix.  6j8)  found  a  past  passive  participle  extended  with  the 
possessive  suffix  -vant,  which  gives  it  the  sense  of  a  perfect  participle  active :  as-i-td- 
vant-  (Pp.  asita-vant -)  ‘having  eaten’. 


c.  Secondary  verbs,  almost  exclusively  causatives4,  add  -ita  after 
dropping  -aya-;  thus  arp-aya-  ‘cause  to  go’  :  arp-itd-  and  drp-ita -;  ihkh-aya- 
‘cause  to  quake’  :  inkh-itd -;  cod-dya-  ‘set  in  motion’  :  cod-iid-;  vTl-dya-  ‘make 
strong’  :  vil-  itd- ;  snath-ay  a-  ‘pierce’  :  snath-ita-;  svan-aya-  ‘resound’  :  - svan-ita -. 

The  only  past  passive  participle  formed  from  a  denominative  is  bham-itd- 
‘enraged’,  from  bhdma-  ‘wrath’. 

576.  The  suffix  -nd  is  always  attached  directly  to  the  root,  which 
as  a  rule  remains  unweakened.  Among  roots  ending  in  consonants,  it  is 
taken  by  those  in  d,  besides  two  or  three  in  the  palatals  c  and  j;  among 
roots  in  vowels,  it  is  taken  by  those  ending  in  the  long  vowels  a,  1 ,  r,  besides 
one  in  u. 

a.  The  final  of  roots  in  -d  is  assimilated  to  the  n  of  the  suffix;  thus  chid- 
‘cut  off’  :  chin-nd-;  tud-  ‘push’ :  tun-nd-;  trd-  ‘pierce’ :  -trn-na-  (VS.xxxvi.  2);  nud- 
‘push’  :  -nun-na-  (SV.)  beside  nut-ta-\  pad-  ‘go’  : pan-nd-  (AV.);  bhid-  ‘split’: 
bhin-na-\  vid-  ‘find’  :  vin-nd-  (AV.)  beside  z dt-td-;  sad-  ‘sit’  :  san-nd-  (VS.  AV.) 
beside  sat-td-;  skand-1, leap’  :  skan-nd-\  syand-1  move  on’  :  syan-nd-;  svid-  ‘sweat’ 

:  svin-nd-.  The  original  participle  of  ad-  ‘eat’  survives  only  (with  change  of 
accent)  in  the  neuter  noun  dn-na-  ‘food*. 

b.  The  roots  in  palatals  which  take  -na  are:  prc-  ‘mix’  :  -prg-na-  (RV1.) 
beside  prk-ta- ;  vrasc-  ‘cut  up’  :  vrk-nd- ;  ruj-  ‘break’  :  rug-nd-. 

c.  Roots  in  -a  remain  unchanged  or  weaken  the  final  to  1:  dra-  ‘sleep’ 
:  -dra-na-  (AV.);  da-  ‘divide’  :  di-nd-\  ha-  ‘leave’  :  hl-nd -;  final  -yd  is  shortened 
to  -I:  syd-  ‘coagulate’  :  si-na-  (VS.)  beside  sT-td-. 

d.  Roots  in  -T  and  -u  remain  unchanged:  hsT-  ‘destroy’  :  -ksi-na-  (AV.) ; 


1  Also  ar-i-td-  if  derived  from  a  somewhat 
doubtful  root  dr-  ‘praise’;  cp.  Whitney, 
Roots,  s.  v.  ar. 

2  viad-i  ta -  is  probably  from  the  causative 

of  mad-  ‘be  exhilarated’. 


3  See  p.  402,  note  2. 

4  No  examples  of  past  participles  from 
desideratives  (except  mTmdmsila -,  AV.)  and 
intensives  seem  to  occur  in  the  Samhitas. 


40 6  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

pi-  ‘swell’  :  pT-na-  (AV.);  blT-  ‘crush’  :  -bli-na-  (AY.);  ll-  ‘cling’  :  -li-?ia-  (AV.); 
du-  ‘burn’  :  du-?ia-  (AV.). 

e.  Roots  in  -r  change  that  vowel  to  - Ir  or  (generally  when  a  labial 
precedes)  -ur  before  -na\  gr-  ‘swallow’  :  gir-na-;  jr-  ‘waste  away’  :  jir-7}d-  (AV.) 
and  jur-na-\  tf-  ‘pass’  :  tlr-na- ;  pr-  ‘fill’  :  pur-nd-  beside  pur-td- ;  mr-  ‘crush’  : 
tnur-nd-  (AV.);  sf-  ‘crush’  :  hr-na-  (AV.)  beside  siir-td-  (RV.  1.  1746)1;  stf- 
‘strew’  :  stir-nd -  beside  -str-ta-. 

b.  Future  Passive  Participles  (Gerundives). 

57 7.  Verbal  adjectives  formed  with  certain  suffixes  have  acquired  the 
value  of  future  participles  passive,  expressing  that  the  action  of  the  verb  is 
or  ought  to  be  suffered.  There  are  four  forms  of  such  gerundives  in  use 
in  the  RV. :  that  derived  with  the  primary  suffix  - ya ,  which  is  common,  and 
those  derived  with  the  secondary  suffixes  -dy-ya,  - en-ya ,  and  -tv-a,  about  a 
dozen  examples  of  each  of  which  are  met  with.  In  the  AV.  are  also  found 
two  instances  each  of  gerundives  in  -tavya  and  -anfya. 

578.  By  far  the  most  frequent  form  of  gerundive  is  that  in  -ya,  about 
40  examples  occurring  in  the  RV.  and  about  60  in  the  AV.  This  suffix  is 
nearly  always  to  be  read  as  -ia,  which  accounts  for  the  treatment  of  final 
radical  vowels  before  it.  The  root,  being  accented,  appears  in  a  strong  form, 
excepting  a  few  instances  in  which  there  is  the  short  radical  vowel  i  u  or  r. 

1.  In  the  following  examples  a  final  short  vowel  remains  unchanged, 
a  -t-2  being  interposed:  -i-t-ya-  ‘to  be  gone’;  apa-mi-t-ya-  (AV.  vi.  1171 *)  ‘to 
be  thrown  away’  (?  mi-  ‘fix’) 3;  sru-t-ya-  ‘to  be  heard’;  kr-t-ya -  ‘to  be  made’; 
car-kf-t-ya-  ‘to  be  praised’  (kr-  ‘commemorate’). 

2.  Otherwise  final  T,  a,  r  regularly  take  Guna  or  Vrddhi,  the  final 

element  of  which  always  appears  as  y,  v,  r  as  before  a  vowel;  thus  from 

It-  ‘cling’  :  a-ldy-ya-* ,  an  epithet  of  Indra;  nu-  ‘praise’  :  nav-ya-  ‘to  be  praised’; 
bhu-  ‘be’  :  bhav-yci-  and  bhav-yd-  ‘future’;  hu-  ‘call’  :  hav-ya-  ‘to  be  invoked’; 
vr-  ‘choose’  :  vdr-ya-  ‘to  be  chosen’. 

3.  Final  -a  coalesces  with  the  initial  of  -ia  to  e,  between  which  and  -a 

a  phonetic  y  is  interposed;  thus  da-  ‘give’  :  de-ya-  (=  dd-i-y-a-)  ‘to  be  given’; 

khyd-  ‘see’  :  -khye-ya-  (AV.);  ma-  ‘measure’  :  me-ya-  (AV.).  In  the  RV.,  how¬ 
ever,  the  form  jiia-ya-  once  occurs  in  the  compound  bala-vi-jha-ya-  (x.  1035) 
‘to  be  recognized  by  his  might’. 

4.  A  medial  vowel  either  remains  unchanged  or,  if  short,  may  take 
Guna,  and  a  is  sometimes  lengthened;  thus  fd-ya-  ‘to  be  praised’;  gi'th-ya-  ‘to 
be  hidden’;  -dhrs-ya-  ‘to  be  assailed’;  dvcs-ya-  (AV.)  ‘to  be  hated’  (]V dvis-) ; 
yodh-ya-  ‘to  be  fought’  {\ryudh-) ;  drdh-ya-  ‘to  be  completed’  (]T rdh-);  mdrj-ya- 
to  be  purified’  (]V mrj-) ;  cdks-ya-  ‘to  be  seen’;  ddbh-ya-  ‘to  be  deceived’; 
rdmh-ya-  ‘to  be  hastened’;  rddh-ya-  ‘to  be  won’;  vand-ya-  ‘praiseworthy’; 
sams-ya-  ‘to  be  lauded’;  -sdd-ya-  from  sad-  ‘sit’;  -?ndd-ya-  from  mad-  ‘be  ex¬ 
hilarated’;  vdc-ya-  ‘to  be  said’  {\Tvac-). 

579.  Hardly  a  dozen  gerundives,  almost  restricted  to  the  RV.,  are 
formed  with  -dy-ya  5  (which  with  one  exception  is  always  to  be  read  - dyia ): 
daks-dyya-  ‘to  be  conciliated’;  pan-dyya-  ‘to  be  admired’;  vid-dyya -  ‘to  be 

1  The  form  -sTr-ta-  is  also  found  in  the  4  Cp.  Grassmann,  s.  v. 

MS.:  Whitney,  Roots,  s.  v.  \sr-  ‘crush’.  :  5  Cp.  Lindner,  Nominalbildung  22;  Del- 

2  Cp.  the  -t  added  to  roots  ending  in  bruck,  Verbum  233;  Whitney  966  c;  Bar- 

•i,  -7i,  -r  to  form  nominal  stems  (308).  tholomae,  BB.  15,  179  n.  I ;  BB.  20,  85. 

3  The  meaning  is  uncertain:  Whitney 

translates  the  word  by  ‘borrowed’.  See  his 

notes  in  his  Translation. 


VII.  Verb.  Infinitive.  407 

found’;  srav-dyya-  ‘glorious’;  -hnav-dyya-  £to  be  denied’.  A  few  are  formed 
from  secondary  verbs  ;  from  causatives:  trayay-dyya-  ‘to  be  guarded’  (\P  tra-) l; 
panay-dyya-  ‘admirable’  (y'pan-);  sprhay-dyya -  ‘desirable’  (\dsprk-) ;  from  a 
desiderative:  di-dhi-s-dyya-  ‘to  be  conciliated  {\rdha-) ;  from  an  intensive: 
vi-tan-tas-dyya-  ‘to  be  hastened’  {Y tarns-).  Akin  to  these  gerundives  is  the 
anomalous  form  stuse-yya-  ‘to  be  praised’,  derived  direct  from  the  infinitive 
stuse  ‘to  praise’2. 

580.  More  than  a  dozen  gerundives  are  formed  with  -en-ya  (generally 
to  be  read  -enia)\  Tks-enya-  ‘worthy  to  be  seen’,  il-enya-  ‘praiseworthy’,  -car- 
enya-  ‘to  be  acted’,  drs-enya-  ‘worthy  to  be  seen’,  -dvis-enya-  ‘malignant’, 
a-bhUs-enya-  ‘to  be  glorified’,  yudh-enya-  ‘to  be  combatted’,  vdr-enya -  ‘desirable’. 
From  the  aorist  stem  is  formed  -yams-enya-  ‘to  be  guided’  (yyam-);  and 
perhaps  paprks-enya- 3  ‘desirable’  (\rprach-).  A  few  are  also  derived  from 
secondary  verbs;  from  desideratives:  didrks-enya-  ‘worthy  to  be  seen’ 
(ydrs-),  susrus-e'nya-  (TS.)  ‘deserving  to  be  heard’;  from  intensives:  mar- 
mrj-cnya-  ‘to  be  adorned’,  vavrdh-enya-  ‘to  be  glorified’;  from  a  denomina¬ 
tive:  sapary-enya -  ‘to  be  adored’. 

581.  About  a  dozen  gerundives,  almost  restricted  to  the  RV.4,  end  in 
-tv-a  (generally  to  be  read  as  -tu-a),  which  seems  to  be  the  infinitive  stem 
in  -tu  turned  into  an  adjective  by  means  of  the  suffix  -a:  kar-tva-  ‘to  be 
made’,  jan-i-tva -  and  jan-tva-  ‘to  be  born’,  j e-tv  a -  ‘to  be  won’,  nan-tva-  ‘to  be 
bent’,  bhdv-T-tva-  ‘future’,  vdk-tva-  ‘to  be  said’,  sdn-i-tva-  ‘to  be  won’,  so-tva- 
‘to  be  pressed’,  snd-tva-  ‘suitable  for  bathing’,  hdn-tva-  ‘to  be  slain’,  he-tva- 
‘to  be  driven  on’  (i \rhi -). 

a.  In  the  AV.  there  begins  to  appear  a  gerundive  in  -tav-ya.  It  probably  started 
from  the  stem  of  the  predicative  infinitive  in  -tav-e,  which  was  turned  into  an  adjective 
by  means  of  the  suffix  -ia^ .  The  only  examples  of  this  formation  are  jan-i-tav-ya-  ‘to 
be  born’  (AV.  IV.  237)  and  him s-i- tav-ya-  ‘to  be  injured’  (AV.  V.  lS5 6 7). 

b.  There  are  also  two  examples  in  the  AV.  of  a  new  gerundive  in  -an-iya,  which 
is  derived  from  a  verbal  noun  in  -ana  with  the  adjective  suffix  -Tya.  These  are 
upa-jiv-amya-  ‘serving  for  subsistence’  =  ‘to  be  subsisted  on’  (AV.  VIII.  io22);  d-vianir- 
aniya-  ‘fit  for  address’  ( d-mantrana -)  =  ‘worthy  to  be  addressed’  (AV.  vm.  i<y)6. 


c.  Infinitive. 

A.  Ludwig,  Der  Infinitiv  imVeda,  Prag  1871.  —  J.  Jolly,  Geschichte  des  Infinitivs 
im  Indogermanischen  (Miinchen  1873),  especially  p.  ill  —  1 37.  —  Delbruck,  Das  alt- 
indische  Verbum  (1874),  p.  221 — 228;  Altindische  Syntax  p.  410 — 425.  —  Avery,  Verb- 
Inflection  in  Sanskrit,  JAOS.  10,275 — 276  (1876). —  Brunnhofer,  Uber  die  durch  ein- 
fache  flectirung  der  wurzel  gebildeten  infinitive  des  Veda,  KZ.  30  (1890},  5°4 — 5 1 3-  — 
Bartholomae,  Zur  bildung  des  dat.  sing,  der  a-stamme,  BB.  15.  221  —  247.  — v.  Negelein, 
Zur  Sprachgeschichte  des  Veda  (1898),  91.- — Fritz  Wolff,  Die  infinitive  des  Indischen 
und  Iranischen.  Erster  teil  :  Die  ablativisch-genetivischen  und  die  accusativischen  infini¬ 
tive,  Giitersloh  1905. 

582.  The  infinitive,  all  the  forms  of  which  are  old  cases  of  nouns  of 
action,  is  very  frequently  used,  occurring  in  the  RV.  alone  about  700  times. 
The  case-forms  which  it  exhibits  are  those  of  the  accusative,  dative,  ablative- 
genitive,  and  locative.  Only  the  first  two  are  common,  but  the  dative  is 
by  far  the  commonest,  outnumbering  the  accusative  in  the  proportion  of  12 
to  1  in  the  RV.  (609  to  49)",  and  of  3  to  1  in  the  AV. 8  Infinitives  are 


1  Cp.  Grassmann,  s.v.,  and  Whitney  105  if. 

2  See  Brugmann,  KG.  809. 

3  See  Benfey,  Vollstandige  Grammatik 
904  and  860. 

4  A  few  of  these  are  also  found  in  B., 
also  an  additional  one,  ho-tva-  ‘to  be  sacri¬ 
ficed’,  in  the  MS.  (i.  93). 


5  Cp.  Brugmann,  KG.  809. 

6  The  gerundive  meaning  in  these  two 
verbal  adjectives  is  probably  only  incipient. 
The  second  is  expressly  connected  with  the 
verbal  noun  d-mantrana-. 

7  Avery  231. 

8  Whitney  986. 


4oS 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


formed  chiefly  from  radical  stems  or  stems  in  -tu,  only  a  few  dative  and 
locative  forms  being  made  from  other  stems.  It  is  somewhat  remarkable 
that  the  acc.  form  in  -turn  which  is  the  only  infinitive  in  the  later  language, 
hardly  occurs  in  the  RV.,  being  found  there  only  five  times1,  while  the 
dative  infinitive,  which  is  more  than  seven  times  as  frequent  as  all  the  rest 
in  the  RV.,  has  almost  disappeared  even  in  the  Brahmanas.  The  formations 
which  are  restricted  to  the  infinitive  meaning  are  the  datives  in  - tavai ,  - dhyai , 
and  (the  very  few)  in  -se,  besides  a  small  number  of  locatives  in  -sdni.  In 
other  forms  it  is  often  difficult  to  draw  a  strict  line  of  demarcation  between 
the  infinitive2  and  ordinary  case  uses-3. 


1.  Dative  Infinitive. 

583-  This  infinitive  ends  in  -e,  which  when  added  to  the  a  of  a  root 
or  stem  combines  with  it  to  -ai.  It  has  the  final  meaning  of  ‘(in  order)  to’, 
Tor  (the  purpose  of)’3.  This  dative  is  commonly  used  without  an  object; 
hence  a  dative  often  appears  beside  it  by  attraction  instead  of  an  accusa¬ 
tive;  e.  g.  asmdbhyam  dr s  dye  s  dry  ay  a  punar  datum  dsum  (x.  1412)  ‘may  they 
two  grant  us  life  again,  for  the  sun,  that  we  may  see  (it)’,  i.  e.  That  we  may 
see  the  sun’  (=  dr  say e  sttryam).  When  used  with  kr-  ‘make’  or  verbs  of 
wishing,  and  when  predicative,  this  infinitive  acquires  a  passive  meaning;  e.  g. 
agnim  sam-idhe  cakartha  (1.1139)  Thou  hast  made  (=  caused)  the  fire  to  be 
kindled’;  ydd  Tm  usmdsi  kdrtave  (x.  74s)  Svhat  we  wish  to  be  done’; 
brahmadvisah  .  .  .  hdntavd  u  (x.  1823)  ‘Brahma-haters  (are)  to  be  slain’4. 

584.  From  roots  are  formed  some  60  dative  infinitives. 

a.  About  a  dozen  are  made  from  roots  ending  in  long  vowels, 
chiefly  -a,  and  one  in  -i.  All  of  these  are  found  only  compounded  with 
prefixes,  excepting  bhu -,  which  appears  once  in  the  simple  form.  Two  of  them 
drop  a  before  the  - e 5.  These  infinitives  are:  vi-khyai  To  look  abroad’;  para-ddi 
To  give  up’;  prati-mdi  To  imitate’  (in.  604);  -ydi  To  go’;  ava-sai  (in. 5320)  To 
rest’;  srad-dhe  (1.1022)  To  trust’  (with  the  dat.  particle  ham);  pra-me  (ix.  704) 
To  form’;  pra-hye  (x.  1093)  To  send’  (Y hi-) ;  -miy-e  To  diminish’  (j P ml-);  bhuv-i 
and  -bhv-e  To  be’  (\Pbhu-);  -tir-e  To  cross’  (  Y tr-) ;  -st'ir-e  (yrstr-  ‘spread’). 

b.  The  rest  are  formed  from  roots  ending  in  consonants.  The  un¬ 
compounded  forms  are:  tvis-e  To  arouse’,  drs-e  To  see’,  bhuj-e  To  enjoy’, 
mah-e'  To  be  glad’,  mih-e  To  make  water’,  mud-e  To  rejoice’,  ?nus-e  ‘to  rob’, 
muh-e  To  be  bewildered’,  yuj-e  To  yoke’,  yudh-c  To  fight’,  ruc-e  To  shine’,  vrdh-e 
To  thrive’,  subh-e  To  shine’. 

The  compounded  forms  are  much  more  frequent.  They  are:  -dj-e  To 
drive’,  -idh-e  To  kindle’,  -krdm-e  To  stride’,  -grdbh-e  To  seize’,  -cdks-e  To  see’, 
-tir-e  To  cross’,  tuj-e 6  To  procure’,  -ddbh-e  To  injure’,  -dls'-e  To  point’,  -drs-e 
To  see’,  -dhrs-e  To  be  bold’  (•+•  AV.  TS.),  -?idm-e  To  bend’,  -nas-e  (+VS.)  To 
attain’,  -niks-e  To  pierce’,  -nud-e  To  thrust’,  -pfc-e  To  fill’,  -prcch-e  ‘to  ask’; 
-badh-e  To  bind’  (AV.),  -budhe  (TS.  1.  2.  31)  ‘to  awake’,  -mrse  To  forget’, 
-yaks-e  To  speed’,  -yuj-e  To  yoke’,  -rdbh-e  To  seize’,  -ruj-e  ‘to  break’,  -vdc-e  To 
speak’  (]j vac-),  -vid-e  To  find’,  -vidh-e  To  pierce’  ( Y vyadhj ,  -vis-e  To  seize’, 
-vrj-e  To  put  round’,  -vrt-e  To  turn’,  -s'ds-e  To  proclaim’,  -sdd-e  To  sit’,  -siid-e 
To  enjoy’,  -skdd-e  To  leap’,  -skabh-e  ‘to  prop’,  -sprs-e  To  touch’,  -sydd-e  To 
flow’,  -svaj-c  To  embrace’7. 


1  Avery  230. 

2  Whitney  970  1;  Wolff  p.  1. 

3  Cp.  Whitney  982.  On  the  uses  of  the 
infinitive,  cp.  Brugmann,  KG.  S05—  8 1 1. 

4  Cp.  Whitney  982,  a — d. 


5  That  is,  srad-dhe  and  pra-7ne,  which 
might,  however,  be  explained  as  locatives. 

6  In  VIII.  415  the  dative,  accented  tuj-e, 
occurring  independently,  appears  to  be  a 
substantive. 


7  Cp.  the  list  in  Ludwig  p.56—58. 


VII.  Verb.  Infinitive. 


409 


a.  One  infinitive  is  also  formed  from  a  reduplicated  root:  sisnath-e 
(hi.  3113)  ‘to  attack’;  but  according  to  Grassmann1  it  is  the  locative  of  a 
substantive  meaning  ‘attack’. 

585-  The  remaining  dative  infinitives  are  formed  from  verbal  nouns 
derived  with  nine  different  suffixes. 

1.  Some  25  of  these  are  datives  of  stems  in  -as2.  They  are  the 
following:  dyas-e  (1.  57O  ‘to  go’,  arhas-e  ‘to  be  worthy  of’,  rcds-e  ‘to  praise’, 
rnjas-e  ‘to  strive  after’,  ksadas-e 3  ‘to  partake  of’,  cdksas-e  ‘to  see’,  caras-e  ‘to  fare’, 
javds-e 4  (111.  502)  ‘to  speed’,  jivds-e  ‘to  live’,  tujds-e  ‘to  hurl’,  dohas-e  ‘to  milk’, 
dhdyas-e  ‘to  cherish’,  dhruvds-e  ‘to  sit  firmly’,  pusyds-e  ‘to  thrive’,  bharas-e 3  ‘to 
bear’,  bhiyds-e  ‘to  fear1,  bhojas-e  ‘to  enjoy’,  rdjas-e  ‘to  shine’,  vrhjas-e  ‘to  turn 
aside’,  vrdhds-e  ‘to  further’,  sobhds-e  ‘to  shine’,  sriyds-e  ‘to  be  resplendent’, 
sahyas-e 5  ‘to  conquer’,  spdras-e  ‘to  help  to’,  spurdhas-e  ‘to  strive  after’,  hards-e 
‘to  seize’. 


a.  Three  roots  form  an  infinitive  stem  with  -s  only  instead  of  -as:  Ji-s-e  ‘to  con¬ 
quer’,  upa-prak-s-e o  (v.  470) ‘to  unite’,  stu-s-e  ‘to  praise’7. 

2.  Some  half  dozen  are  formed  from  stems  in  -/:  is-dy-e8  (vi.  52*5)  ‘to 

refresh’,  tuj-dy-e  (v.  46 7)  ‘to  breed’,  drs-ay-e  ‘to  see’,  ?nah-ay-e  ‘to  rejoice’, 

yudh-ay-e  ‘to  fight’,  san-dy-e  ‘to  win’;  cit-dy-e 9  (VS.)  ‘to  understand’. 

3.  Four  or  five  are  formed  from  stems  in  -//:  is-tdy-e  ‘to  refresh’. 

pT-tdy-e  ‘to  drink’,  vl-tdy-e  ‘to  enjoy’,  sd-tay-e  ‘to  win’;  perhaps  also  u-tdy-e 

(; nfn )  ‘to  help  (his  men)’. 

4.  Over  30  dative  infinitives  are  formed  from  stems  in  -tu  (added  to 
the  gunated  root,  in  some  instances  with  connecting  vowel),  from  which  acc. 
and  abl.  gen.  infinitives  are  also  formed: 

a.  dt-tav-e  ‘to  eat’,  ds-tav-e  ‘to  attain’,  ds-tav-e  (VS.;  TS.  iv.  5.  i2)  ‘to 
shoot’,  e-tav-e  ‘to  go’,  b-tav-e  ‘to  weave’  (j/  vd-),  kdr-tav-e  ‘to  make’,  gan-tav-e 
and  gd-tav-e  ‘to  go’,  da-tav-e  ‘to  give’,  prati-dhd-tav-e  ‘to  place  upon’,  d/ib-tav-e 
‘to  suck’,  pdk-tave  (AV.)  ‘to  cook’,  pdt-tav-e  ‘to  fall’,  pd-tav-e  ‘to  drink’,  bhdr- 
tav-e  ‘to  bear  away’,  mdn-tav-e  ‘to  think’,  ydn-tav-e  ‘to  present’,  yas-tav-e  ‘to 
sacrifice’,  yd-tav-e  ‘to  go’,  yd-tav-e  ‘to  ward  off’,  vak-tav-e  ‘to  speak’,  prd-van- 
tav-e  ‘to  win’  (Y van-),  vdr-tav-e  ‘to  restrain’,  v ds-tav-e  ‘to  shine’,  vd-tav-e  (AV.) 
‘to  weave’,  vet-tav-e  (AV.)  ‘to  find’,  vd-lhav-e  ‘to  convey’,  pari-sak-tav-e  ‘to  over¬ 
come’,  sdr-tav-e  ‘to  flow’,  sd-tav-e  ‘to  bring  forth’,  se-tav-e  (AV.)  ‘to  bind’,  sd- 
tav-e  ‘to  press’,  stu-tav-e  ‘to  praise’,  hdn-tav-e  ‘to  slay’. 

I?,  av-i-tav-e  ‘to  refresh’,  car-i-tav-e  ‘to  fare’,  jlv-d-tav-e  (TS.  iv.  2.  65;  VS. 
xviii.  67)  ‘to  live’,  sdvi-tav-e  ‘to  bring  forth’,  stdr-T-tav-e  (AV.)  ‘to  lay  low’, 
srdv-i-tav-e  ‘to  flow’,  hdv-i-tav-e  ‘to  call’. 

5.  Over  a  dozen  infinitives  are  formed  from  stems  in  -tava  (added 
like  -tu  to  the  gunated  root),  which  are  doubly  accented. 

a.  e-tavdi  ‘to  go’  (also  aty-.  dnv etavai ),  o-tavdi  ‘to  weave’,  gdn-tavdi  ‘to 
go’  (also  upa-gantavai ),  dd-tavdi  ‘to  give’,  pdri-dha-tavai  (AV.)  ‘to  envelope’, 
pd-tavdi  ‘to  drink’,  dpa-bhar-tavdi  ‘to  be  taken  away’,  mdn-tavdi  ‘to  think’, 
md-tavai  ‘to  low’,  sdr-tavai  ‘to  flow’,  sd-tavdi  (AV.)  ‘to  bring  forth’),  hd?i- 
tavdi  ‘to  slay’  io. 


1  s.  v.  sisnatha. 

2  As  a  rule  the  suffix,  but  in  half  a  dozen 
instances  the  root,  is  accented. 

3  According  to  Grassmann,  2.  sing,  middle. 

4  According  to  Grassmann,  dat.  of  the 
substantive  javas  meaning  ‘swiftness’. 

5  According  to  Grassmann,  dat.  of  the 
comparative  sahyas. 

6  Delbruck,  Verbum,  and  Avery  accent 


•prd/cse.  Cp.  Oldenberg.  Rgveda,  note  on 
v.  476- 

7  See  Delbruck  p.  181  (I,  5);  cp.  above, 
p.  378,  note  1. 

8  Cp.  however,  Delbruck  207. 

9  Perhaps  more  probably  a  substantive, 
according  to  BR. :  ‘for  understanding’. 

10  The  MS.  has  kariavai ,  cp.  WHITNEY 
9S2  d  and  Wolff  7  (p.  9). 


4io 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


(j.  jiv-i-tavai  (AV.)  ‘to  live’  (Pp.  -ta  vdi),  yam-i-tavai  'to  guide’,  srav-i-tavai 
‘to  flow’. 

6.  There  seems  to  be  only  one  certain  example  of  a  dative  infinitive 
formed  from  a  stem  in  - tya :  i-tyai  ‘to  go’1. 

7.  Some  35  dative  infinitives  almost  limited  to  the  RV. 2  are  formed 
from  stems  in  -dhya  added  to  verbal  bases  ending  in  a  (generally  accented), 
and  seem  to  have  the  termination  - d/iyai :  iya-dhyai  ‘to  go’  (]V /-),  ira-dhyai $ 
‘to  seek  to  win’,  isd-dhyai  and  isaya-dhyai  ‘to  refresh’,  irayd-dhyai  ‘to  set  in 
motion’,  ksara-dhyai  ‘to  pour  out’,  gdma-dhyai  ‘to  go’,  grnd-dhyai  (AA.  v.  2.  110) 
‘to  praise’,  card-dhyai  ‘to  fare’,  jard-dhyai  ‘to  sing’,  tamsayd-dhyai  ‘to  attract’, 
tard-dhyai  to  overcome’,  duhd-dhyai  ‘to  milk’,  dhiyd-dhyai  ‘to  deposit’  (]/) dha-), 
nasaya-dhyai  ‘to  cause  to  disappear’,  piba-dhyai  ‘to  drink’,  prnd-dhyai  ‘to  fill’, 
bhdra-dhyai  ‘to  bear’,  mandd-dhyai  ‘to  delight  in’,  mandaya-dhyai  ‘to  rejoice’, 
madaya-dhyai  ‘to  delight  in’,  ydja-dhyai 4  ‘to  worship’,  risaya-dhyai  ‘to  injure 
oneself’,  vandd-dhyai  ‘to  praise’,  vartayd-dhyai  ‘to  cause  to  turn’,  vaha-dhyai  ‘to 
guide’,  vajaya-dhyai  ‘to  hasten’,  vavrdhd-dhyai  (from  the  perfect)  ‘to  strengthen’, 
vrjd-dhyai  kto  turn  to’,  sayd-dhyai  ‘to  lie’,  sucd-dhyai  ‘to  shine’,  sacd-dhyai  ‘to 
partake’,  sdha-dhyai  ‘to  overcome’,  stavd-dhyai  ‘to  praise’,  syandayd-dhyai  ‘to 
flow’,  huvd-dhyai  ‘to  call’.  The  TS.  has  also  one  of  these  infinitives  ending 
in  -e\  gamd-dhye  (1.  3.  62). 

8.  Five  dative  infinitives  are  formed  from  stems  in  -man:  trd-man-e 
‘to  protect’,  dd-man-e  ‘to  give’,  dhdr-man-e  (x.  881)  ‘to  support’,  bhdr-man-e 
‘to  preserve’,  vid-mdn-e 5  ‘to  know’. 

9.  Three  dative  infinitives  are  formed  from  stems  in  -van:  tur-van-e 
‘to  overcome’  Q/Vr-),  da-van-e  ‘to  give’,  dhttr-van-e  ‘to  injure’  (' dhvr- ). 


2.  Accusative  Infinitive. 

586.  This  infinitive  is  an  accusative  in  sense  as  well  as  in  form,  being 
used  only  as  the  object  of  a  verb.  It  is  primarily  employed  as  a  supine 
with  verbs  of  motion6  to  express  purpose.  It  is  formed  in  two  ways. 

a.  More  than  a  dozen  radical  stems  in  the  RV.  and  several  others  in 
the  AV.  form  an  accusative  infinitive  with  the  ending  -am1. 

The  root  nearly  always  ends  in  a  consonant  and  appears  in  its  weak 
form.  It  is  not  always  easy  to  distinguish  these  infinitives  from  substantives, 
but  the  following  include  all  the  more  certain  forms:  sam-idham  ‘to  kindle’, 
vi-crt-am  ‘to  unfasten’,  prci-tir-am  (\,rtr-)  ‘to  prolong’,  prati-dhdm  ‘to  place  upon’ 
(AV.),  (z7-,  sam-ypfcch-am  ‘to  ask’,  pra-miy-atn  ‘to  neglect’  (pV/V-),  yam-cun* 
‘to  guide’,  yudZi-am  (AV.)  ‘to  fight’,  a-rdbh-am  ‘to  reach’,  a-ru/i-am  ‘to  mount’, 
d-vis-am  ‘to  enter’,  subh-am  ‘to  shine’,  a-sdd-am  ‘to  sit  down’9. 

b.  Five  accusative  infinitives  from  stems  in  -tu  (of  which  the  dative 


1  In  X.  1064  bJutjyai ,  occurring  beside 
pustyai ,  is  doubtless  a  substantive ;  other 
cases  of  the  word  are  also  met  with:  see 
Grassmann,  s.  v.  bhuji.  The  MS.  1. 63  has  also 
sadhyai  (from  sah-\-ii);  rohisyai,  which  occurs 
in  the  TS.1. 3.lo2is  doubtless  a  substantive ; 
see  Delbruck  201  and  Whitney  977. 

2  This  infinitive  form  occurs  once  onlv 

✓ 

in  the  AV.  in  a  Rigvedic  passage. 

3  An  intensive  formation  from  ~\/radh-  (64,  i). 

4  yajadhyai  TS.  IV.  6.  33;  VS.  XVII.  57. 

5  Whitney  974  also  quotes  ddr-mcine. 

6  Cp.  Wolff  32,  40. 


7  The  onlv  roots  in  vowels  taking  it  are 

dhd-,  mb-,  tr-. 

8  Occurs  three  times  in  the  RV.,  always 
dependent  on  sakema. 

9  Perhaps  also  sam-oh-am  (strong  radical 
vowel)  and  upa-sp’ij-am.  Cp.  the  list  in 
Wolff,  p.  87 — 90.  There  are  several  quite 
doubtful  examples  from  the  AV.,  as  nik- 
khid-am  (conjecture),  pra-tahk-am,  sam-rudh- 
am.  See  Whitney’s  notes  in  his  Translation 
on  AV.  iv.  162;  v.  187;  vii.  505. 


VII.  Verb.  Infinitive. 


411 


form  is  much  commoner)1  occur  in  the  RV.  and  about  the  same  number  of 
others  in  the  AV.:  at-turn  (AV.)  ‘to  eat’,  o-tum  ‘to  weave’,  ktir-tum  (AV.)  ‘to 
make’,  ni-kartum  (Kh.  iv.  525)  ‘to  overcome’,  khtin-i-tum  (VS.  xi.  10)  ‘to  dig’, 
dti-tum  ‘to  give’,  drtis-tum  (AV.)  ‘to  see’,  prtis-tum  ‘to  ask’,  prti-bhar-tum  ‘to 
present’,  ytic-i-tum  (AV.)  ‘to  ask  for’,  tinu  pra-volhum  ‘to  advance ,  sptirdh-i-tum 
(AV.)  ‘to  contend  with’2. 


3.  Ablative-Genitive  Infinitive. 

587-  This  infinitive  is  formed  in  two  ways,  like  the  accusative  in¬ 
finitive,  either  from  a  radical  stem  or  from  a  verbal  noun  in  -tu  (from  which 
a  dative  and  an  acc.  infinitive  are  also  formed)3.  The  former,  therefore,  ends  in 
-as,  the  latter  in  -tos.  As  these  endings  are  both  ablative  and  genitive  in 
form,  the  cases  can  only  be  distinguished  syntactically.  The  ablative  use  is 
by  this  criterion  shown  to  preponderate  considerably. 

a.  The  -as  form  has  the  ablative  sense  almost  exclusively,  as  is 
indicated  by  its  being  employed  with  words  governing  the  ablative,  viz.  the 
adnominal  prepositions  rte  ‘without’,  purti  ‘before’,  and  the  verbs  pa-  ‘protect’ 
tra-  ‘rescue’,  bhi-  ‘fear’.  It  occurs  with  the  same  kind  of  attraction  as  appears 
with  the  dative  infinitive:  thus  trtidhvam  karttid  ava-ptid-as  (n.  29s)4  ‘save  us 
from  the  pit,  from  falling  down  (into  it)’.  There  are  six  such  ablatives  in  the 
RV. :  a-trd-as  ‘being  pierced’,  ava-ptid-as  ‘falling  down’,  sam-prc-as  ‘coming  in 
contact’,  abhi-sris-as  ‘binding’,  abhi-svtis-as  ‘blowing’,  ati-sktid-as  ‘leaping  across’. 

a.  There  seems  also  to  be  at  least  one  example  (11. 28°)  of  the  genitive 
use,  viz.  ni-mis-as  .  .  Tse  ‘I  am  able  to  wink’,  the  construction  of  \Pls'-  being 
the  same  as  with  the  genitive  infinitive  in  -tos  (b  a).  Another  instance  is 
perhaps  a-pfc-as  ‘to  fill’  (vm.  409). 

b.  Of  the  infinitives  in  - tos  occurring  in  the  RV.  some  six  are  shown 
by  the  construction  to  be  ablatives.  They  are:  e-tos  ‘going’,  gtin-tos  ‘going’, 
jtini-tos  ‘being  born’,  ni-dha-tos  ‘putting  down’,  stir-T-tos  ‘being  shattered’,  so-tos 
‘pressing’,  htin-tos  ‘being  struck’;  perhaps  also  vtis-tos  (1.  1743)5. 

a.  Three  infinitives  in  -tos  have  the  genitive  sense,  viz.  ktir-tos 
‘doing’  (with  madbyd)6,  dti-tos  ‘giving’,  and  yo-tos  ‘warding  off’  (both  with  Ts- 
‘have  power’).  In  two  passages  in  which  Tse  governs  the  infinitive  attraction 
of  the  object  appears  as  with  the  dative  infinitive:  Tse  raytih  suvfryasya  dtitos 
(vn.  46)  ‘he  has  power  over  wealth  (and)  brave  sons,  over  giving  (them)’,  i.  e. 


‘he  has  power  to  give  wealth  and  brave  sons’;  also  ytisya 
(vi.  1811)  ‘whom  he  can  ward  off’7. 


£  f 

ise 


yotos 


4.  Locative  Infinitive. 

588.  This  form  of  the  infinitive  is  rare,  since  thirteen  or  fourteen  examples 
at  the  most  occur.  Several  of  these  are,  however,  indistinguishable  in  meaning 
from  ordinary  locatives  of  verbal  nouns8. 

a.  Five  or  six  of  these  locatives  are  formed  from  radical  stems:  vy-us-i 
‘at  the  dawning’,  sam-caks-i  ‘on  beholding’,  drs-i  and  sam-drs-i  ‘on  seeing’, 
budh-i  ‘at  the  waking’.  As  these  nearly  always  govern  a  genitive,  they  are 
preferably  to  be  explained  as  simple  locatives  of  verbal  nouns. 


1  See  above  585,  4. 

2  See  the  list  in  Wolff  p.  68—71. 

3  Above  585,  4  and  586. 

4  Cp.  also  viii.  i12:  pur  a  jatrubhya  d-trdas 
before  the  cartilages  being  pierced’. 

5  See  Wolff  ii. 

6  On  this  word  see  Wolff  14,  who  thinks 


it  governs  the  ablative  rather  than  the 
genitive. 

7  See  Delbruck,  Altindische  Syntax  p.  418, 
and  cp.  Wolff  58. 

8  Cp.  Delbruck  212  (p.227)  and  Whitney 

985- 


412  I.  Allgf.meines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

b.  One  locative  infinitive  is  formed  from  a  stem  in  -tar:  dhar-tdr-i  ‘to 
support’  and  vi-dhar-tdr-i  ‘to  bestow’. 

c.  Eight  locatives  with  a  genuine  infinitive  meaning  are  formed  from 
stems  in  -san  in  the  RV.  They  are:  gr-ni-san-i 1  ‘to  sing’,  tar-T-sdn-i  ‘to 
cross’,  ?ie-sdn-i  ‘to  lead’,  par-sdn-i  ‘to  pass’,  abhi-bhti-sdn-i  ‘to  aid’,  su-sdn-i 
‘to  swell’,  sak-sdn-i  ‘to  abide’  (j fsac-)z,  upa-str-nT-sdn-i 1  ‘to  spread’. 

a.  The  form  isan-i  (11.  2 9),  seems  to  be  derived  from  is-  ‘emit’  for 
is-sdn-i1 2  3. 


d.  Gerund. 

589-  A  considerable  number  (upwards  of  120)  of  forms  ending  in  -tvi,  -tv a, 
-tvdya,  - tya ,  -ya  occur  in  the  RV.  and  AV.  in  the  sense  of  gerunds  expressing 
an  action  which  accompanies  or  more  often  precedes  that  of  the  finite  verb. 
They  are  doubtless  old  cases4  (the  first  most  probably  a  locative,  the  rest 
instrumentals)  of  verbal  nouns  formed  with  -tic,  - ti ,  -i,  all  of  which  are  also 
employed  in  the  formation  of  infinitives5 *.  The  first  three  are  formed  from 
the  simple  root,  the  last  two  from  the  compounded  root. 

590.  A.  a.  Of  the  gerunds  formed  from  the  simple  root,  those  in  -tvi 
are  the  commonest  in  the  RV.,  there  being  fifteen  altogether  in  the  RV. 
They  hardly  ever  occur  in  any  of  the  other  Samhitas.  They  appear  to  be  old 
locatives0  of  stems  in  -tic,  which  as  a  rule  is  added  directly  to  the  root,  but 
in  two  instances  with  connecting  -i-.  They  are  kr-tvz  ‘having  made’,  kha-ivl 
(TS.  iv.  1.  14)  ‘having  dug’,  ga-tvz  ‘having  gone’,  gu-dhvz  ‘having  concealed’, 
jani-tvi.  ‘having  produced’,  jus-tvT  ‘liking’,  pz-tvz  ‘having  drunk’,  pu-tvZ  ‘having 
cleansed’,  bhu-tvi  ‘having  become’,  vr-tvz  ‘enclosing’,  vrk-tvZ  ‘having  over¬ 
thrown’  (Yvrj-),  vis-tvz  ‘working’  (yd1  is-),  vrs-tvZ  ‘showering’,  skabhi-tvi  ‘having 
propped’,  ha-tvZ  ‘having  smitten’,  hi-tvz  ‘having  abandoned  ( yha -). 

b.  The  gerund  in  -tied,  an  old  instrumental  of  a  verbal  noun  in  - tu ,  is 
formed  by  nine  roots  in  the  RV.  and  about  thirty  more  in  the  AV.  Those 
found  in  the  RV.  are:  pZ-tvd  ‘having  drunk’,  b hit-tv d  ‘having  shattered’,  bhu- 
tvd  ‘having  become’,  mi-tv d  ‘having  formed’  (]Pma~),  yuk-tvd  ‘having  yoked’, 
vr-tvd  ‘having  covered’,  s'ru-tvd  ‘having  heard’,  ha-tvd  ‘having  slain’,  hi-tvd 
‘having  abandoned’  (j fhd-).  The  forms  occurring  in  the  AV.  include  two 
formed  from  secondary  verbal  stems  and  three  others  formed  with  the 
connecting  vowel  -1-.  They  are:  is-tvd  ‘having  sacrificed’  (}  y aj-),  kalpay-i-tvd 
'having  shaped’,  kr-tvd  ‘having  made’,  kri-tvd  ‘trading’,  ga-tvd  ‘having  gone', 
grh-i-tvd  'having  seized’,  jag-dhvd  ‘having  devoured’  (j Pjaks-),  ci-tvdi  ‘having 
gathered’,  cay-i-tvd  ‘noting’,  tir-tvd  ‘having  crossed’  (j//r-),  tr-dhvd  ‘having 
shattered’7  ir/i-),  dat-tvd  ‘having  given’,  drs-tvd  ‘having  seen’,  pak-tvd  ‘having 
cooked’,  pu-tvdi  ‘having  purified’,  bad-dhvd  ‘having  bound’,  bhak-tvd  ‘sharing’, 
mrs-tvd  ‘having  wiped  off’,  ru-dhvd  ‘having  ascended’,  lab-dhvd  ‘taking’,  vit-tvd 
‘having  found’,  vrs-tvd  ‘cutting  oft’  (idvrasc-)8,  sup-tvd  ‘having  slept’,  stab- 
dhvd  ‘having  established’,  stu-tvd  ‘having  praised’,  sna-tvd  ‘having  bathed', 
sramsay-i-tvd  ‘letting  fall’,  hims-i-tvd  ‘having  injured’.  One  gerund  in  -tva  also 
occurs  though  compounded  with  a  prefix:  praty-arpay-i-tvd  (AV.)  ‘having  sent 


1  Formed  from  the  present  base. 

2  From  \sac-,  BR.,  Delbruck,  Verbum 
213;  from  \sah- ,  Whitney  978. 

3  See  Bohtlingk,  pw.  s.  v.  isdni,  and  cp. 
Whitney  978,  Oldenberg,  note  on  11.  29. 

4  Cp.  v.  Negelein,  Zur  Sprachgeschichte  91. 

5  Cp.  Bartholomae,  BB.  15,227,  239; 

Brugmann,  Grundriss  2,  1090. 


6  Bartholomae,  loc.  cit. 

7  trs-tvei  in  AV.  XIX.  34s  is  probably  to  be 
read  iris  }va  ‘thrice  thee’;  see  Whitney’s 
Translation. 

8  See  note  on  AV.  vin.  32  in  Whitney’s 
Translation  (RV.  has  vrk-tvd ). 


VII.  Verb.  Gerunds. 


4i3 


in  opposition’.  From  the  Khilas:  janay-i-tvd  (1.48);  from  the  VS.  i-tvdi  (xxxn. 
12),  vid-i-tvd  (xxxi.  18)  ‘having  known’,  spr-tvd  (xxxi.  1)  ‘pervading’. 

c.  The  rarest  gerund  in  the  RV.  is  that  in  -tvdya,  being  formed  from 
only  seven  roots.  It  appears  to  be  a  late  formation,  occurring  only  in  the 
tenth  Mandala,  excepting  one  example  in  the  eighth  (vm.  1008)  in  a  hymn 
which  is  marked  by  Arnold  2  as  belonging  to  the  latest  period  of  the  RV. 
Two  of  these  gerunds  ( gatvdya  and  hatvdya )  recur  in  the  AV.,  which,  how¬ 
ever,  has  no  additional  examples  of  this  type.  These  forms  have  the  appearance 
of  being,  datives  of  stems  in  - tva ,  but  the  use  of  the  dative  in  this  sense  is 
in  itself  unlikely,  as  that  case  is  otherwise  employed  to  express  the  final 
meaning  of  the  infinitive.  Hence  Bartholomae^  explains  the  forms  as  a 
metrical  substitute  for  a  fern.  inst.  in  -tvdya  (from  the  stem  - tva ),  or  for  a  loc. 
of  -tva  with  enclitic  a  added.  There  seems  to  be  another  possible  explanation. 
Three  of  the  seven  forms  occurring  appear  instead  of  the  corresponding 
forms  in  -tva  of  the  older  Mandalas.  Owing  to  this  close  connexion  and 
the  lateness  as  well  as  the  rarity  of  these  forms,  we  may  here  have  a  tenta¬ 
tive  double  formation,  under  the  influence  of  compound  gerunds  formed  with 
' -ya  which  end  in  -ay a,  such  as  a-ddya  ‘taking’. 

The  forms  occurring  are  kr-tvdya  (VS.  xi.  59;  TS.  iv.  1.  54)  ‘having  made’, 
ga-tvdya  ‘having  gone’,  jag-dhvdya  ‘having  devoured’,  ta-tvdya  (VS.xi.  1)  ‘having 
stretched’,  dat-tvdya  ‘having  given’,  drs-tvdya  ‘having  seen’,  bhak-tvdya  ‘having 
attained’,  yuk-tvdya  ‘having  yoked’,  vr-tvdya  (TS.  iv.  1.  21 2 3;  VS.  xi.  19)  ‘having 
covered’,  ha-tvdya  ‘having  slain’,  hi-tvdya  ‘having  abandoned’. 

591.  B.  When  the  verb  is  compounded,  the  suffix  is  regularly  either 
-yd  or  -tyd.  In  at  least  two-thirds  of  these  forms  the  vowel  is  long  in 
the  RV.4 


a.  Nearly  40  roots  in  the  RV.  and  about  30  more  in  the  AV.,  when 
compounded  with  verbal  prefixes,  take  the  suffix  -ya5.  Four  roots  take  it 
also  when  compounded  with  nouns  or  adverbs.  The  forms  occurring  in  the 
RV.  are  in  the  alphabetical  order  of  the  radical  initial:  a-dc-ya  ‘bending’, 
pra-drp-ya  ‘setting  in  motion’,  prati-is-yd  ‘having  sought  for’,  abhi-up-ya  ‘having 
enveloped’  (Yvap-),  vi-krt-ya  ‘having  cut  in  pieces’,  abhi-krdm-ya  ‘approaching’, 
abhi-khyd-ya  ‘having  descried’,  abhi-gdr-ya  ‘graciously  accepting’,  sam-grbh-ya 
‘gathering’,  prati-grh-ya  ‘accepting’,  anu-ghus-ya  ‘proclaiming  aloud’,  abhi-caks-yd 
‘regarding’,  prati-cdks-ya  ‘observing’  and  vi-cdks-ya  ‘seeing  clearly’,  ni-cdy-ya 
‘fearing’,  pari-tap-ya  ‘stirring  up’  (heat),  vi-tdr-yd  ‘driving  forth’,  a-dd-ya  ‘taking’ 
and  pari-dd-ya  ‘handing  over’,  ati-div-ya  ‘playing  higher’,  anu-dfs-ya  ‘looking 
along’,  abhi-pdd-ya  ‘acquiring’,  pra-pruth-yd  ‘puffing  out’,  vi-bhid-ya  ‘shattering’, 
abhi-bhd-ya  ‘overcoming’,  vi-md-ya  ‘disposing’  and  sam-md-ya  ‘measuring  out’, 
sam-mil-ya  ‘closing  the  eyes’,  vi-muc-ya  ‘unyoking’,  d-mus-ya  ‘appropriating’, 
anu-mrs-ya  ‘grasping’,  d-yti-ya6  ‘taking  to  oneself’,  d-rabh-ya  ‘grasping’  and 
sam-rdbh-ya  ‘surrounding  oneself  with’,  ni-rudh-yd  ‘having  restrained’,  abhi- 
vrt-ya  ‘having  overcome’  and  d-vftyd  ‘causing  to  roll  towards’,  abhi-vldg-ya 
‘pursuing’,  ni-sad-ya  ‘having  sat  down’,  vi-sah-ya  ‘hawing  conquered’,  ava-sd-ya 
‘having  unyoked’,  sam-hd-ya  ‘preparing  oneself’  (ha-  ‘go’).  Compounds  formed 
with  adverbs  are:  pu?iar-dd-ya  ‘giving  back’,  mitha-sprdh-ya  ‘vying  together’; 
and  with  nouns,  karna-grh-ya  ‘seizing  by  the  ear’,  pada-grh-ya  ‘grasping  by 
the  foot’,  hasta-grh-ya  ‘grasping  by  the  hand’. 


1  The  MS.  has  also  the  form  sam-iray-i- 
iva:  Whitney  990  a. 

2  Vedic  Metre  p.  283, 

3  BB.  15,  p.  239,  12. 

4  Cp.  Whitney  993  a. 


5  On  the  gerund  in  -ya  cp.  Neisser,  BB. 
30,  308—311. 

6  -yu-ya  is  also  compounded  with  ni-  and 
vi-. 


414  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

The  additional  roots  thus  compounded  in  the  AV.  are:  ud-uh-ya 
'having  carried  up’,  a-krdm-ya  ‘stepping  into’  and  pari-krdm-ya  ‘striding  about’, 
sam-gir-ya  ‘swallowing  up’,  sam-grh-ya 1  ‘having  grasped’ 2,  vi-cch'id-ya  ‘having 
cut  asunder’,  upa-ddd-ya  ‘putting  in’  {da-  ‘give’)3,  abhi-dhd-ya  ‘encircling’, 
vi-dhfi-ya  ‘shaking  off’,  para-nl-ya  ‘leading  away’,  a-pdd-ya  ‘arriving  at’  and  pra- 
pdd-ya  ‘going  forward’,  sam-pd-ya  ‘drinking  up’,  vi-bhdj-ya  ‘having  apportioned’, 
(caus.  of  \r bhaj -),  sam-bhd-ya  ‘combining’,  ni-mdjj-ya  ‘having  immerged’  (\d majj-), 
apa-md-ya  ‘having  measured  off’4,  apa-mrj-ya  ‘having  wiped  off’,  sam-rabh-ya 
‘taking  hold  together’,  a-ruh-ya  ‘ascending’,  sam-lup-ya  ‘having  torn  up’5, 
upa-vis-ya  ‘sitting  down’,  pari-vis-ya  ‘attending  upon’,  sam-sd-ya  ‘sharpening’, 
d-sad-ya  ‘sitting  upon’  and  ni-sdd-ya  ‘sitting  down’,  sam-sic-ya  ‘having  poured 
together’,  apa-sidh-ya  ‘driving  away’,  sam-siv-ya  ‘having  sewed’,  nih-srp-ya 
‘having  crept  out’,  ati-sthd-ya  ‘excelling’,  prati-sthd-ya  ‘standing  firm’,  ut-thd-ya 
‘arising’.  From  the  VS.:  ni-str-ya  (xvi.  13)  ‘having  broken  off’,  sam-sfj-ya 
(xi.  53)  ‘having  mingled’,  ati-hd-ya  (xxv.  43)  ‘having  missed’. 

b.  Roots  which  end  in  a  short  vowel,  either  originally  or  after  losing  a 
nasal,  add  -tya  (nearly  always  in  RV.)  or  -tya  instead  of  -yd,  when  com¬ 
pounded.  The  following  gerunds  are  thus  formed  in  the  RV. :  -i-tya  ‘having 
gone’  with  api-,  abhi-  and  a-,  -i-tya  with  abhi-  and  prati -;  a-gatyd  ‘having 
come’  (l /gam-),  a-dr-tya  ‘regarding’,  d-bhr-tyd  ‘bringing’,  vi-ha-tya  ‘having 
driven  away’  (y  han-);  and  with  adverbial  prefixes  aram-kr-tyd  ‘having  made 
ready’,  akhkhall-kr-tya  ‘shouting’.  From  the  Khilas:  aty-a-hr-tya  (iv.  529). 

The  AV.  has  the  following  gerunds  from  nine  additional  roots  ?iir-f-tya 
‘separating’  (?)6,  abhi-ji-tya  ‘having  conquered’,  and  sam-ji-tya  ‘having  wholly 
conquered’,  a-ta-tya1  ‘having  expanded’,  apa-?rd-tya  ‘having  borrowed’  (] f  md-), 
ud-yd-tya  ‘lifting  up’,  pra-d-vr-tya  ‘having  enveloped’,  upa-sru-tya  ‘having  over¬ 
heard’,  ud-dhr-tya  ‘having  taken  up’  {Y hr-) ;  also  in  composition  with  a  sub¬ 
stantive:  namas-kr-tya.  The  VS.  has  upa-stu-tya  (xxi.  46)  ‘having  invoked’ 
and  pra-stu-tya  (xxi.  46)  ‘having  lauded’. 


VIII.  INDECLINABLES. 


1.  Prepositions. 

Gaedicke,  Der  Akkusativ  im  Veda  (Breslau  1880),  p.  193— 210.  —  Whitney, 
Sanskrit  Grammar  1077 — 1089,  1 123 — 1 130.  —  Delbruck,  Altindische  Syntax  p.  440 — 471.  — 
Cp.  Benfey,  Vollstandige  Grammatik  24 L  and  784.  —  Brugmann,  KG.  p.  457 — 4S0.  — 
J.  S.  Speijer,  Vedische  und  Sanskrit-Syntax,  Grundriss  1.  6,  87. 

592.  Two  classes  of  prepositions  are  to  be  distinguished.  The  first 
class  embraces  the  genuine  or  adverbial  prepositions.  These  are  words  with 
a  local  sense  which,  being  primarily  used  to  modify  the  meaning  of  verbs, 
came  to  be  connected  independently  with  the  cases  governed  by  the  verbs 
thus  modified.  They  show  no  signs  of  derivation  from  inflexional  forms  or 
(except  tirds  and  purds)  forms  made  with  adverbial  suffixes.  The  second 
class  embraces  what  may  be  called  adnominal  prepositions.  These  are  words 
which  are  not  compounded  with  verbs,  but  govern  cases  only.  As  regards 
form,  they  almost  invariably  end  in  case  terminations  or  adverbial  suffixes. 


1  -gfhya  also  appears  compounded  with 
ni-,  vi-  and  prali-. 

2  The  gerund  a-ghra-ya  (AV.  XIX.  85), 
the  reading  of  the  text,  is  not  found  in  the 
Mss.  and  is  doubtless  wrong;  cp.  Whitney’s 
Index  Verborum. 

3  From  the  present  base  of  ]/da-,  cp. 
Whitney  992  a. 

4  apa-md-ya  is  a  conjectural  reading. 


5  v.  Negelein  92  gives  -vidh-ya  ( \vyadh -) 
and  -sus-ya  as  occurring  in  the  AV„  but 
they  are  not  to  be  found  in  Whitney’s 
Index  verborum. 

6  See  note  on  AV.  x.  22  in  Whitney’s 
Translation. 

7  Conjectural  reading  in  AV.  XX.  136 J>; 
see  Whitney’s  Index  Verborum 


VIII.  Indeclinables.  Adverbial  Prepositions. 


4i5 


A.  Adverbial  Prepositions. 

593.  Of  the  twenty-two  included  in  this  class1,  eight  are  never  used 
adnominally,  viz.  dpa 2  ‘away’;  ud  ‘up’,  ‘out’;  m  ‘down’,  ‘into’;  ms  ‘out’;  para 
‘away’;  prd  ‘forth’;  vi  ‘asunder’  (often  =  ‘dis-%  ‘away’);  sdm3  ‘together’4. 
Three  others,  for  the  most  part  employed  adnominally,  are  restricted  in  their 
adverbial  use  to  combination  with  particular  verbs,  viz.  dccha  ‘towards’,  tiras 
‘across’,  purds  ‘before’.  The  remaining  eleven,  being  employed  both  adverbially 
and  adnominally,  are:  dti  ‘beyond’;  ddhi  ‘upon’;  dnu  ‘after’;  antdr  ‘within’; 
dpi  ‘on’;  abhi  ‘against’;  ava  ‘down’;  d  ‘near’;  upa  ‘up  to’;  pari  ‘around’; 
prati  ‘towards’. 

a.  When  combined  with  verbs 5  these  prepositions  are  not  compounded 
in  the  principal  sentence6.  Generally  speaking,  they  immediately  precede 
the  verb;  but  they  are  also  often  separated  from  it,  e.  g.  d  tv  a  visantu  (1.  5'') 
‘may  they  enter  thee’.  Occasionally  the  preposition  follows  the  verb,  e.  g. 
indro  gd  avrnod  dpa  (vm.  633)  ‘Indra  disclosed  the  cows’.  Two  prepositions 
are  not  infrequently  combined  with  the  verb7;  no  certain  instances  of  three 
being  thus  used  can  be  quoted  from  the  RV.,  though  a  few  such  instances 
occur  in  the  AV. 8  On  the  other  hand,  a  preposition  sometimes  appears  quite 
alone  9;  the  verb  ‘to  be’,  or  some  other  verb  commonly  connected  with  it, 
can  then  be  supplied  without  difficulty;  e.  g.  d  tu  71a  indra  (1.  ion)  ‘hither, 
pray,  (come)  to  us,  Indra’.  Or  the  preposition  appears  without  the  verb  in 
one  part  of  the  sentence,  but  with  it  in  another;  e.  g.  pari  7?id7n ,  pari  me 
prajdm ,  pari  7iah  pahi  ydd  dhanam  (AV.  11.  74)  ‘protect  me,  protect  my  pro- 
jeny,  protect  what  wealth  (is)  ours’.  As  the  verb  normally  stands  at  the  end 
of  the  sentence,  the  preposition  would  naturally  come  after  the  object.  Hence 
as  a  rule  it  follows  the  noun  governed  by  the  verb  (though  it  is  also  often 
found  preceding  the  noun).  Primarily  used  to  define  the  local  direction  ex¬ 
pressed  by  the  verb  which  governs  a  case,  prepositions  gradually  became 
connected  with  particular  cases.  In  the  RV.  it  is  still  often  uncertain  whether 
the  adverbial  or  the  adnominal  sense  is  intended.  Thus  dasvdtnsam  dpa 
gacchatam  (1.  47^)  may  mean  either  ‘do  ye  two  go-to  the  pious  man’  or  ‘do 
ye  two  go  to-the  pious  man’.  When  used  adnominally  the  preposition  only 


1  On  the  relative  frequency  of  these  pre¬ 
positions  in  the  RV.  and  AV.  see  Whitney, 
Sanskrit  Grammar  1077  a. 

2  On  the  relation  of  dpa,  dpi,  upa,  m, 
part  to  corresponding  Greek  prepositions 
see  J.  Schmidt,  KZ.  26,  21  ff. 

3  sdm  seems  in  a  few  passages  to  have 
attained  an  independent  prepositional  use 
with  the  instrumental:  sdm  usadbhih  (I.  63), 
sam  patnibhih  (il,  16®),  sdm  fkvabhih  (vm. 
97 1 2),  sam  jydtisd  jyotik  (VS.ll.  9),  sdm  ay  usd 
(TS.  1.  I.  io2);  but  in  all  these  examples  the 
case  perhaps  depends  on  the  compound 
sense  of  the  verb,  BR.  do  not  recognize 
the  prepositional  use,  cp.  Delbruck  p.  459; 
on  the  other  hand,  see  Grassmann  s.  v. 
sdm  and  Whitney  1127.  sdm  is  used  with 
the  inst.  in  Kh.  1.  47. 

4  The  adverbs  avis  and  prddur  ‘in  view’ 
are  used  with  \ as-,  ] /bhu-  and  \kr-  only. 

5  Though  a  certain  number  of  verbs  are 

never  actually  met  with  in  the  RV.  and 

AV.  in  combination  with  prepositions  (cp. 

Delbruck  p.  433),  there  can  be  litte  doubt 


that  practically  all  verbs  except  denomina¬ 
tives  were  capable  of  combining  with  pre¬ 
positions.  On  the  other  hand,  some  verbs 
occur  only  in  combination  with  prepositions 
(Delbruck,  loc.  cit.). 

6  accha ,  liras,  purds  seem  never  to  be 
compounded  with  the  verb  even  in  depen¬ 
dent  clauses;  see  Delbruck  p.469  (mid.). 

7  When  there  are  two,  pard  always  im¬ 
mediately  precedes  the  verb ;  d  and  ava 
nearly  always;  ud,  ni,  prd  usually.  On  the 
other  hand,  abhi  is  all  but  invariably  the 
first  of  the  two;  ddhi  and  dnu  are  nearly 
always  so,  upa  and  prati  usually;  cp.  Del¬ 
bruck  234. 

8  Cp.  Delbruck  235.  Three  prepositions 
combined  with  a  verb  are  common  in  B.; 
the  last  is  then  almost  invariably  a  or  ava , 

9  On  the  elliptical  imperative  use  of  pre¬ 
positions  cp.  Pischel,  VS.  1.  13,  i9f.;  Brug- 
mann,  IF.  18,  128;  Delbruck,  Vergleichende 
Syntax  3,  122  f. 


41 6  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

defines  the  local  meaning  of  the  case.  It  cannot  be  said  to  ‘govern’  the 
case,  except  perhaps  when  d  ‘up  to’  or  pur  as  ‘before’  are  connected  with 
the  ablative. 

594.  The  fourteen  genuine  prepositions  which  are  used  adnominally 
are  almost  entirely  restricted  to  employment  with  the  accusative,  loca¬ 
tive,  and  ablative.  Six  are  used  with  the  accusative  only,  viz.  dccha ,  dti , 
anu,  abhi ,  prdti  and  Hr  as ;  one  (dpi)  with  the  locative  only;  one  (dva)  with 
the  ablative  only  (and  that  very  rarely). 

The  remaining  six  take  the  accusative  and  one  or  both  of  the  other 

two  cases:  pari  takes  the  ablative  also;  iipa  the  locative  also;  ddhi ,  a?itar, 

d,  purds  take  both  the  locative  and  the  ablative  also.  The  first  two1  of 

these  six  belong  primarily  to  the  sphere  of  the  accusative,  the  last  four  to 

that  of  the  locative.  Thus  it  appears  that  the  genuine  prepositions  were  at 
the  outset  practically  associated  with  these  two  cases  only.  The  ablative 
came  to  be  used  secondarily  with  pari  in  the  sense  of  ‘from  (around)’;  and 
similarly  with  locative  prepositions,  ddhi  —  ‘from  (upon)’,  antar  =  ‘from 
(within)’,  d  =  ‘from  (on)’.  In  all  these,  the  sense  of  the  ablative  case  com¬ 
bined  with  the  original  meaning  of  the  preposition  to  form  a  new  double 
notion.  But  in  purds  ‘before’  and  in  d,  when  it  means  ‘up  to’,  which  are 
both  used  before  the  case,  the  ablative  sense  has  completely  disappeared. 

The  following  is  a  detailed  account  of  the  genuine  prepositions  in  their 
alphabetical  order. 

dccha  ‘towards’. 

595.  In  combination  with  verbs  of  motion  and  of  speaking2,  dccha 3 
expresses  direction  in  the  sense  of  ‘(all  the  way)  to’4.  Used  adnominally 
with  the  same  meaning,  it  takes  the  accusative,  which  either  precedes  or 
follows.  It  is  rare  except  in  the  RV. 5  Examples  of  its  use  are:  prd  ydtana 
sdkhimr  dccha  ( 1. 1 6  5 1 3)  ‘proceed  hither  to  your  friends’;  up  a  prdgat  . .  accha 
pitdram  mataram  ca  (1.  16313)  ‘he  has  come  forward  hither  to  his  father  and 
mother’;  kd?n  dccha  yuhjathe  rdtham  (v.  743)  ‘to  (go  to)  whom  do  ye  two 
yoke  your  car?’;  dccha  ca  tva^end  ndmasa  vadamasi  (vm.  216)  ‘and  to  thee 
we  speak  with  this  devotion’;  prey  dm  agdd  d his  ana  barhir  dccha  (TS.i.  1. 2 1  = 
MS.  1.  i2  —  K.  1.  2)  ‘this  bowl  has  come  forward  hither  to  the  litter’. 

ati  ‘beyond’. 

596.  Adverbially  ati  is  frequently  used  in  the  sense  of  ‘beyond’,  ‘over’, 
‘through’,  with  verbs  of  motion.  Whether  it  is  used  adnominally  with  these 
and  cognate  verbs  is  somewhat  uncertain.  There  are,  however,  a  few 
distinct  instances  of  such  use6  of  ati  in  other  connexions  with  the  accu¬ 
sative;  e.  g.  s'atdm  dasdm  dti  srdjah  (vm.  563)  ‘a  hundred  slaves  (beyond  =) 
in  addition  to  garlands’;  purvtr  dti  ksdpa/i  (x.  77s)  ‘through  many  nights’; 
kdd  asya^dti  vratdm  cakrma  (x.  12$)  ‘what  have  we  done  (beyond  =)  contrary 


1  In  regard  to  upa  the  sense  of  ‘motion 
to’  seems  to  be  the  primary  one;  for  it  is 
used  twice  as  often  with  the  acc.,  and  its 
position  before  the  loc.  is  less  primitive. 

2  It  is  once  (vm.  3 3 1 3 )  also  used  with 
sru-  ‘hear’  in  the  sense  of  ‘listen  to’. 

3  The  final  a  is  short  only  at  the  end  of 
a  Pada  and  in  I.  3117  and  IX.  1061;  other¬ 
wise  always  acchd, 

4  In  the  SV,  it  is  once  used  with  the 


locative  in  the  v,  r.  sddanesti  dccha  for 
sddanani  dccha  (RV.  IX.  91 T). 

5  It  is  used  with  over  tw'enty  roots  in 
the  RV.  and  wdth  only  two  in  the  AV. 
(Whitney  1078).  In  the  TS.  it  occurs  with  i- 
‘go’  (iv.  1. 81;  11. 2. 123)  and  with  vad •  ‘speak’ 
(iv.  5.  I2  =  VS.  xvi.  4). 

6  The  adnominal  use  survives  through 

o 

the  Brahmanas  into  the  Mahabharata. 


VIII.  Indeclinables.  Adverbial  Prepositions. 


4i7 


to  his  ordinance?’;  yd  devo  martyam  dti  (AV.  xx.  1277)  ‘the  god  who  (is) 
beyond  mortals’. 

adhi  ‘upon’. 

597.  The  general  meaning  of  adhi  in  its  adverbial  use  is  ‘upon’,  e.  g. 
adhi  gam  ‘come  upon’,  then  ‘find  out’,  ‘learn’. 

In  adnominal  use  the  proper  sphere  of  adhi  is  the  locative,  with 
which  it  is  almost  always  connected.  Here,  however,  there  is  sometimes  an 
uncertainty  whether  the  preposition  belongs  to  the  verb  or  the  noun;  e.  g. 
ndkasya  prsthe  adhi  tisthati  (1.  12  5s)  ‘he  stands  upon  the  ridge  of  the  firma¬ 
ment’.  When  referring  to  a  person  adhi  means  ‘beside’,  ‘with’  (from  the 
notion  of  wielding  sway  over);  e.  g.  yan>  ?iasatya ,  paravdti  ydd  vd  sthd  adhi 
turvase  (1.  47 7)  ‘when,  O  Nasatyas,  ye  are  at  a  distance  or  with  Turvasa’. 

a.  From  the  locative  the  use  of  adhi  extended  to  the  ablative,  with 
which  it  is  less  frequently  connected.  It  then  primarily  has  the  compound  sense 
‘from  upon’;  e.  g.  atah  ...  d  gahi  divo  vd  rocandd  adhi  (1. 69)  ‘thence  come, 
or  from  the  bright  realm  of  heaven’.  Often,  however,  the  simple  ablative 
meaning  alone  remains;  e.  g.  hrdayad  adhi  (x.  1633)  ‘from  the  heart’;  purusad 
adhi  (VS.  xxxii.  2)  ‘from  Purusa’.  A  somewhat  extended  sense  is  occasionally 
found;  e.  g.  yam  .  .  .  kdnva  Tdhd  rtdd  adhi  (1.  3611)  ‘whom  Kanva  kindled 
(proceeding  from  =)  in  accordance  with  sacred  order’;  md  panir  bhur  as  mad 
adhi  (1.  333)  ‘be  not  niggardly  with  regard  to  us’. 

b.  From  the  locative  the  use  of  adhi  further  spread  to  the  accusative, 
though  in  a  very  limited  way,  to  express  the  sphere  on  or  over  which  an 
action  extends;  e.  g.  prthi'c  prdtlkam  ddhy  edhe  agni/i  (vii.  361)  ‘Agni  has  been 
kindled  over  the  broad  surface’.  Otherwise,  when  taking  the  accusative  in 
the  sense  of  ‘upon’  with  verbs  of  motion,  adhi  nearly  always  belongs  to 
the  verb. 

a.  In  the  RV.  only,  cuihi  is  used  seven  times  with  the  (following)  instrumental 
singular  or  plural  of  snu •  ‘height’,  to  express  motion  along  and  over  =  'across’;  e.  g. 
cakrdm  .  .  .  adhi  snund  hrhatd  varta.ma.nam  (iv.  28*)  ‘the  wheel  rolling  across  the  mighty 
height’.  This  is  probably  to  be  explained  as  the  instrumental  of  the  space  (by  =) 
through  which  motion  takes  place  (e.  g.  vdto  antariksena  ydti  ‘the  wind  goes  through 
the  air’,  1.  i6ii4),  the  preposition  that  regularly  means  ‘upon’  being  added  to  define 
the  action  as  taking  place  ‘over’  as  well  as  ‘along’.  The  VS.  has  the  regular  locative  of 
snu -  with  adhi  : pythivya  adhi  snusu  (xvn.  14)  ‘on  the  heights  of  the  earth’. 

anu  ‘after’. 

598.  In  its  adverbial  use  anu  primarily  means  ‘after’,  e.  g.  anu  i-  ‘go 
after’,  ‘follow’;  from  this  fundamental  sense  are  developed  various  modifications 
such  as  ‘along’,  ‘through’. 

In  its  adnominal  use  anu  takes  the  accusative  only.  When  the  influence 
of  the  verb  is  still  felt,  it  means  ‘after’,  ‘along’,  ‘throughout’;  e.  g.  para  me 
yanti  dhitdyo  gdvo  nd  gdvyutlr  anu  (1. 2516)  ‘my  prayers  go  abroad  like  kine 
(seeking)  after  pastures’;  upa  prd  yanti  dhitdyah  rtdsya  pathyd  anu  (in.  127) 
‘forth  go  my  prayers  along  the  paths  of  sacred  order’;  ydt  pdhca  mdnusam 
anu  nrmnam  (vm.  g2)  ‘the  might  which  (exists)  throughout  the  five  peoples’; 
similarly  prthivlm  anu  (VS.  xm.  6)  ‘throughout  the  earth’,  vanaspdtTmr  anu 
(VS.  xm.  7)  ‘in  all  trees’,  pradisd  ’ nu  (VS.  xxxii.  4)  ‘throughout  the  regions’. 

When  used  in  closer  connexion  with  nouns  anu  expresses: 

a.  sequence  in  time:  ‘after’  or  (with  plurals)  ‘throughout’;  e.  g.  pftrvdim 
anu  prayatim  (1.  1265)  ‘after  the  first  presentment’;  anu  dyftn  ‘throughout  the 
days’  =  ‘day  after  day’. 

b.  conformity:  ‘after’  =  ‘in  accordance  with’;  e.  g.  svdm  anu  vratdm 
(1.  1281)  ‘according  to  his  own  ordinance’;  amptdrt  anu  (VS.iv.  28)  ‘after  the 

Indo-arische  Philologie.  I.  4.  27 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


418 


manner  of  immortals’;  arm  josam  (TS.  1.  1.  132  =  VS.  it.  17)  ‘for  (=  to  suit) 
thy  enjoyment’.  This  is  the  commoner  independent  use. 


anidn  ‘between’. 


599.  In  its  adverbial  use,  which  is  not  frequent,  antdr  means  ‘between’, 
‘within’,  ‘into’;  e.  g.  ant  as  car-  ‘move  between  or  within’;  a?itdh  pas-  ‘look  into’; 
antar  gd-  ‘go  between’,  ‘separate’;  antar-vidvdn  ‘knowing  (the  difference) 
between’,  ‘distinguishing’. 

The  fundamental  and  by  for  the  most  frequent  adnominal  use  of 
antar  is  connected  with  the  locative  in  the  sense  of ‘within’,  ‘among’;  e.  g. 
antah  samudre  ‘within  the  ocean’;  apsu^antdr  ‘within  the  waters’;  antdr  devesu 
‘among  the  gods’;  garbhe  antah  (VS.xxxii.4)  ‘within  the  womb’;  matrtamasu « 
antah  (TS.  1.  8.  122  =  VS.  x.  7)  ‘in  the  best  of  mothers’. 

a.  From  the  locative  its  use  extends  in  a  few  instances  to  the  ablative 
in  the  sense  of  ‘from  within’;  e.  g.  a?itdr  asmanah  ‘from  within  the  rock’; 
esd  yayau  paramdd  antah  ddreh  (ix.  87s)  ‘it  has  come  from  the  highest  stone’. 

b.  From  the  locative  its  use  further  extends,  in  several  instances,  to  the 
accusative,  in  the  sense  of  ‘between’  (expressing  both  motion  and  rest), 
generally  in  connexion  with  duals  or  two  classes  of  objects;  e.  g.  mahdn 
sadhdsthe  dhruva  d  nisatto  ’ nt dr  dyava  (111.  64)  ‘the  great  one  who  has 
sat  down  in  the  firm  seat  between  the  two  worlds’;  indra  it  somapd  ekah  . . 
antdr  devdn  m  arty  dins  ca  (vm.24)  ‘Indra  is  the  one  Soma-drinker  (between  =) 
among  gods  and  mortals’1. 


dpi  ‘upon’. 

600.  In  its  adverbial  use  with  verbs  of  motion  dpi  generally  means  ‘into’, 
e.  g.  dpi  gam-  ‘go  into’,  ‘enter’;  but  this  sense  assumes  various  modifications 
which  may  be  expressed  by  ‘on’,  ‘over’,  ‘up’;  e.  g.  dpi  dhd-  ‘put  upon’,  ‘close 
up’;  dpi  nah -  ‘tie  up’;  dpi-ripta-  ‘smeared  over’  =  ‘blind’. 

In  its  adnominal  use,  which  is  rare,  dpi  is  connected  with  the  loca¬ 
tive  only.  It  then  has  the  sense  of  ‘on’;  e.  g.  ay dmg  ague,  tve  dpi  yam 
yajhdm  cakrmd  vaydm  (11. 58)  ‘this  (is),  O  Agni,  the  sacrifice  which  we  have 
offered  on  thee’2. 


abhi  ‘towards’. 

601.  In  its  adverbial  use  abhi  means  ‘towards’  with  verbs  of  motion, 
e.  g.  abhi  dm-  ‘run  towards’;  it  further  commonly  makes  verbs  of  action 
transitive,  e.  g.  krand-  ‘roar’  :  abhi  krajid-  ‘roar  at’;  it  also  sometimes,  especially 
with  bhii-  ‘be’,  comes  to  have  the  sense  of  superiority:  abhi  bhu-  ‘overcome’. 

The  adnominal  use  of  abhi  is  fairly  frequent,  though  in  many  individual 
instances  difficult  to  distinguish  from  its  adverbial  use.  It  is  connected  with 
the  accusative  only,  in  the  sense  of  ‘to’;  e.  g.  ud  irsva  nari^abhi  jwalokdm 
(x.  188)  ‘Arise,  O  woman,  to  the  world  of  the  living’.  The  sense  of  ‘over’ 
(implying  dominion),  abstracted  from  one  of  its  secondary  adverbial  uses,  is 
occasionally  found;  e.  g.  visvd  yds  carsantr  abhi  (1.  865)  ‘who  (is)  over 
all  men’. 


1  In  the  later  language  antciy  is  not  in¬ 
frequently  used  with  the  genitive  (as  well 
as  the  locative).  An  example  of  this  occurs 
as  early  as  VS.  XL.  5  (=  Isa  Upanisad5): 
tad  antdr  asya  sarvasya,  tad  u  sarvasya ^asya 
bdhyatah  ‘it  is  within  this  all  and  it  is  with¬ 
out  this  all’. 


2  The  adverb  dpi  begins  to  be  employed 
secondarily  in  the  RV.  (though  rarely)  as  a 
conjunctional  particle  meaning  ‘also’;  cp. 
Brugmann,  KG.  588,  5. 


VIII.  Indeclinables.  Adverbial  Prepositions. 


419 


dva  ‘down’. 

602.  In  its  adverbial  use,  dva  generally  means  ‘down’,  e.  g.  dva  gam- 
‘come  down’;  but  is  has  also  the  extended  sense  of  ‘away’,  ‘off’,  e.  g.  dva 
srj-  ‘discharge’. 

In  its  adnominal  use,  which  is  very  rare  and  doubtful,  it  is  connected 
with  the  ablative  in  the  sense  of  ‘down  from’.  In  the  following  two 
examples,  especially  the  second,  the  case  seems  to  be  directly  dependent  on 
the  preposition:  vrstim  dva  diva  invatani  (vn.  641 2)  ‘send  rain  down  from 
heaven’;  ye  te  pdfithdno  dva  diva/i  (A V.  vn.  551)  ‘which  (are)  thy  paths  down 
from  the  sky’1. 

a  ‘near’. 

603.  The  adverbial  use  of  d  with  verbs  expressing  either  physical  or 
mental  motion  is  very  common  in  the  sense  of  ‘near’,  ‘hither’,  ‘towards’, 
‘to’,  ‘upon’;  e.  g.  d  aj-  ‘drive  hither’;  d  kratid-  ‘cry  to’;  d  dhi-  ‘think  upon’, 
‘attend  to’.  Less  commonly,  when  used  with  verbs  expressing  rest  or  occurrence, 
it  means  ‘in’  or  ‘at’;  e.  g.  d  ksi-  ‘dwell  in’,  d  j an-  ‘be  born  at’  a  place. 

When  used  adnominally,  d  regularly  follows  the  case,  excepting  only 
one  sense  of  the  ablative.  It  is  primarily  and  most  commonly  connected 
with  the  locative,  when  it  has  the  sense  of ‘on’,  ‘in’,  ‘at’,  ‘to’;  e.  g.  npdstha  d 
‘on  the  lap’;  dadhus  tvd  bhrgavo  mdnusesu^d  (1.  58°)  ‘the  Bhrgus  brought 
thee  to  men’. 

a.  From  the  locative  its  use  extended  to  the  ablative,  with  which  it  is 
used  fairly  often.  It  is  generally  used  after  this  case,  when  it  primarily  has 
the  compound  sense  of  ‘from  on’  (cp.  adhi);  e.  g.  parvatdd  d  ‘from  (on)  the 
mountain’.  It  also  means,  secondarily,  ‘away  from’;  e.  g.  yds  cid  dhi  tvd 
bahubhya  d  sutdvam  dvivdsati  (1.  849)  ‘who  entices  thee  away  from  many 
(others)  with  his  Soma  draught’.  This  secondary  meaning  is  sometimes  further 
extended  to  express  preference;  e.  g.  yds  te  sdkhibhya  d  vdram  (1.  44)  ‘who 
is  a  boon  to  thee  (in  distinction)  from  friends’,  i.  e.  ‘who  is  better  to  thee 
than  friends’. 

a.  In  about  a  dozen  instances  in  the  RV.,  d  is  used  before  the  ablative 
to  express  ‘up  to’2;  e.  g.  yati  giribhy a  d  samudrdt  (vn.  952)  ‘going  from  the 
mountains  up  to  the  sea’;  d  nimrucah  (1.  16 110)  ‘till  sunset’3.  This  reversal 
of  meaning  is  probably  due  to  the  reversal  of  the  natural  order  of  the  words: 
samudrdd  d  ‘from  the  sea’  thus  becoming  d  samudrdt  ‘to  the  sea’. 

b.  The  use  of  d  is  further  extended  to  the  accusative,  with  which  it 
is  least  frequently  connected,  generally  meaning  ‘to’,  ‘upon’,  to  express  the 
goal  with  verbs  of  motion;  e.  g.  antar  lyase  .  .  yusmams  ca  devan  visa  d  ca 
martan  (iv.  23)  ‘thou  goest  mediating  to  you,  the  gods,  and  to  the  people, 
the  mortals’;  matard  sfdatam  barhir  d  (1.  1427)  ‘may  the  two  mothers  seat 
themselves  upon  the  litter’;  ehy  d  nah  (AV.  11.  54)  ‘come  hither  to  us’; 
devdnam  vaksi  priyam  d  sadhdstham  (TS.  v.  1.  111  —  VS.  xxix.  1)  ‘bring  (it) 
to  the  dear  abode  of  the  gods’.  In  closer  connexion  with  nouns,  d  is  used 
to  express  purpose  in  the  phrases  josam  d  ‘for  enjoyment’,  and  vdram  d 
‘for  pleasure’. 

upa  ‘up  to’. 

604.  In  its  adverbial  use  upa  is  in  sense  akin  to  abhi  and  d,  expressing 
‘near  to’;  e.  g.  upa  gam-  ‘go  near  to’.  The  fundamental  meaning  of  close 


1  Cp.  Delbruck  p.  451. 

2  With  very  few  exceptions  this  is  the 

only  use  of  d  to  be  found  in  B. ;  in  C.  also 

a  is  found  only  before  the  ablative,  but 


with  the  old  sense  of  ‘from’  as  well  as 
‘up  to’. 

3  It  is  occasionally  found  after  the  abla¬ 
tive  in  this  sense;  see  Grassmann  s.  v.  a. 

27* 


420  i.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

contiguity  is  often  coupled  with  the  idea  of  subordination  or  inferiority;  e.  g. 
upa  sad-  ‘sit  down  close  to’,  ‘approach  reverentially’;  upa  as-  ‘sit  under’/  adore’. 

In  its  adnominal  use  upa  is  most  frequently  connected  with  the  accu¬ 
sative  (which  it  more  often  precedes  than  follows)  in  the  sense  of ‘to’;  e.  g. 

a  yahi  .  .  upa  brahmani  vaghdtah  (1.  3$)  ‘come  to  the  prayers  of  the  wor¬ 

shipper’. 

a.  It  is  also  used  (about  half  as  frequently  in  the  RV.)  before  the 
locative  in  the  sense  of  ‘beside’,  ‘upon’,  ‘at’:  yd  upa  sUrye  (1.  23*?)  Svho 

(are)  beside  the  sun’;  upa  dydvi  ‘(upon  =)  up  to  the  sky’  (from  below); 

upa  jmann  upa  vetase  ava  tara  (YS.  xvii.  6  ==  MS.  11.  io1 2)  ‘descend  upon  the 
earth,  upon  the  reed’. 

a.  Quite  exceptionally  (only  three  times)  upa  occurs  in  the  RV.  with  the  (following) 
instrumental.  In  two  passages  it  expresses  sequence  of  time  in  the  phrase  upa  dyub/ds 
(v.  533;  vni.  408)  ‘day  by  day’.  Once  it  expresses  conformity:  yastnai  visnus  irini  padd 
vicakrama  upa  mitrasya  dharmabhih  (Val.  IV3)  ‘for  whom  Visnu  strode  forth  his  three  steps 
in  accordance  with  the  ordinances  of  Mitra’.  These  abnormal  senses  of  upa  are  parallel 
to  those  of  anu  (598  a,  b),  and  the  construction  to  that  of  adhi  (597  a). 

tiras  ‘across’. 

605.  Adverbially  tiras  is  used  in  the  sense  of  ‘aside’,  but  only  with  the 
two  verbs  dha-  ‘put’  and  bhu-  ‘be’,  in  the  Samhitas1;  thus  tiro  dha-  ‘put  aside’, 
‘conceal’;  tiro  bhu-  ‘disappear’;  e.  g.  ajakavam  tiro  dadhe  (vn.  501)  ‘I  put 
away  the  scorpion’;  md  tiro  ’bhut  (AV.  vm.  17)  ‘may  it  not  disappear’. 

Adnominally  tiras  is  used  fairly  often  in  the  RV.,  and  a  few  times  in 
the  AV.,  in  the  sense  of  ‘across’,  ‘over’,  ‘through’,  ‘past’,  with  (nearly  always 
before)  the  accusative2;  e.  g.  d  ye  tanvdnti  rasmibhis  tirdh  samudrdm  (1. 1  g6) 
‘who  spread  with  their  rays  across  the  ocean’;  nay  anti  duritd  tirdh  (1. 413) 
‘they  lead  him  through  (so  as  to  escape)  dangers’;  tiro  visvahi  drcato  ydhy 
arvdh  (x.  8916)  ‘come  hither  past  (leaving  behind)  all  singers’. 

a.  Figuratively  tiras  occasionally  means  ‘contrary  to’;  e.  g.  devdncZm  cit 
tiro  vdsam  (x.  1714)  ‘even  against  the  will  of  the  gods’;  yd  ?io  ..  tiras  cittd?ii 
jighamsati  (vn.  59s)  ‘who  desires  to  slay  us  contrary  to  expectations’  (=  ‘un¬ 
awares’),  yd  no  ..  tirdh  satydni  .  .  jighamsat  (TS.  iv.  3.  133)  ‘who  may  desire 
to  slay  us  contrary  to  oaths’. 

pari  ‘around’. 

606.  In  its  adverbial  use  pari  generally  means  ‘around’,  e.  g.  pari  i- 
‘go  around’;  figuratively  it  also  means  ‘completely’,  e.  g.  pari  vid-  ‘know  fully’ 
(cp.  7 jspi  oids). 

Its  adnominal  use  starts  from  the  accusative,  with  which  case  it 
is,  however,  not  very  commonly  connected.  Here,  too,  it  is  not  always  certain 
that  the  preposition  does  not  belong  to  the  verb.  It  nearly  always  immedia¬ 
tely  precedes  the  accusative  in  the  sense  of  ‘around’,  ‘about’;  e.  g.  pari  dydm 
anydd  Tyate  (1. 3019)  ‘the  other  (wheel)  goes  around  the  sky’.  The  following  is 
one  of  the  two  instances  in  which  pari  comes  after  the  accusative3:  havamahe 
sraddhdm  m  a  dhy  d  m  din  a  rn  paid  (x.i  513)  Sve  invoke  Sraddha  (about  =)  at  noon’4. 

a.  Its  use  then  extends  to  the  ablative,  with  which  it  is  much  more 
frequently  connected.  Here  it  has  primarily  the  compound  sense  of  ‘from 
around’;  e.  g.  divas  pari  (1.  476)  ‘from  the  sky  (which  is)  around’;  tdmasas 
pari  (1.  5010)  ‘from  the  surrounding  darkness’.  The  original  meaning  (as  in 


1  In  the  SB.  and  later  liras  is  used  with 
ky-  ‘do’  also. 

2  It  is  found  at  least  once  in  the  AV. 

(xu.  339)  and  occasionally  in  ttje  SB.  in  the 


sense  of  ‘away  from’  =  ‘without  the  know¬ 
ledge  of’. 

3  Cp.  Grassmann,  s.  v.  pari,  784  (bottom). 

4  Like  the  German  preposition  ‘urn’. 


VIII.  Indeclinables.  Prepositional  Adverbs.  421 


ddhi)  then  disappears,  leaving  only  the  ablative  sense  ‘from’;  e.  g.  tv  dm 
adbhyds  tvam  asmanas  pari  . .  jayase  (11.  1 l 2)  ‘thou  art  born  from  the  waters, 
from  the  rock’. 

purds  ‘before’. 

607.  Adverbially  purds  is  combined  with  hr-  ‘do’,  and  dha-  ‘put’  only, 
in  the  sense  of  ‘in  front’;  e.  g.  indrah  krnotu  prasave  rathdm  purdh  (1. 1029) 
‘may  Indra  place  (our)  car  in  front  in  the  enterprise’;  indram  visve  devdso 
dadhire  purdh  (1.  13 11)  ‘the  all-gods  placed  Indra  in  the  forefront’. 

Adnominally  purds  occurs  about  nine  times  in  the  RV.,  in  the  sense  of 
‘before’  and  connected  with  the  accusative,  the  ablative,  and  the  locative; 
e.  g.  asadan  mdtaram  purdh  (x.  1891)  ‘he  has  sat  down  before  his  mother’; 
nd  gardabham  pure  asvan  nay  anti  (in.  53 2  3)  ‘they  do  not  place  the  ass  before 
the  horse’  ( dsvat );  yah  srhjaye  puro  .  .  samidhydte  (iv.  15*)  ‘who  is  kindled 
before  Srnjaya’. 

prati  ‘against’. 

608.  Used  adverbially  prati  means  ‘towards’,  ‘against’,  e.  g.  prati  i-  ‘go 
towards  or  against’;  prati  via-  ‘counterfeit’,  ‘imitate’.  From  this  sense  the 
notion  of  equality  was  developed,  as  in  prati  as-  ‘be  a  match  for’;  e.  g. 
indra ,  ndkis  tvd  prdty  asty  esam ,  visva  jatany  abhy  a  si  tdni 1  (vi.  25  s)  ‘0  Indra, 
none  of  them  is  equal  to  thee;  thou  art  superior  to  all  these  beings’.  The 
verb  as-  often  being  omitted,  prati  appears  to  be  used  like  an  adjective;  e.  g. 
indram.  nd  mahnd  prthivi  cand  prati  (i.  5  5 1 )  ‘not  even  the  earth  (is)  equal  to 
Indra  in  greatness’.  The  preposition  further  comes  to  express  adverbially  the 
sense  of  ‘back’;  e.  g.  prati  uh-  ‘thrust  back’;  prati  bra-  ‘reply’. 

Adnominally  prati  is  used  with  the  accusative  only,  altogether  about 
a  dozen  times  in  the  RV.  With  verbs  of  motion 2  or  of  calling  it  means 
‘towards’,  ‘to’  (though  here  there  is  sometimes  a  doubt  whether  it  does  not 
rather  belong  to  the  verb) ;  e.  g.  prati  tydm  edrum  adhvardin  gopTthdya  prd 
hUyase  (1.  191)  ‘thou  art  summoned  to  the  beloved  sacrifice  to  drink  the 
milk’.  With  verbs  of  protecting  it  means  ‘against’  =  ‘from’;  e.  g.  dgne  raksa 
no  dm  has  ah,  prati  sma ,  dev  a ,  rfsatah  (vn.  1513)  ‘O  Agni,  protect  us  from 
distress,  against  injurers,  0  god’.  Sometimes  it  means  ‘over  against’,  ‘opposite’; 
e.  g.  abodhy  agnih  .  .  prati  .  .  avail  in  usdsarn  (v.  1  *)  ‘Agni  has  awakened  in 
face  of  the  coming  Dawn’.  It  expresses  conformity  in  the  phrase  prati  vdram 
‘according  to  desire’  (cp.  dnu  b,  upa  a,  a). 

a.  In  the  phrase  prati  vastok  ‘at  dawn’,  occurring  three  times  in  the  RV.,  the  pre¬ 
position  seems  to  take  the  ablative,  but  vastok  may  here  be  meant  for  an  adverbial 

form  3. 

B.  Adnominal  Prepositions. 

609.  This  class  of  words  which  is  never  compounded  with  verbs,  but 

only  governs  oblique  cases  (with  the  exception  of  the  dative),  cannot  be 
clearly  distinguished  from  adverbs  such  as  urdhvam  (which  from  B.  onwards 
is  also  used  as  a  preposition  with  the  ablative  in  the  sense  of  ‘above’  and 

‘after’).  It  is  to  be  noted  that  several  of  them  govern  the  genitive  and  the 

instrumental,  cases  practically  never  connected  with  the  genuine  prepositions 
in  the  Samhitas.  The  following  is  an  account  of  these  words  arranged  in 
their  alphabetical  order*. 


1  Both  abhi  and  prati  primarily  express 
direction  ‘towards’,  but  the  former  tends  to 
imply  superiority  or  attack  (‘at’),  the  latter 
comparison  and  equality  or  repulsion  (‘back’). 

2  In  B.  prati  is  regularly  used  after  the 

accusative,  though  apparently  never  connected 


with  verbs  of  motion :  here  it  expresses  ap¬ 
proximate  position  —  ‘about’,  ‘at’,  ‘on’;  it 
also  means  ‘in  regard  to’,  ‘in  equality  with’. 

3  Cp.  BR.,  and  Delbruck  p.  463. 

4  Though  several  of  these  [avas,  are , 
paras,  saca,  sanitur ,  sanutar,  samdya,  sum  ad, 


422  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

adhas  ‘below’. 

610.  With  the  accusative  adhas  occurs  only  once  in  the  RV.,  in  the 
sense  of  ‘below’:  tisrah  prthivir  adhd  astu  (vn.  104”)  ‘may  he  be  below  the 
three  earths’.  It  is  also  found  once  with  the  ablative  (or  genitive)  in  the 
same  sense:  adZiah  .  .  paddh  (x.  1662)  ‘below  (my)  feet’.  The  latter  use  also 
occurs  once  in  the  SV.  and  once  in  the  AY.:  ye  te  pantha  adhd  divdZi  (SV. 
1.  2.  2.  38)  ‘thy  paths  which  are  below  the  sky’;  adhas  te  dsmano  many  dim 
upasyamasi  yd  guruZi  (AV.  vi.  42*)  ‘we  cast  thy  fury  under  a  stone  that  (is) 
heavy’. 

antard  ‘between’. 

611.  This  word  occurs  five  times  in  the  RV.  with  a  following  accu¬ 
sative  in  the  sense  of  ‘between’,  e.  g.  antard  ddmpati  ‘between  husband  and 
wife’.  It  also  occurs  a  few  times  in  the  AV.  and  VS.  before  duals;  e.  g. 
antard  dydvaprtfiivi  ‘between  heaven  and  earth’. 

abhitas  ‘around’. 

6 12.  This  adverb  is  employed  in  a  few  passages  of  the  RV.  and  AV.  in 
the  sense  of ‘around’  with  the  accusative;  e.  g.  sdro  nd purndm  abhlto  vadantah 
(vii.  1037)  ‘talking  as  round  a  brimful  lake’;  ye  devd  rdstrabhrto  Ph! to  yanti 
sttryam  (AV.  xiii.  135)  ‘the  kingdom-bearing  gods  who  go  around  the  sun’. 

avas  ‘down  from’. 

613.  In  the  RV.  avas  occurs  four  times  with  the  ablative  (cp.  dva)  in 
the  sense  of  ‘down  from’;  e.  g.  avail  sdryasya  brZiatdh  purisat  (x.  2  721)  ‘down 
from  the  vast  misty  region  of  the  sun’.  It  is  further  employed  four  or  five 
times  with  the  instrumental;  e.  g.  avd  divd  patdyantam  patamgam  (1.  1635) 
‘a  bird  flying  down  from  heaven’.  The  latter  use  seems  to  be  analogous  to 
that  of  ddfd  with  the  instrumental  (597  a). 

updri  ‘above’. 

614.  This  adverb  occurs  three  times  in  the  RV.  after  the  accusative 
in  the  sense  of  ‘above’,  ‘beyond’;  e.  g.  tisrah  prtZiivir  updri  (1.  34s)  ‘above 
the  three  earths’.  It  is  also  found  once  with  the  instrumental  in  the  combi¬ 
nation  bhdmyopari,  i.  e.  bZidmya  updri  (x.  753)  ‘beyond  the  earth’.  It  is, 
however,  more  likely  that  here  we  have  an  irregular  euphonic  combination 
for  bhUtnya\h\  updri 1  and  that  the  case  governed  by  the  preposition  is  the 
genitive.  This  would  account  for  the  frequent  use  of  updri  with  the  genitive 
in  the  later  language,  while  the  instrumental  would  be  unique. 

rte  ‘without’. 

615.  This  word2  is  used  fairly  often  in  the  RV.,  and  occasionally  in  the 
later  Samhitas,  before  or  after  the  ablative  (sometimes  separated  from  it)  in 
the  sense  of  ‘without’;  e.  g.  nd  rte  tvdt  Zzriyate  him  cana  (x.  112?)  ‘without 
thee  nothing  is  done’;  yebZiyo  ?ia  ’rte  pavate  dZidma  him  cand  (TS.  iv.  6.i4  = 
VS.  xvii.  14)  ‘without  whom  no  dwelling  is  purified’. 


smad )  disappear  in  C.,  there  is  nevertheless 
in  the  later  language  a  large  increase  in 
their  numbers,  greatly  supplemented  by  the 
periphrastic  use  of  nouns  and  by  the  pre¬ 
positional  gerunds.  Cp.  Speijer,  Vedische 
und  Sanskrit-Syntax  89 — 93. 


1  See  Grassmann,  s.  v.  ttpari\  cp.  above 
p.  65  (top). 

2  In  origin  an  old  locative.  On  some 
other  words  representing  old  case-forms, 
used  prepositionally  ( arvak  etc.),  cp.  WHIT¬ 
NEY  1128. 


VIII.  Indeclinables.  Prepositional  Adverbs.  423 

paras  ‘beyond’. 

616.  In  the  RV.  paras  is  used  with  the  accusative,  instrumental,  ablative, 
and  locative;  but  in  the  later  Samhitas  it  seems  to  be  found  with  the  abla¬ 
tive  only. 

a.  It  takes  the  accusative  six  or  seven  times  in  the  sense  of  ‘beyond’, 
not  only  locally,  but  also  to  express  superiority  or  excess;  e.  g.  dti  sdrya?n 
pardh  sakund  iva  paptima  (ix.  10720)  ‘we  have  flown  away  like  birds  beyond 
the  sun’;  nahl  dev 6  nd  martyo  mahds  tdva  krdtum  pardh  (1.  192)  ‘for  neither 
god  nor  mortal  (goes)  beyond  the  might  of  thee,  the  great’. 

b.  It  is  employed  nearly  three  times  as  frequently  with  the  instrumental, 
for  the  most  part  in  the  sense  of  ‘beyond’;  e.  g.  pard  mdtraya  (vn.  991 2) 
‘beyond  measure’.  In  some  passages  this  sense  is  somewhat  modified.  Thus 
the  word  twice  means  ‘over’  (as  opposed  to  avds);  e.  g.  yds  te  arnsur  avds 
ca  yah  pardh  srucd  (x.  1 7 I3)  ‘thy  juice  which  (fell)  down  from  and  over  the 
ladle’.  Twice,  moreover,  it  expresses  ‘without’;  e.  g.  pard  maydbhis  (v.  44*) 
‘without  wiles’. 

c.  With  the  locative  it  occurs  only  once  in  the  sense  of  ‘beyond’:  ye 
trimsdti  trdyas  pard  devdso  barh'ir  dsadati  (vm.  281)  ‘the  gods  who,  three  in 
excess  of  thirty,  have  seated  themselves  upon  the  litter’. 

d.  It  is  found  in  three  passages  of  the  RV.,  as  well  as  a  few  times  in 
the  AV.  and  the  VS.,  with  the  ablative  in  the  senses  of  ‘beyond’,  far  ‘from’, 
and  ‘away  from’;  e.  g.  pard  divdh  (AV.  ix.  421)  ‘beyond  the  sky’;  asmat  .  . 
pardh  (vm.  2718)  ‘far  from  him’;  tvdt  pardh  (AV.  xii.  3^)  ‘apart  from  thee’; 
pard  nuljavatd  ’tlhi  (VS.m.  61)  ‘go  away  beyond  (Mount)  Mujavat’.  The  last 
example  may  probably  be  an  instance  of  the  accusative  with  paras  —  ‘beyond 
(the  tribe  of)  the  Mujavants’  b 

purdstad  ‘in  front  of’. 

617.  This  adverb  is  used  two  or  three  times  in  the  Samhitas  with  the 
genitive  in  the  sense  of  ‘before’,  ‘in  front  of’;  e.  g.  sdmiddhasya  purdstat 
(111.  82)  ‘in  front  of  the  kindled  one’;  vdjah  purdstad  utd  madhyatd  nah  (TS. 
iv.  7.  122  =  VS.  xviii.  34)  ‘strength  be  before  us  and  in  the  midst  of  us’. 


purd  ‘before’  (time). 

In  the  RV.  purd  is  used  some  twenty  times,  and  in  the  later  Samhitas 
occasionally,  before  or  after  the  ablative.  It  has  primarily  the  sense  of 
‘before’  (of  time);  e.  g.  purd  nu  jardsah  (vm.  6720)  ‘before  old  age’;  purd 
krurdsya  visrpah  (TS.  1.  1.  93  —  VS.  1.  28)  ‘before  the  departure  of  the  cruel 
(foe)’.  This  sense  is,  however,  often  modified  to  express  exclusion,  sometimes 
equivalent  to  ‘without’,  ‘except’,  ‘in  preference  to’,  e.  g.  purd  sambadhdd  abhy  d 
vavrtsva  (11.  16s)  ‘turn  to  us  before  (=  so  as  to  save  us  from)  distress’;  purd 
mat  (AV.xii.  34b)  ‘except  me’. 

bahirdhd  ‘outside’. 


618.  This  adverb2  is  once  used  in  the  VS.  with  the  ablative  in  the 
sense  of  ‘outside’,  ‘from’:  iddrn  ahdm  taptdni  vdr  bahirdhd  yajhdn  nissrjami 
(VS.  v.  n)  ‘this  heated  water  I  eject  from  the  sacrifice’. 

sdca  ‘with’. 


619.  The  use  of  sdca  is  almost  restricted  to  the  RV.,  where  it  is  common 
before  and  after  the  locative,  meaning  ‘in  association  with’,  ‘beside’,  ‘at’, 


1  The  word  muj avanl-  occurs  in  the  plural 
as  the  name  of  a  tribe  in  AV.  v.  22$  etc. 

2  It  is  used  fairly  often  in  B.  and  S.  The 


simple  form  bahts  ‘outside’  (used  also  with 
abl.)  is  frequent  in  B.  and  later. 


424  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 

‘in’;  e.  g.  itidra  Id  dhdryoh  saca  (1. 71 2 3)  ‘Indra  with  his  two  bays’;  maddyasva  sute 
saca  (1.8 18)  ‘rejoice  at  the  pressed  libation’;  namucav  asure  saca  (VS.xx.68) 
‘along  with  the  demoniac  Namuci’1. 

sanitur  ‘apart  from’. 

620.  This  adverb  is  used  two  or  three  times2  in  the  RV.  after  the 
accusative  in  the  sense  of  ‘beside’,  ‘apart  from’;  e.  g.  patim  sanitur  (v.  1 2*) 
‘without  a  lord’. 

sanutdr  ‘far  from’. 

621.  Allied  to  the  preceding  word,  sanutdr  appears  once  in  the  RV. 
with  the  ablative  in  the  sense  of  ‘far  away  from’:  ksetrad  apasyam  sanutds 
carantam  (v.  24)  ‘far  from  the  field  I  saw  him  wandering’. 

saha  ‘with’. 

622.  This  adverb  is  common  in  the  RV.  as  well  as  the  later  Samhitas, 
before  and  after  the  instrumental  in  the  sense  of  ‘with’;  e.  g.  saha  fsibhih 
(1.  23*+)  ‘together  with  the  seers’;  jar&yuna  sa/id  (VS.  viii.  28)  ‘with  the  after¬ 
birth’;  saha  pdtya  (TS.  1.  1.  io2)  ‘with  (my)  husband’;  mdtiasa  saha  (AV.  1.  i2) 
‘together  with  divine  mind’. 

sakdm  ‘with’. 

623.  In  the  same  sense  as,  but  less  frequently  than,  saha,  the  adverb 
sakdm 3  is  used  before  and  after  the  instrumental;  e.  g.  sakdm  sttryasya 
rasmibhih  (1.  477)  ‘together  with  the  rays  of  the  sun’;  sakdm  ga?i  manasa 
yajham  (VS.  xxvn.  31)  ‘may  he  come  with  thought  to  the  sacrifice’;  sakdm 
jarayuna  pata  (AV.  1.  n6)  ‘fly  with  the  afterbirth’. 

sumac/  ‘with’. 

624.  This  word  occurs  four  times  as  an  adverb4  in  the  RV.  with  the 
sense  of  ‘together’.  It  is  found  once  governing  the  instrumental  in  the 
sense  of  ‘with’:  jay  a  patim  vahati  vagm'ma  sumat  (x.  32b  ‘the  wife  weds  the 
husband  with  a  shout  of  joy’. 

smad  ‘with’. 

625.  Besides  being  used  adverbially  some  half  dozen  times  in  the  RV. 
with  the  sense  of  ‘together’,  ‘at  the  same  time’,  smad 5  also  occurs  about  as 
often  with  the  instrumental,  meaning  ‘with’;  e.  g.  smdt  suribhih  (1.  5iIS) 
‘together  with  the  princes’. 


2.  Adverbs. 

Grassmann,  Worterbuch  1737  —  1740.  —  Whitney,  Sanskrit  Grammar  1097 — 1117. 

626.  Adverbs  are  most  conveniently  grouped  as  those  which  are  formed 
with  adverbial  suffixes  and  those  which  are  formed  with  case-endings.  The 
former  class  may  be  best  described  according  to  the  suffixes  alphabetically 
arranged,  the  latter  according  to  the  ordinary  sequence  of  the  cases. 


1  Though  not  found  in  the  AV.,  sdca  |  4  sutnad  also  appears  as  the  first  member 

survives  in  the  TB.  (1.  2.  I8).  of  a  compound  in  sumad-anjsu-,  sumad-gana-, 

2  Cp.  BR.  and  Grassmann,  s.  v.  '  sumad-ratha-. 

3  On  other  adverbs  of  similar  meaning,  5  smad  also  appears  as  the  first  member 

with  case-endings  (samayd,  sardtham)  used  of  six  or  seven  compounds, 

prepositionally,  see  Whitney  1127. 


VIII.  Indeclinables.  Adverbial  Suffixes.  425 


A.  Adverbial  suffixes. 


627.  -as  forms  adverbs  chiefly  of  a  local  or  temporal  meaning ;  thus 
tir-ds  ‘across’,  par-as  ‘beyond’,  pur-ds  ‘before’,  sa-dh-as  and  sa-dy-ds  ‘to-day’, 
‘at  once’;  sv-as  ‘to-morrow’,  hy-ds  ‘yesterday’;  also  mith-as  ‘wrongly’. 

628.  -tas  expresses  the  ablative  sense  of  ‘from’.  It  forms  adverbs: 

a.  from  pronouns;  e.  g.  d-tas  ‘hence’,  amu-tas  ‘from  there’,  ku-tas 
‘whence?’,  td-tas  ‘thence’,  y d-tas  ‘whence’,  and,  with  accent  on  the  suffix,  i-tds 
‘from  hence’,  mat-tds  (AV.)  ‘from  me’. 

b.  from  adjectives  and  substantives;  e.  g.  any  d-tas  ‘from  another 
place’,  daksina-tds  ‘from  the  right’,  sarvd-tas  ‘from  all  sides’;  agra-tds  ‘in  front’, 
hrt-tds  ‘from  the  heart’,  etc.;  the  suffix  is  added  to  a  locative  case-form  in 
patsu-tds  ‘at  the  feet’,  beside  pat-tds  ‘from  the  feet’. 

c.  from  prepositions:  dnti-tas  ‘from  near’,  abhl-tas  ‘around’,  pari-tas 
(AV.)  ‘round  about’. 

a.  These  adverbs  in  -tas  are  sometimes  used  as  equivalents  of  ablatives;  e.  g. 
dto  bhuyas  ‘more  than  that’;  tdtah  sastkdt  (AV.)  ‘from  that  sixth’.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
ablative  sense  is  sometimes  effaced,  the  locative  meaning  taking  its  place;  e.  g.  agra- 
tds  ‘in  front’. 


629.  -tat  (an  old  ablative  of  ta-  ‘this’)1  has  an  ablative  or  a  loca¬ 
tive  meaning.  It  is  attached  to  adverbial  case-forms  and  adverbial  or  ad- 
nominal  prepositions;  thus  udak-tat  ‘from  above’,  prdk-tat  ‘from  the  front’; 
ardt-tat  ‘from  afar’,  uttardt-tat  ‘from  the  north’,  parakdt-tat  ‘from  a  distance’; 
pascd-tat  ‘from  behind’;  adhds-tat  ‘below’,  avas-tat  ‘below’,  paras-tdt  ‘beyond’, 
purds-tat  ‘in  or  from  the  front’,  and  with  inserted  ^  (probably  due  to  the 
influence  of  the  preceding  forms)  upari-s-tdt  ‘(from)  above’. 

630.  -ti  in  an-ti  ‘near’,  i-ti  ‘thus’;  probably  also  in  d-ti  ‘beyond’,  pra-ti 
‘towards’. 

631.  -tra  or  -tra  has  a  local  sense,  and  is  mostly  attached  to  pro¬ 
nominal  stems  or  stems  allied  to  pronouns  in  sense;  thus  d-tra  ‘here’,  amu- 
tra  (AV.)  ‘there’,  ku-tra  ‘where?’,  td-tra  ‘there’,  y  d-tra  ‘where’;  any  d-tra  ‘else¬ 
where’,  ubhay d-tra  ‘in  both  places’,  visvd-tra  ‘everywhere’;  asma-trd  ‘among  us’, 
sa-trd  ‘in  one  place’,  ‘together’;  daksina-trd  ‘on  the  right  side’,  puru-tra  ‘in 
many  places’,  bahu-trd  ‘amongst  many’;  deva-trd  ‘among  the  gods’,  paka-trdi^ 
in  simplicity’,  purusa-trd  ‘among  men’,  7?iaidya-trd  ‘among  mortals’,  sayu-trd 
‘on  a  couch’. 


a.  These  adverbs  in  -tra  are  sometimes  used  as  equivalents  of  locatives;  e.  g. 
yatradhi  ‘in  which’,  hasta  d  daksina-trd  ‘in  the  right  hand’.  This  locative  sense  also  some¬ 
times  expresses  the  goal;  e.  g.  patho  devatrd .  .ydndn  (x.  73")  ‘roads  that  go  to  the  gods. 


632.  -tba  forms  adverbs  of  manner,  especially  from  pronominal  stems; 
thus  d-tha  (more  usually  with  shortened  vowel,  dtha)  ‘then’,  i-t-thd  ‘thus, 
itnd-tha  ‘in  this  manner’,  ka-thd  ‘how’;  td-thci  ‘thus’,  ya-thd  ‘in  which  manner  ; 
atiya-tha  ‘otherwise’,  visva-thd  ‘in  every  way’;  urdhvd-tha  ‘upwards’,  purva-tha 
‘formerly’,  pratnd-tha  ‘as  of  old’;  rtu-thd  ‘regularly’,  nama-tha  (AV.)  ‘by  name  ; 
evd-tha  ‘just  so’. 

a.  -tham  occurs  beside  - tha  in  i-t-thdm  ‘thus’,  and  ka-tham  ‘how? . 

633.  -da  forms  adverbs  of  time  almost  exclusively  from  pronominal 
roots;  thus  i-dd  ‘now’,  ka-dd2  ‘when?’,  ta-dd  ‘then’,  ya-dd  ‘at  what  time’; 
sa-da  ‘always’;  sarva-dd  (AV.)  ‘always’. 

a.  -dam  occurs  beside  -da  in  sd-dam  ‘always’;  and  -da-nTm,  an  extended 
form  of  -da,  appears  in  i-da-nim  ‘now’,  ta-da-nlm  then,  visva-da-nwi  always. 


1  In  the  RV.  tat  itself  is  once  used  in-  !  2  In  the  RV.  nearly  always  accented  kadi 

dependently  in  the  sense  of  ‘in  this  way’.  when  followed  by  cana  =  ‘never  . 


426 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


b.  di-,  which  occurs  only  in  ya-di  ‘if’1,  is  perhaps  related  to  -da. 

634.  -dha  forms  adverbs  from  numerals  or  words  of  cognate  meaning, 
with  the  sense  of  ‘(so  many)  times’,  ‘in  (so  many)  ways’,  ‘-fold’;  thus  eka- 
dhd  (AV.)  ‘singly’,  dvi-dha  ‘in  two  ways’,  tri-dha  and  tre-dhd  ‘triply’,  catur-dhd 
‘fourfold’,  so-dhd  ‘in  six  ways’,  dvadasa-dhd  (AV.)  ‘twelvefold’;  kati-dhd  ‘how 
many  times?’,  tati-dhd  (AV.)  ‘in  so  many  parts’,  puru-dhd 2  ‘variously’,  bahu- 
dhd  ‘in  many  ways’,  visvd-dha 2  ‘in  every  way’,  sasva-dhd  ‘again  and  again’; 
priya-dhd  (TS.)  ‘kindly’,  pre-dhd  (MS.)  ‘kindly’,  bahir-dhd  (VS.)  ‘outward’, 
mitra-dhd  (AV.)  ‘in  a  friendly  manner’;  a-dha  and  (with  shortened  final)  a-dha 
‘then’,  a-d-dhd  (‘thus’  =)  ‘truly’;  sdma-dha 3  (Kh.  1.  n4)  ‘in  the  same  way’. 

a.  sa-dha-,  occurring  as  the  first  member  of  several  compounds,  in  the 
sense  of  (‘in  one  way’  =)  ‘together’,  is  probably  formed  with  the  same  suffix, 
the  final  vowel  being  shortened4 6;  in  independent  use  it  appears  as  sahd 
‘with’ 5.  With  the  same  original  suffix  appear  to  be  formed  other  adverbs 
in  -ha;  thus  i-ha  ‘here’  (Prakrit  id  ha),  kii-ha  ‘where?’,  visvd-ha 6  and  visvd-ha 7 
‘always’,  sama-ha  ‘in  some  way  or  other’. 

635.  -va,  expressing  similarity  of  manner,  forms  two  adverbs:  i-va 
‘like’,  ‘as’8;  e-va,  often  with  lengthened  final,  e-vd  ‘thus’,  -'/dm  appears  beside 
-va  in  e-z 'dm  ‘thus’,  which  occurs  once  in  the  RV.  (x.  1513)  instead  of  evd,  and 
a  few  times  in  the  AV.  with  vid-  ‘know’;  it  is  also  found  in  the  SV.  (1.3. 1.110): 
nd  hi  evdun  ydtha  tv  dm  ‘there  is  nothing  such  as  thou’. 

636.  -vat  forms  adverbs  meaning  ‘like’  from  substantives  and  adjectives; 
e.  g.  ahgiras-vat  ‘like  Angiras’,  manu-vat  ‘as  Manu  (did)’;  purana-vdt ,  purva- 
vdt ,  pratna-vat  ‘as  of  old’.  In  origin  it  is  the  accusative  neuter  (with  adver¬ 
bial  shift  of  accent)  of  the  suffix  - vant ,  which  is  used  to  form  adjectives  of 
a  similar  meaning  (e.  g.  tvd-vant-  ‘like  thee’). 

637.  -sds  is  used  to  form  adverbs  of  measure  or  manner  with  a  distri¬ 
butive  sense,  often  from  numerals  or  words  implying  number;  thus  sata-sds 
(AV.)  ‘by  hundreds’,  sahasra-sas  ‘by  thousands’;  sreni-sas  ‘in  rows’;  similarly 
rtu-sds  ‘season  by  season’,  deva-sds  ‘to  each  of  the  gods’,  parva-sds  ‘joint  by 
joint’,  manma-sas  ‘each  as  he  is  minded’. 

638.  -s  forms  two  or  three  multiplicative  adverbs:  dvi-s  ‘twice’, 
trl-s  ‘thrice’,  and  probably  catur  for  *catur-s  (cp.  Zend  cat  hr  us)  ‘four  times’. 
The  same  suffix  forms  a  few  other  adverbs:  adhd-s  ‘below’  (cp.  adha-ra  ‘in¬ 
ferior’),  avd-s  ‘downwards’  (from  dva  ‘down’),  -dyu-s9  (from  dyu-  ‘day’)  in 
anye-dyu-s  (AV.)  ‘next  day’  and  ubhaya-dyu-s  (AV.)  ‘on  both  days’;  perhaps 
also  in  dvi-s  ‘openly’  and  bahi-s  ‘outside’10. 

639.  -hi  forms  a  few  adverbs  of  time  from  pronominal  roots;  thus 
kdr-hi  ‘when?’,  tdr-hi  ‘then?’11.  The  first  part  of  these  words  seems  already 
to  contain  an  adverbial  suffix  -r12  (thus  kd-r  —  Lat.  cur )Jh 

640.  There  are  also  some  miscellaneous  adverbs  consisting  of  isolated 


1  Cp.  Brugmann,  KG.  585. 

2  The  final  vowel  of purudhd  and  visvadhd 
appears  shortened  before  a  double  consonant 
in  the  RV. 

3  Cp.  sama-ha. 

4  As  in  adha,  purudha,  visvadha. 

5  See  above  58,  2  a  (p.  52). 

6  Just  as  visvadha  beside  visvadhd;  but 
cp.  Brugmann,  KG.  582. 

7  On  the  other  hand  visvdha  ‘always’  is 

=  visvd  aha  ‘all  days’  {‘alle  Tage ’)  with  a 

single  accent,  like  a  compound;  see  Grass- 

mann,  s.  v. 


8  In  the  late  parts  of  the  RV.  and  in  the 
AV.  iva  has  often  to  be  read  as  va;  cp. 
Arnold,  Vedic  Metre  129,  but  see  Olden- 
berg,  ZDMG.  61,  830. 

9  See  Meringer,  IF.  18,  257;  cp.  Richter, 
IF.  9,  238;  Schulze,  KZ.  28,  546. 

10  Cp.  Brugmann,  KG.  584. 

11  amur-hi,  etdr-hi ,  yar-hi  also  occur  in  B. 

12  Cp.  ava-r,  which  occurs  once  beside 
the  usual  avd-s. 

13  Cp.  Brugmann,  KG.  583. 


VIII.  Indeclinables.  Adverbial  Case-forms. 


427 


words  or  small  groups,  mostly  of  obscure  origin,  formed  with  other  suffixes. 
The  latter  in  alphabetical  order  are: 

-a  :  kv-a  (always  ku-d)  Svhere?’  and  a-dy-d1  ‘to-day’. 

-an  :  pun-ar  ‘again’  and  sasv-dr  ‘secretly’. 

-a  :  antar-d  ‘between’,  pur-d  ‘before’;  perhaps  also  in  ndna  ‘variously’, 
which  may  be  =  nd-na  ‘so  and  so’  from  the  pronominal  root  na-2. 

- it  :  daksin-it  ‘with  the  right  hand’;  and  -vit  in  cikit-vit  ‘with  deliberation’. 
-u  :  jdt-u  ‘ever’,  mith-u  ‘wrongly’,  muh-u  ‘suddenly’;  anu-sth-u  ‘at  once’ 
(‘standing  after’,  from  \ fstha-,  cp.  su-sth-u  ‘in  good  state’). 

-ur  :  muh-ur  ‘suddenly’. 

-k  :  jyo-k  ‘long’.  In  several  other  adverbs  -k  with  more  or  less  probability 
represents  the  final  of  a  root;  thus  ninlk  ‘secretly’  (probably  from  *nini-ac- 
adj.  ‘secret’),  inadrik  ‘towards  me’  (contracted  from  madriak ,  neut.  adv.  of 
madriac-  adj.  ‘turned  to  me’);  anu-sdk  ‘in  succession’  (‘following  after’  :  iPsae-); 
ayu-sdk  ‘with  the  cooperation  of  men’  (sac-  ‘follow’);  usd-dhak  ‘with  eager 
consumption’  (‘eagerly  burning’  :  j/1 dak-). 

-tar  :  pra-tdr  ‘early’  and  sanu-tdr  ‘away’  (621). 

-fur  :  sani-tnr  ‘away’  (620). 

-ndm  :  nu-nam  ‘now’  and  nana-ndm  ‘variously’  (642  d). 


B.  Adverbial  Case-forms. 

641.  A  large  number  of  case-forms  of  nominal  and  pronominal  stems, 
often  not  otherwise  in  use,  are  employed  as  adverbs.  They  become  such 
when  no  longer  felt  to  be  case-forms3.  Forms  of  all  the  cases  appear  with 
adverbial  function. 

Nominative.  Examples  of  this  case  are  prathamdm  ‘firstly’,  dvittyam 
‘secondly’;  e.  g.  divas  pari  prathamdm  jajhe  agnir ,  asmdd  dvitiyam  pari 
jatdvedah  (x.  45  *)  ‘Agni  was  first  bom  from  heaven,  secondly  he,  Jatavedas, 
(was  born)  from  us’.  Such  adverbs  are  to  be  explained  as  originally  used 
in  apposition  to  the  verbal  action :  ‘as  the  first  thing,  Agni  was  born’.  A 
masculine  form  has  become  stereotyped  in  ki-s  as  an  interrogative  adverb; 
its  negative  forms  nd-kis  and  md-kis  are  often  used  in  the  sense  of  ‘never’ 
or  simply  ‘not’. 

642.  Accusative.  Adverbs  of  this  form  are  to  be  explained  from 
various  meanings  of  the  accusative.  The  following  are  examples  of  nominal 
forms  representing: 

a.  the  cognate  accusative:  red  kapotam  ?iudata  pranodam  (x.  1655) 
‘by  song  expel  the  pigeon  as  expulsion’;  citrdm  bha?ity  usasah  (vi.  652)  ‘the 
Dawns  shine  brightly’  (=  ‘a  bright  scil.  shining’);  marmrjmd  te  tanvcim  bhun 
krtvah  (111.  184)  ‘we  adorned  thy  form  many  times’  (originally  ‘makings’); 
similarly  dhrsnu  ‘boldly’,  puru  ‘much’,  ‘very’,  bhdyas  ‘more’;  and  the  compara¬ 
tive  in  -taram  added  to  verbal  prefixes;  e.  g.  vi-taram  vi  kramasva  (iv.  1811) 
‘stride  out  more  widely’;  sam-taram  sain  sisadhi  (AV.  vn.  16’)  ‘quicken  still 
further’;  pra  tain  nay  a  pra-tardm  (x.  45°)  ‘lead  him  forward  still  further’;  ud 
enam  ut-tarain  nay  a  (AV.  vi.  51)  ‘lead  him  up  still  higher’;  so  also  ava-tardm , 
paras-taram ,  para-taram  ‘further  away’,  and  the  fern,  accusatives  sam-taram 
and  paras-tardm  (AV.). 


1  Cp.  Reichelt,  BB.  25,  244.  3  On  the  distinction  between  case  function 

2  Cp.  op.  cit.  839;  Persson,  IF.  2,  20off.,  and  adverbial  use  see  Brugmann,  KG.  5 7 1  . 

‘auf  diese  (oder)  jene  Weise’;  Bartholomae, 

IF.  jo,  io — 12,  originally  ‘separating. 


428 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


b.  the  appositional  accusative;  thus  osd-m  ‘quickly’  (lit.  ‘burningly’), 
kdma-m  ‘according  to  desire’;  ndrna  ‘byname1,  rupa-m  ‘in  form’,  satyd-m  ‘truly’. 

c.  the  accusative  of  direction ;  e.  g.  dgra-m  (/-)  ‘(go)  to  the  front  of’, 
‘before’;  asta-m  (gam-)  ‘(go)  home’. 

d.  the  accusative  of  distance  and  time ;  e.  g.  dura-m  ‘a  long  way  off’, 
‘far’;  ndkta-m  ‘by  night’,  saya-m  ‘in  the  evening’,  cird-m  ‘(for  a)  long  (time)’, 
nitya-m  ‘constantly’,  pdrva-m  ‘formerly’. 

a.  There  are  also  some  adverbs  derived  from  obsolete  nominal  stems,  which 
would  seem  for  the  most  part  to  have  belonged  originally  to  the  sphere  of  the  cognate 
accusative;  thus  ara-m  ‘sufficiently’  (from  *ara-  ‘fitting’),  ala-m{ AV.)  id.;  tusni-m  ‘in  silence’, 
nanana-m  (from  nano)  ‘variously’,  nund-m  (from  nu)  ‘now’;  sdka-tn  ‘together’  (from  *sdha- 
‘accompaniment’:  sac-  ‘follow’2 3. 

|3.  Finally  a  number  of  accusative  adverbs  are  formed  from  pronominal  stems; 
thus  adds  ‘there’,  ‘thither’;  /(/‘just’,  ‘even’;  iddm  ‘here’,  ‘now’;  ini  ‘ever’  (e.  g.  yd  Tin 
‘whoever’);  ka-d,  an  interrogative  particle;  kd-m,  a  particle  emphasizing  a  preceding 
dative  or  (unaccented)  the  particles  mi,  su ,  hi;  ki-m  ‘why?’;  -ki-m  ‘ever’  (in  md-kim  ‘never’); 
kuv-id  ‘whether?’;  ci-d  ‘even’;  td-d  ‘then’;  ya-d  ‘if’,  ‘when’,  ‘that’;  si-m  ‘ever’  (yat  sim 
‘whenever’);  snma-d  and  smd-d  ‘together’. 


643.  Instrumental.  With  the  ending  of  this  case  (sometimes  plural) 
are  formed  adverbs  from  substantives,  adjectives,  and  pronouns,  the  latter  two 
groups  being  at  first  probably  used  with  the  ellipse  of  a  substantive.  Various 
senses  of  the  instrumental  case  are  expressed  by  these  adverbs.  Usually 
they  imply  manner  or  accompanying  circumstances;  e.  g.  tdras-a  ‘with 
speed’;  sdhas-a  ‘forcibly’;  tdvisj-bhis  ‘with  might’;  Jidvyas-a  ‘anew’;  end  ‘in  this 
(way)’,  ‘thus’.  Not  infrequently  they  express  extension  of  space  or  time;  e.  g. 
agrena  ‘in  front’;  aktu-bhis  ‘by  night’;  div-a  ‘by  day’  (but  div-d  ‘through  the 
sky’);  dosd  ‘in  the  evening’. 

a.  The  substantive  instrumentals  are  chiefly  formed  from  feminine 
stems  in  -a  not  otherwise  in  use,  but  corresponding  mostly  to  masculines 
or  neuters  in  - a ;  thus  a-datrayd  ‘without  (receiving)  a  gift’  ( ddtra -  ‘gift’); 
asayd  ‘before  the  face  of’,  ‘openly’  ( *dsa -  =  as-  ‘face’);  rtayd  ‘in  the  right 
way’  (prtd-  —  rtd-);  naktayd  ‘by  night’  (*  nakfa-  —  nakfa-)',  sumnayd  ‘piously’ 
(psumnd-  —  sumnd-);  svapnayd  (AV.)  ‘in  a  dream’  (psvapna-  —  svdpna-). 


a.  Several  of  these  feminines  are  instrumentals  from  stems  in  -ta  and  identical  in 
form  with  the  stem;  thus  tirasca-td  ‘through’;  devd-ta  ‘among  the  gods’;  bdhu-td  ‘with  the 
arms’;  sasvdr-td  ‘in  secret’;  dvi-td  ‘in  two  ways’  may  have  a  similar  origin  (dvi  ta-  ‘two’) k 
We  have  perhaps  also  old  instrumentals  of  feminine  stems  in  -d  in  taditnd  ‘then’  =  ‘at 
that  time’;  and  in  vflhd  ‘according  to  choice’,  ‘at  will’  {pvf- thd-  ‘choice’,  from  vr-  ‘choose’). 

ft.  In  a  few  examples  the  instrumental  seems  more  probably  to  be  that  of  a  radical 
stem  with  adverbial  shift  of  accent  rather  than  from  a  stem  in-d;  thus  guh-a  ‘in  secret’, 
rather  inst.  of  gtih-  ‘hiding’4,  than  of  a  stem  *guh-a -5;  similarly  infs-a  ‘in  vain’  (*mfs- 
‘neglect’  :  inst.  mrs-d );  sac- a  ‘together’  (*sdc-  ‘accompaniment’  :  inst.  sac-d).  In  a-slha  (RV1.), 
perhaps  meaning  ‘at  once’,  we  seem  to  have  an  instrumental  adverb  from  a  radical  d- 
stem  a-sthd-  (‘no  standing’)  =  ‘without  delay’. 


b.  The  adjective  instrumentals  end  either  in  -a  (plural  -ais)  or  -ya. 
The  former  are  derived  from  a-  stems  and  a  few  consonant  stems  in  -c\  the 
latter  are  anomalous  feminines  from  u-  stems  and  one  or  two  i-  stems: 

a.  apakd  ‘afar’  ( dpaka -  ‘far’);  ir?nd  ‘quickly’  (irmd-);  uccd  and  uccdis  ‘on 
high’  (used-);  daksind  ‘to  the  right’  ( daksina -);  paracdis  ‘for  away’  (*paraca~); 
pascdi  ‘behind’  ( *pascd -);  madhyd  ‘in  the  midst’  (. madhya -);  sdnais  ‘slowly’ 


1  Cp.  Gray,  IF.  11,  307  ff. ;  Foy,  IF.  12, 
172. 

2  For  some  other  adverbs  of  obscure 
origin,  which  were  originally  accusatives, 
see  Whitney  hit  f. 

3  Cp.  Benfey,  SV.  Glossary,  and  Grass- 

mann,  Worterbuch,  s.  v. 


;  4  The  normal  inst.  of  which  would  be 

gnh-d. 

S  Cp.  RV.  I.  676  guhd  guham  gas  and  in 
the  next  stanza  guhd  bhavantam. 


VIII.  Indeclinables.  Particles. 


429 


(*saua-)  and  sdnakais  id.;  sand1  ‘from  of  old’  ( sdna -);  samand  ‘in  the  same 
way’  ( samana -);  tirasc-d  ‘across’;  nic-d  ‘downwards’;  prac-d  ‘forwards’. 

(?.  anu-sthu-y-d 2  ‘at  once’  ( anu-sthu  ‘following’,  adv.  from  ‘stand’); 

asu-y-d  ‘swiftly’  {add-) ;  dhrsnu-y-a  ‘boldly’  {dkrsnu-) ;  mithu-y-d  ‘falsely’  ( nuthu , 
adv.  from  mith-  ‘be  hostile’);  raghu-y-d  ‘rapidly’  {raghu-) ;  sddhu-y-d  ‘straight’ 
{sadhi't-);  also  urviy-d  (for  urvv-d)  ‘far’,  from  urvi  f.  of  uru-  ‘wide’;  and 
visvy-d  ‘everywhere’,  from  *visvl irregular  f.  of  visva-  ‘all’,  beside  the  regular 
inst.  f.  visvaya ,  which  itself  seems  once  (vm.  682)  to  be  used  adverbially. 

c.  Pronominal  instrumentals  are  formed  from  several  stems  in  -a 
and  one  in  -zz.  Some  appear  in  the  masculine  (or  neuter)  form  of  -a  or  the 
feminine  of  -yd;  so  and  ‘thus’  {ana-  ‘that’);  amd  ‘at  home’  ( ama -  ‘this’);  a-yd 
‘thus’  {a-  ‘this’);  end  ‘thus’  {ena-  ‘this’);  ka-yd  ‘how?’  {ka-  ‘who?’);  ub/iayd 
‘in  both  ways’  {ubhaya-  ‘both’).  From  amu-  ‘that’  is  formed  the  adverb  amu-y-d 
‘in  that  way’,  with  the  anomalous  interposition  of  y3.  To  the  influence  of 
the  latter  word  is  probably  due  the  form  kuhayd  ‘where?’  (RV1.)  beside  the 
usual  kdiha  ‘where?’. 

644.  a.  Dative.  The  adverbial  use  of  this  case  is  rare.  Examples 
are:  apardya  ‘for  the  future’  (from  dpara-  ‘later’);  vdrdya  ‘according  to  wish’ 
( vara -  ‘choice’). 

b.  Ablative.  This  case  is  on  the  whole  used  adverbially  fairly  often. 
It  is,  however,  seldom  formed  from  substantives,  as  drdt  ‘from  a  distance’, 
dsdt  ‘from  near’;  or  from  pronouns,  as  dt  ‘then’,  tdt  ‘thus’,  ydt  ‘as  far  as’. 
It  is  most  commonly  formed  from  adjectives;  thus  durdt  ‘from  afar’;  nicdt 
‘from  below’;  pascdt  ‘from  behind’;  sdksdt  ‘visibly’;  and  with  shifted  accent: 
adhardt  ‘below’  {dd/iara-);  apdkdt  ‘from  afar’  ( dpdka -);  a/ndt  ‘from  near’ 
(dma-);  uttardt  ‘from  the  north’  {iittar a-);  sandt 4  and  sanakdt  ‘from  of  old’ 
{sdna-). 


c.  Genitive.  The  adverbial  use  of  this  case  is  very  rare.  Examples 
are  aktds  ‘by  night’  and  vastos  ‘in  the  morning’. 

d.  Locative.  Several  forms  of  this  case  have  an  adverbial  meaning; 
thus  dgre  ‘in  front’;  abhi-svare  ‘behind’  (lit.  ‘within  call’);  astam-Tke  ^ at  home’; 
dke  ‘near’;  are 5  ‘afar’;  rte  ‘without’;  dure  ‘afar’;  and  in  the  plural  aparfsu 
‘in  future’. 


3.  Particles. 

Whitney,  Sanskrit  Grammar  122,  132 — 133.  —  Delbruck,  Altindische  Syntax 
p.  240—267.  —  Cp.  Brugmann,  KG.  817—855. 

645.  Other  adverbial  words,  the  derivation  of  which  is  obscure  and  the 
meaning  of  which  is  abstract  or  general,  may  be  classed  as  particles.  They 
form  three  groups,  the  emphatic,  the  conjunctional,  and  the  negative,  the 
first  being  the  most  numerous.  The  emphatic  particles,  as  throwing  stress 
on  a  preceding  word,  are  either  enclitic  or  incapable  of  beginning  a  sentence ; 
the  conjunctional  particles,  except  uta,  are  of  a  similar  nature;  but  the  nega¬ 
tives,  having  a  strongly  antithetical  meaning,  generally  occupy  an  emphatic 
position  in  the  sentence. 

646.  The  emphatic  particles  may  usually  be  translated  by  such  words 
as  ‘just’,  ‘indeed’,  or  rendered  merely  by  stress  on  the  word  they  follow. 


1  In  the  last  three  adverbs  the  accent 
does  not  shift  to  the  final  syllable. 

2  These  anomalous  forms  are  due  per¬ 
haps  to  the  influence  of  the  pronominal 
amu-y-d. 

3  The  anomalous  interposition  of  y  is 


perhaps  due  to  the  influence  of  the  numerous 
adverbs  in  -yd  from  stems  in  - a ,  amu •  being 
an  isolated  pronominal  u-  stem. 

4  sandt  occurs  also  AA.  v.  2.  2  5. 

5  On  are ,  drdt ,  rte  cp.  NeISSER,  BB.  1 9, 
I40. 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vepic  Grammar. 


43° 

They  are  afiga ;  aha1,  gha,  ha  (the  last  two  less  emphatic  than  aha) ;  sma; 
svid  (generally  following  an  interrogative)  —  ‘pray’;  vai,  nearly  always  following 
the  first  word  of  a  sentence.  Three  particles  which  emphasize  the  preceding 
word  more  strongly  in  the  sense  of  ‘certainly’,  ‘in  truth’,  are  k/la  (+  AV.), 
khalu  (RV1.,  not  in  AV.),  bhdla  (RV1.  AV1.).  In  the  RV.  ta  usually  empha¬ 
sises  exhortations  =  ‘pray’,  but  sometimes  also  statements  =  ‘surely’;  once 
(vi.  29s)  it  seems  to  mean  ‘but’,  which  is  its  sense  in  its  single  occurrence  in 
the  AV.  The  particle  nd,  when  it  means  ‘as  it  were’,  ‘like’,  was  in  origin 
probably  an  emphatic  particle  =  ‘truly’2. 

647.  There  are  several  conjunctional  particles,  some  of  which  are  com¬ 
pounded.  u 3  ‘now’,  ‘again’,  is  commonly  used  deictically  and  anaphorically 
after  pronouns  and  verbs.  Both  u-td  and  ca  mean  ‘and’,  ca  when  compounded 
with  the  negative  particle  as  cand  originally  meant  ‘not  even’,  but  the  negative 
sense  generally  disappears  and  cand  turns  the  interrogative  pronoun  into  an 
indefinite,  as  has  cand  ‘some  one’4,  ca  when  compounded  with  id ,  that  is 
ced,  means  ‘if’,  nti  ‘now’  generally  follows  the  first  word  of  the  sentence. 
The  disjunctive  particle  is  va  ‘or’,  hi  (generally  following  the  first  word  of  a 
sentence)  expresses  the  reason  for  an  assertion  =  ‘for’,  ‘because’;  it  is  also 
used  with  imperatives,  when  it  means  ‘then’.  It  occurs  once  in  the  RV. 
(vi.  48")  compounded  with  the  negative  nd,  but  without  change  of  meaning: 
hind  ‘for’. 

648.  The  negative  particle  which  denies  assertions  is  7id  ‘not’.  Its 
compound  ned  (==  nd  id)  expresses  an  emphatic  ‘not’;  it  is,  however,  usually 
employed  in  the  final  sense  of  ‘in  order  that  not’,  ‘lest’.  Its  compound  na-kis 
often  means  ‘never’,  and  nd-kun ,  in  the  only  two  stanzas  in  which  it  occurs 
(vm.  78*' s),  has  the  same  sense.  The  negative  also  occurs  twice  (x.  54s;  84s) 
compounded  with  mi  as  nanii,  which  expresses  a  strong  negative  =  ‘not  at 
all’,  ‘never’.  When  it  is  compounded  with  hi  as  71a  hi,  the  latter  word  retains 
the  meaning  of  both  particles:  ‘for  not’. 

md  ‘not’  is  the  prohibitive  particle  regularly  used  with  the  injunctive5. 
It  is  compounded  with  the  petrified  nom.  -his  and  acc.  -him  to  md-kis  and 
md-kim.  The  former  frequently  and  the  latter  in  its  only  two  occurrences 
mean  ‘never’. 

a.  Adverbial  words  occurring  in  compounds  only. 

649.  A  limited  number  of  words  of  an  adverbial  character  have  either 
entirely  lost  or,  in  a  few  instances,  nearly  lost  their  independent  character, 
being  found  in  combination  with  half  a  dozen  particular  verbs  or  as  the 
first  member  of  nominal  compounds.  In  two  or  three  examples  the  original 
independence  of  such  words  can  still  be  traced. 

650.  A  few  mostly  onomatopoetic  reduplicative  words  appear  only 
compounded  with  the  roots  hr-  ‘do’  and  bhu-  ‘be’,  the  prefixed  form  generally 
ending  in  -a,  once  in  -I:  thus  akhkhall-kftya 6  (vii.  1033)  ‘croaking’,  alala- 


1  Another  frequent  particle  of  the  same 
meaning,  id,  has  already  been  mentioned 
among  the  pronominal  accusative  adverbs. 

2  Greek  vai,  Lat.  nae ,  cp.  Lith.  nei  ‘as  it 
were’  (cp.  Brugmann,  KG.  839);  this  sense 
of  na  is  generally  explained  as  derived  from 
the  negative  =  ‘not  (precisely)’ :  see  Whitney 
1122  h;  cp.  BB.  22,  1 94  ff. 

3  On  the  Sandhi  of  11,  see  above  71,  I  b. 

4  Cp.  Delbruck,  op.  cit.  p.  544. 

5  It  is  not  used  with  the  ordinary  sub¬ 


junctive,  nor  the  imperative,  nor  the  opta¬ 
tive  except  in  the  form  bhujema\  see 
Delbruck:  p.  361  (top).  In  the  Khilas  it 
occurs  two  or  three  times  with  the  2.  impv. ; 

[  pasya  (lir.  1517),  tisfha  (iv.  525),  and  once  at 
least  with  the  subj. :  vadati  (i.  95)  :  MS.  vadeti. 

b  This  is  the  only  instance  of  the  prefix 
ending  in  -T  instead  of  -a  in  the  RV.  In 
the  AV.  -T  appears  before  forms  of  kr-  in 
the  nominal  compounds  vatT-krta-  and  vatl - 
kara-,  designations  of  a  disease. 


VIII.  Indeclinables.  Particles.  431 

bhavant-  (iv.  180)  ‘sounding  merrily’;  jaiijana-bhdvant-  (vm.  43s)  ‘sparkling’; 
kikird  kniu  (vi.  537)  ‘tear  to  tatters’;  masm asd-karam  (AV.v.  23s)  ‘I  have  crushed’, 
masmasd  kuru  (VS.  xi.  80)  and  mrsmrsd  kuru  (MS.  11.  J1)  ‘crush’,  malmald- 
bhavant-  (MS.  II.  1319;  TS.  1. 4.  341)  ‘glittering’,  bharbhard-bhavat  (MS.  11.  21:  B.) 
‘became  confounded’;  bibib a-bhdvant-  (MS.  i.65:B.)  ‘crackling’. 

651.  The  adverb  avis  ‘openly’,  ‘in  view’,  is  found  in  combination  with 
the  verbs  as bhu-  and  kr-  only.  With  the  latter  it  means  ‘make  visible’, 
e.  g.  avis  karta  (1.  869)  ‘make  manifest’.  With  the  two  former,  which  are 
sometimes  omitted,  it  means  ‘become  visible’,  ‘appear’;  e.  g.  avis  sdnti  (vm.  823) 
‘being  manifest’;  avir  ag?iir  abhavat  (1.  1432)  ‘Agni  became  manifest’. 

pra-dur ,  lit.  ‘out  of  doors’,  begins  to  appear  in  the  AV.  in  combination 
with  Y bhu-,  meaning  ‘become  manifest’,  ‘appear’. 

652.  The  word  srdd,  which  originally  probably  meant  ‘heart’1,  is  often 
found  in  combination  with  dha-  ‘place’,  in  the  sense  of  ‘put  faith  in’,  ‘credit’, 
nearly  always,  however,  separated  from  the  verb  by  other  words,  e.  g.  srdd 
asmai  dhatta  (11.  12s)  ‘believe  in  him’;  srdd  asmai ,  naro ,  vdcase  dadhatana 
(VS.  vm.  5)  ‘give  credence,  O  men,  to  this  utterance’.  It  also  appears  in  the 
substantive  srad-dhd-  ‘faith’.  The  word  is  once  also  found  with  ]/Ar-  in  the 
sense  of ‘entrust’:  srdd  visvd  vdrya  krdhi  (vm.  752)  ‘entrust  all  boons  (to  us)’. 

653-  The  interjection  hth  is  compounded  with  kr-  ‘make’  in  the  sense 
of  ‘utter  the  sound  hih\  ‘murmur’;  thus  gdur  .  .  hihh  akrnot  (1.  16428)  ‘the 
cow  lowed’;  hiii-krnvati  (1.  16427)  ‘lowing’;  hih-krtaya  svdhd  (VS.  xxii.  7) 
‘hail  to  the  sound  hid ;  tasma  usd  hih-krnoti  (AV.  ix.  645)  ‘for  him  the  dawn 
utters  hiii. 

654-  A  few  substantives,  after  assuming  an  adverbial  character,  are 
found  compounded  with  participial  forms,  dsta-m  ‘home’,  which  still  appears 
as  a  noun  in  the  RV.,  though  commonly  used  adverbially  in  the  accusative 
with  verbs  of  motion,  is  combined  like  a  verbal  prefix  with  participles  of  i- 
‘go’  in  the  AV.:  astam-ydnt-  ‘setting’,  astam-esydnt-  ‘about  to  set’,  astam-ita- 
(AV.xvn.  123) 2 ‘set’.  The  noun  ndmas-  ‘obeisance’  is  similarly  compounded  in 
the  gerund  with  kr  -‘make’  in  the  AV.:  namas-krtya 3.  In  the  RV.  itself  names 
of  parts  of  the  body,  with  no  tendency  otherwise  to  adverbial  use,  are  thus 
compounded  with  the  gerund  of gra/i-  ‘seize’:  karna-grhya  ‘seizing  by  the  ear’, 
pada-grhya  ‘seizing  by  the  foot’,  hasta-grhya  ‘grasping  the  hand’4.  The 
transition  to  this  use  was  probably  supplied  by  nouns  compounded  with  past 
participles,  as  sdhas-krta-  ‘produced  by  force’. 

655-  There  are  besides  a  few  monosyllabic  adverbial  particles  which 
occur  as  prefixes  compounded  with  nominal  forms  only.  By  far  the 
most  frequent  of  these  is  the  negative  prefix,  which  appears  in  the  form  of 
an -  before  vowels  and  a-  before  consonants.  It  is  compounded  with  in¬ 
numerable  substantives  and  adjectives,  but  rarely  with  adverbs,  as  a-kutra  ‘to 
the  wrong  place’,  a-pundr  (‘not  again’  =)  ‘once  for  all’;  dn-eva  (AV1.) 
‘not  so’. 

656.  sa as  a  prefix  expressive  of  accompaniment,  is  employed  as  a 
reduced  form  of  the  verbal  prefix  sam 5,  and  interchanges  with  saha-;  e.  g. 
sa-cetas-  ‘accompanied  by  wisdom’,  ‘wise’,  beside  saha-cchandas-  ‘accompanied 
with  songs’. 


1  See  Uhlenbeck,  Kurzgefasstes  Etymo- 
logisches  Worterbuch  der  altindischen 
Sprache,  Amsterdam  18S8 — 89,  s.  v.  sraddha. 

2  For  some  other  later  nominal  compounds 
of  this  kind  see  Whitney  1092  c. 

3  This  is  the  regular  form  in  the  later 


language,  but  the  independent  form  namas 
kj'tva  is  occasionally  found ;  cp.  Bfhaddevata, 
I.  I,  critical  note  in  my  edition. 

4  Cp.  Whitney  990  b  and  above  591  a 
(p.  413,  bottom)  and  591  b. 

5  Cp.  above  250. 


432  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar.  VIII.  Indeclinables. 

657.  c/us-  (appearing  also,  according  to  the  euphonic  combination,  as  dur -, 
dus-,  dus-) 1 ,  means  ‘ill’,  ‘hard  to’;  e.  g.  dur-ga-  ‘(place)  difficult  of  access’, 
dur-yuj-  ‘ill-yoked’,  dur-??iatl-  ‘ill-will’;  dus-cyava?id-  ‘hard  to  shake’;  dus-krta- 
‘ill-done’ ;  dus-sdha-  ‘irresistible’. 

658.  su-  ‘well’,  ‘easy  to’  is  compounded  with  a  much  larger  number  of 
words  than  dus-2-,  e.  g.  su-kdra-  ‘easy  to  accomplish’;  su-krt -  ‘acting  well’, 
su-gd-  ‘easy  of  access’,  su-mati-  ‘good-will’,  su-yuj-  ‘well-yoked’.  It  is,  however, 
still  found  in  a  state  of  transition  in  the  RV.,  where  it  occurs  independently 
more  than  200  times3,  being  then  connected  in  sense  with  the  verb  only4; 
e.  g.  asrndn  su  jigyusah  krtam  (1.  177)  ‘make  us  well  victorious’5. 


4.  Interjections. 

659-  A  certain  number  of  words  having  the  nature  of  interjections  occur 
in  the  Samhitas.  They  are  of  two  kinds,  being  either  exclamations  or 
imitative  sounds. 

a.  The  exclamations  are  bat  (RV.)  ‘truly’,  baia  (RV.)  ‘alas!’,  hdnta 
‘come’  used  exhortatively  with  the  subjunctive,  and  haye  ‘come’,  before  voca¬ 
tives,  hlruk  ‘away!’,  huruk  (RV.)  ‘away!’,  hdi  (AV.)  ‘ho!’.  Perhaps  uve 
(x.  867) 6. 

b.  Interjections  of  the  onomatopoetic  type  are:  kikird  (RV.)  used  with 
kr-  ‘make  the  sound  kikirdi  =  ‘tear  to  tatters’;  kikkitci  (TS.)  used  in  invoca¬ 
tions  (TS.  hi.  4.  21);  cis'cd  (RV.)  ‘whiz!’  (of  an  arrow)  used  with  kr-  ‘make  a 
whizzing  sound’;  phdt  (AV.  VS.)  ‘crash!’,  phdl  (AV.  xx.  1353)  ‘splash!’;  bd 
(TS.  =  AV.)  ‘dash!’;  bhuk  (AV.  xx.  1351)  ‘bang!’,  sal  (AV.  xx.  135  2)  ‘clap! 


1  See  Grassmann,  Worterbuch,  columns 
614—619. 

2  Op.  cit ,  columns  1526—1560. 

3  In  the  AV.  it  is  still  used  independently, 
but  only  14  times. 

4  See  Grassmann,  op.  cit.,  s.  v.  su. 

5  The  Pada  text  of  AV.  xix.  49t0  treats 


sv  apayati  ‘may  he  go  well  away’  as  a 
compound:  su-apayati;  but  this  is  doubt* 
less  an  error  for  su  |  apa  |  aya/i.  See  Whit¬ 
ney's  note  on  this  passage  in  his  Translation 
of  the  AV. 

6  See  Neisser,  BB.  30,  303;  cp.  above 
p.  337,  note  7. 


ADDENDA  AND  CORRIGENDA. 


It  should  be  noted,  in  addition  to  what  is  said  at  the  end  of  §  i  (p.  2), 
that  when  the  abbreviations  fVS.’  etc.  indicate  the  occurrence  of  a  form  in 
a  later  Veda,  they  only  mean  that  the  form  in  question  is  not  found  in  the 
RV.,  while  it  may  occur  in  parallel  passages  of  one  or  more  of  the  other 
Samhitas  also.  The  symbols  ‘TVS.’  etc,  are  intended  to  draw  attention  to 
the  fact  that  the  form  indicated  occurs  in  a  later  Samhita  as  well  as  in 
the  RV.  —  In  the  enumeration  of  words,  stems,  inflected  forms,  and  suffixes, 
initial  alphabetical  order  is  the  principle  followed.  But  it  is  occasionally  varied 
for  clearness  of  grouping.  Thus  the  arrangement,  in  the  case  of  compounds, 
is  sometimes  according  to  the  final  member  (e.  g.  308,  375  A,  591  a)  or,  in 
the  case  of  roots,  according  to  the  medial  or  final  vowel  (e.  g.  421,  483).  The 
principle  is  also  departed  from  when  examples  only  of  very  frequent  forms  are 
given.  Thus  the  nom.  forms  of  present  participles  are  arranged  in  the  order  of 
the  conjugational  classes  (314);  the  nom.  and  other  cases  of  the  (7-declension 
are  given  according  to  frequency  of  occurrence  (372).  Adverbs  are  classed 
according  to  the  alphabetical  order  of  the  suffixes  (626 — 640)  or  the  sequence 
of  the  cases  (641  —  644).  —  The  principle  of  giving  the  meanings  of  words 
has  been  followed  throughout  the  work.  But  this  has  been  modified  in  two 
ways  in  the  enumeration  of  inflected  forms.  In  declension  the  meaning  is 
given  only  with  the  first  occurrence  of  a  case-form  of  any  word  found  in  the 
same  paragraph  (e.  g.  372).  It  seemed  impossible  to  follow  the  same  method 
in  lists  of  inflected  verbal  forms.  For,  owing  to  the  modifications  of  sense 
due  to  context  and  compounding  with  prepositions,  the  meaning  could  not 
be  satisfactorily  stated  by  giving  it  with  the  first  occurrence  of  forms  from 
the  same  root.  The  meaning  has  therefore  been  stated  with  the  root  only 
or  when  forms  from  different  roots  might  be  confused  (e.  g.  444,  445).  But 
as  the  index  gives  the  meaning  of  every  root  and  enumerates  all  paragraphs 
containing  forms  from  that  root,  the  general  sense  of  all  such  forms  may 
easily  be  ascertained.  —  As  regards  references,  figures  without  an  added  ‘p.’ 
always  indicate  paragraphs  when  books  are  divided  into  paragraphs;  e.  g. 
‘Delbruck,  Verbum  184  (p.  166  — 169)’;  otherwise  they  refer  to  the  page. 
When  pages  have  to  be  referred  to  they  are  for  the  convenience  of  the  reader 
often  divided  into  quarters;  thus  Lanman  37 2$  means  the  third  quarter  of 
p.  372  in  Lanman’s  Noun-Inflection. 

B.  23,  line  19  for  orignal  read  original.  —  P.  51,  note  2,  for  *guzdha  read 
*gnzdha-.  —  P.  56,  1.  27,  for  AV.  read  Av.  and  for  ‘weak  read  weak.  —  P.  58,  1.  4 
from  below,  for  cak\an\anta  read  cak[an\antu .  —  P.  60,  1.  2,  for  appears  read 
appears  as.  —  P.  61,  1.  7,  for  become  read  becomes;  1  34,  for  ( a-yds  read  a-yas; 
1.  36,  for  fall’)  read  Tali’.  —  P.  66,  §  72,  2  b:  cp.  Oldenberg,  ZDMG.  63,  298.  — 
P.  67,  1.  30,  for  There  seems  to  be  no  certain  instance  of  this  in  the  RV.  read 
This  is  of  regular  and,  as  far  as  d  is  concerned,  of  very  frequent  occurrence 
in  the  RV.,  e.  g.  tan  (for  tad)  mitrasya  (1.  1155);  1.  31,  after  cakrdn  nd 

Indo-arische  Philologic  I.  4.  26 


434 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


(x. 95t2,  i3)  for  however  read  too.  —  P.  70,  1.  17,  insert  often  also  after  But  s. — 
P.  83,  1.  27,  for  Reduplicated  stems  read  Reduplicated  present  stems;  1.  28, 
after  ‘invoking’  add  but  perfect  sisriyand-  Raving  resorted  to’.  —  P.  99,  1.  2 
from  below,  insert  (A V.)  after  ma-mad-a-t;  note  3,  for  ri-hate  read  rih-ate.  — 
P.  100,  last  line:  on  ddsa-mana-  cp.  p.  373  note  Iz.  —  P.  109,  1.  3  from 
below,  for  vevij-a  read  vevij-a-  and  for  cara-car-d  read  cara-car-a-. —  P.  119, 
1.  21,  for  jigis-u  read  jigls-u-.  —  P.  141,  1.  2  from  below,  for  medh-i-rd-  read 
medh-i-rd -.  —  P.  146,  1.  6,  for  204  read  244.  —  P.  156,  1.  20,  for  vdrunas 
read  vdrunas  and  1.  22,  for  pitara-  read  pitara.  —  P.  157,  1.  26,  for  occurs 
read  occur. —  P.  169,  1.  21,  after  purusa-vyaghra-  add  (VS.).  —  P.  192,  1.  9 
from  below,  for  mahantas  read  mahdntas.  —  P.  197,  note  7,  for  55  read 
66  c  /S’.  —  P.  199,  note  8,  add  Cp.  Oldenberg,  ZDMG.  63,  300 — 302.  — 
P.  202,  I.  sing.:  Oldenberg,  ZDMG.  63,  289,  would  place  the  form  ran  a 
(ix.  77)  here.  —  P.  209,  1.  25,  for  Svidth  read  width.  —  P.  215,  note  5,  for 
Bahuvrlhi  read  a  Bahuvrlhi.  —  P.  238,  note  *,  add  Cp.  Oldenberg,  ZDMG. 
63,  300  —  302.  —  P.  255,  1.  11,  for  asas  read  -as  as;  §  371,  1.  3,  for  ending 
read  endings.  —  P.  257,  lines  9  and  12:  on  brand,  dand ,  and  sakhyd  (as 
acc.  pi.)  cp.  Oldenberg,  ZDMG.  63,  287  —  290.  —  P.  264,  1.  3  from  below: 
according  to  Oldenberg,  ZDMG.  63,  293,  also  satruhdtyai.  —  P.  279,  1.  10, 
for  /-declension  read  ^-declension.  —  P.  304,  1.  9  from  below,  for  at  man-  read 
atmdn -.  —  P.  315  delete  1  after  414.  —  P.  317,  1.  20,  for  -yat  read  -ydt.  — 
P.  320,  sing.  3.:  ydmati  should  perhaps  be  classed  as  a  root  aor.  subj.,  though 
this  form  seems  to  have  a  distinctly  indicative  sense  in  the  two  passages 
in  which  it  occurs;  du.  2.  for  sadathas  read  sddathas ,  which  form  should  per¬ 
haps  rather  be  classed  as  a  root  aor.  subj.;  pi.  1.,  delete  ddyamasi  (AV.).  — - 
P.  321,  1.  2,  delete  gdmanti :  see  p.  369  top;  1.  12:  the  shift  of  accent  is  in¬ 
sufficient  (cp.  hims-te)  for  the  treatment  of  himsanti  as  a  transfer  form  (cp. 
p.  100,  I.13):  it  should  preferably  be  placed  in  464  after  vrhjanti. —  P.  321, 
Indicative  Middle:  Sing.  1  ,  delete  daye  (AV.  TS.).  —  Sing.  3.,  delete  bhdjate ; 
yojate ,  star  ate  (p.369,  top) ;  read  vdhate  before  v  a  sate,  and  say  ate  before  siksate.  — 
Du.  3.,  add  sobhete. —  PI.  1,  delete  staramahe  (p.  369,  top).  —  P.  323,  §  424, 
Sing.  1.,  delete  bhojam,  yojam  (503).  —  Sing.  2.,  delete yamas,  vdras  (502).  — 
Sing.  3  .  delete  yamat,  rad/iat,  sakat  (502),  tamat,  ddsat,  sramat,  sadat  (510), 
minat  (477),  sndtkat  (452);  for  vdrat  read  varat  (‘cover’):  —  PI.  3.,  delete 
yam an  (502),  vaman,  sdsan  { 452),  add  srdsan. —  Middle.  PI.  3.,  delete yavanta 
(502). —  P.  324,  1.  4,  for  yoja  read  ydja;  last  line,  delete  dayasva  (AV.).  — 
P.  325,  §  427  a,  delete  sdsant-  (455)  and  sdnant-  (512).  —  P.  326,  1.  1,  for 
cdyamana  read  cdyamana -;  §  428,  Sing.  3.,  delete  a  sad  at  ^0%).  —  P.  328,  1.  3, 

:  srna-  read  Four;  1.  4  add  gr-  ‘sing’  :  grnd-  (AV.)  beside  grnd *,  and  sr-  ‘crush’ 
for  Two  (AV.)  beside  s'rnd-.  —  §  430,  Sing.  2.,  read  ksipasi  (AV.)  before 
tirasi ;  Middle.  Sing.  1.,  delete  mrje  and  suse  (45 1).  —  P.  329,  §  431,  Sing.  3., 
delete  prndt;  §  432,  delete  gii/uis ,  rudhat,  trpdn  (510)  and  add  bhujdt  ( bhuj - 
‘bend’).  —  P.  330,  1.  11,  add  me ddta/n;  1.  14,  after  TS.  iv.  6.  5l  add  =  AV. 
VS.  MS.  —  §  435?  delete  ksiydnt-,  mrjdnt-  (455),  citd?it-  (506),  guhdnt-,  sucdnt- 
(512),  susant -,  svasdnt-  (455);  insert  ‘bending’  after  bhuj  dint- \  Middle,  delete 
guhdmana-,  dhrsamana nrtamana-,  sucamana-  (512). —  §436,  Sing.  2.,  add 
adyas.  —  P.  332,  1.  1,  add  dayamasi  (AV.);  1.  7,  add  daye  (AV.  TS.);  §  441, 
add  ray  a.  —  P.  333,  1.  12,  delete  cdyamana-.  — -  P.  337,  lines  6  and  8,  delete 
bhuthds  and  bhutds  (502),  and  (AV.)  after  psatds;  Middle.  Sing.  1.,  for  mrje 
(AV.)  read  mrje ;  add  suse  ( j svas-  ‘blow’).  —  P.  338,  1.  2.,  delete  pareas, 
sdkas  (502);  1.  5,  add  snathat ;  1.  10,  add  vaman ,  sdsan;  1.  12,  delete  varjate 
(502).  —  §  454,  Act.  Sing.,  add  drahi  (AV.)  and  dratu  (AV.)  and  after  psahi 
delete  (AV.);  note  4,  add  Perhaps  root  aor.  subj.;  cp.  502  (p.  369).  — 


Addenda  and  Corrigenda. 


435 


P.  339,  1.  6,  delete  sotana  ( su -  ‘press’):  cp.  505.  —  §  455,  Act.,  delete 
dhrsant-  (512),  add  mrjant-,  susdnt-,  svasant-;  Middle.,  delete  d hr  sand-  (AV.), 
add  tvaksana-.  —  P.  340,  1.  3,  delete  svand-  (su-  ‘press’,  SV.):  cp.  506.  — 
P.  342,  1.  1 1,  delete  piprati . —  P.  343,  1.  1 2,  for  TS.  iv.  6.  15  read  TS.  iv.  6.  14.  — 
P.  345,  §  467,  delete  krntatl-  and  sumbkdna-. —  P.  350,  1.  11,  for  prnat  (AV.) 
read  prndt ;  1.  16,  add  minat  (for  minat).  —  P.  359,  1.  23,  delete  VS.  xxxm.  87; 
1.  24,  after  sr-  ‘crush’  add  AV.;  1.  26,  after  ‘bring  forth’  add  AN.-,  note  IX,  for 
sdsa/ie  read  sdsahe.  —  P.  361,  1.  10,  add  cakdn  before  sasvdr.  —  P.  362,  1.  6: 
cdkantu  though  sing,  in  form  is  pi.  in  meaning  and  stands  by  haplology  lor 
cdkanantu-.  cp.  p.  58,  1.  4  from  below.  —  P.  364,  1.  12,  read  -raji  or  -iran 
for  -iran-,  1.  9  from  below,  delete  dvdvacTt  (549).  —  P.  366,  1.  5  from  below, 
delete  akrdn  (  f  brand-) :  see  522  (.r-aor.).  —  P.  367,  1.  2,  delete  akrdn  (\P krand-) : 
see  522  (V-aor.);  1.  22,  delete  aprkta  (] f prc-)\  see  522  (i'-aor.).  —  P.  368, 
§  502,  1.  3,  add  sdkas ;  1.  6,  for  yamat  read  yam  at;  1.  7,  add  sakat;  1.  9,  after 
pathds  add  ‘drink’.  —  P.  369,  1.  5  from  below:  on  dpydsam  (AA.  v.  3.  2)  see 
Keith,  Aitareya  Aranyaka,  p.  157,  note  IO,  and  Index  iv,  f  dp-.  —  P.  374, 
1.  22,  add  bibhis-athds.  —  P.  383,  1.  8,  delete  aydslt.  —  P.  384,  1.  4  from 
below,  add  3.  aydslt.  —  P.  397,  1.  2  and  1.  24,  add  vildyasi  and  vilayasva. 


28* 


LIST  OF  ABBREVIATIONS. 


AA.  =  Aitareya-Aranyaka. 

AB.  ==  Aitareya-Brahmana. 

AJPh.  =  American  Journal  of  Philology. 

APr.  =  Atharva-Pratisakhya. 

ASL.  =  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature. 

AV.  =  Atharva-Veda. 

Av.  =  Avesta. 

B.  =  Brahmana. 

BB.  =  Bezzenberger’s  Beitrage. 

BI.  —  Bibliotheca  Indica. 

BR.  =  Bohtlingk  and  Roth  (St.  Petersburg  Dictionary). 

C.  =  Classical  Sanskrit. 

GGA.  =  Gottingische  Gelehrte  Anzeigen. 

IE.  =  Indo-European. 

IF.  =  Indogermanische  Forschungen. 

Hr.  =  Indo-Iranian. 

IS.  =  Indische  Studien. 

JAOS.  =  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society. 

K.  =  Kathaka. 

KG.  =  Brugmann’s  Kurze  Vergleichende  Grammatik. 

Kh.  =  Khila. 

IvZ.  =  Kuhn’s  Zeitschrift. 

MS.  =  Maitrayanl  Samhita. 

N.  =  (Proper)  Name. 

O.  u.  O.  =  Orient  und  Occident. 

Pp.  =  Pada-patha. 

pw.  =  Petersburger  Worterbuch  (Bohti.INGK’s  Smaller  Lexicon). 
Paipp.  =  Paippalada. 

RPr.  ==  Rigveda-Pratisakhya. 

RV.  =  Rigveda. 

S.  =  Sutra. 

SA.  =  Sankhayana-Aranyaka. 

SB.  =  Satapatha-Brahmana. 

SBE.  =  Sacred  Books  of  the  East. 

SV.  =  Sama-Veda. 

TB.  =  Taittirlya-Brahmana. 

TPr.  =  Taittirlya-Prati^akhya. 

TS.  =  Taittirlya-Samhita. 

Up.  =  Upanishad. 

V.  =  Vedic. 

VPr.  =  Vajasaneyi-Pratisakhya. 

VS.  =  (i)  Vajasaneyi-Samhita;  (2)  Vedische  Studien. 

Wb.  ==  Worterbuch. 

WZKM.  =  Wiener  Zeitschrift  fur  die  Kunde  des  Morgenlandes. 

YV.  =  Yajur-Veda. 

ZDMG.  =  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgenlandischen  Gesellschaft. 


I.  SANSKRIT  INDEX. 

The  references  in  both  Indexes  are  to  paragraphs. 


a-,  an-,  negative  particle  com¬ 
pounded  with  nouns  251, 
655- 

yams-  ‘attain’,  pr.  470,  sj.  471, 
impv.  472  ;  pf.  4S2  c  a,  4S5, 
sj.  487,  opt.  489,  pt.  493; 
root  aor.  500,  inj.  503;  opt. 
504,  prec.  504;  a- aor.  opt. 
51 1 ;  j-aor.sj.523;  inf.585,4. 
yamh-  ‘compress’,  pf.  482c  a; 
p.  358,  n.  9. 

akramim ,  1.  s.  aor.  \/ kr am- 
66  c  (2  2. 

yaks-  ‘mutilate’,  pr.  impv.  472; 

pr.  pt.  473;  zjr-aor.  529. 
aksan ,  root  aor.  of  g/ias-  499. 
ahkhaya-  den.,  sj.  569  a. 
yac -  ‘bend’,  pr.  422,  impv. 
426;  ps.  pr.  445,  pt.  447, 
impf.  448;  gd.  591  a. 
accha  ‘towards’,  prep,  with 
acc.  595. 

1  /aj-  ‘drive’,  pr.  422,  sj.  423, 
opt.  425,  impv.  426,  pt.  427, 
impf.  428 ;  ps.  445,  pt.  447 ; 
inf.  584b. 

yaiij-  ‘anoint’,  pr.  464,  sj.  465, 
impv.  466,  pt.  467,  impf. 
468;  pf.  482  c  a,  485,  sj. 
487,  opt.  489,  pt.  493;  ps. 
445,  pt.  447;  pp.  574,2. 
yat  -‘wander’,  pr.  422,  pt.  427. 
dti  ‘beyond’,  prep,  with  acc. 
596. 

J/W-  ‘eat’,  pr.  451,  sj.  452, 
opt. 453,  impv. 454,  pt.  455, 
impf.  456;  pp.  576a;  inf. 
585,4,  586  b. 

addnt-  ‘eating’,  inflected  295  c. 
adhas  ‘below’,  prep,  with  acc. 
abl.  610. 

adhi  ‘upon’,  prep,  with  loc. 

abl.  acc.  inst.  597. 
yan -  ‘breathe’,  pr.  422,  430, 
451,  impv.  454,  pt.  455, 
impf.  456;  pf.  482  c,  485  ; 
zk-aor.  529;  cs.  556. 
anaks-  ‘eyeless’  340. 
anadvah -  ‘ox’  351  a. 
anasdmahai ,  pf.  sj.  yarns- 
4S2  c  a. 

anu  ‘after’,  prep,  with  acc.  598. 


ant  dr  ‘between’,  prep,  with 
loc.  abl.  acc.  599. 
antara  ‘between’,  prep,  with 
acc.  61 1. 

any  a-  ‘other’  403,  I. 
dp-  ‘water’  334. 
apdd-  ‘footless’  319  a. 
apas-  n.  ‘work’  and  apds-  ‘ac¬ 
tive’,  inflected  344. 
dpi1  upon’,  prep,  with  loc.  600. 
abhanas ,  2.  s.  impf.  ybhanj- 
66  c  2  ;  p.  345,  note  I0. 
abhi  ‘towards’,  prep,  with  acc. 
601. 

abhitas  ‘around’,  prep,  with 
acc.  612. 

yam-  ‘injure’,  pr.  422,  451, 
inj.  424,  pt.  427  ;  red.  aor. 
5H;  cs.  555. 

amba,  f.  voc.  374  (p.  265). 
ay  dm  ‘this’,  inflected  393. 
ayds  2.  s.  aor.  j fyaj-  66  c  2,  522. 
ardtlya -  den.,  sj.  569  a. 
ari-  devout’,  inflected  380  b  3. 
\ arc-  ‘shine’,  ‘praise’,  pr.  422, 
sj.  423,  inj.  424,  impv.  426, 
pt.427,  impf.  42S;  ps.  445, 
pt.  447;  pf.  482  c  a,  485  ; 
cs.  556;  inf.  585, 1. 
arthdya-  den.,  sj.  569  a,  impv. 
569  d. 

\/arh-  ‘deserve’,  pr.  422,  sj. 

423,  Pt-  427;  pf-  485;  inf- 
581,  I. 

arhire ,  3.  pi.  pf.  482  c  a. 
yav-  ‘favour’,  pr.  422,  sj.  423, 
inj.  424,  opt.  425,  impv.  426, 
pt.  427,  impf.  428;  pf.  482  c, 
485;  root  aor.  opt.,  prec. 
504;  zk-aor.  529,  sj.  530,  inj. 
531,  impv.  533;  ft.  537,  pt. 

538  ;  PP-574, 1  inf.  585,  4. 
ava-1  this’,  pron.,  inflected  396. 
ava  ‘down’,  prep,  with  abl. 602. 
avayas,  nom.  of  avayaj-  66 
c  j8  1;  302. 

avas  ‘down  from’,  prep,  with 
abl.  613. 

avi-  ‘sheep’  p.  283  (top). 
yas-  ‘eat’,  pr.  476,  opt.  477, 
impv.  478,  pt.  479,  impf. 
480;  pf.  482  c,  485;  is- 


aor.  529,  inj.  531;  pp. 

..575  b. 

dsman-  ‘stone’,  inflected  329. 
Vi.  as-  ‘be’,  pr.  451,  sj.  452, 
inj.  452,  opt.453,  impv.454, 
pt.  455,  impf.  45^;  pf.  482  c, 
485. 

V2.  as-  ‘throw’,  pr.  439,  impv. 
44T  pt.  442,  impf.  443,456; 
pf.  485;  ft.  537;  ps.  445; 
pp.  572;  inf.  585,4. 
asau  ‘that’,  inflected  394. 
askrta ,  root  aor.  of  kr-  ‘make’ 
5op. 

asmaka  ‘of  us’  390,  I. 
asrat  3.  s.  aor.  \/sras-  66  c §2) 
499- 

yah-  ‘say’,  pf.  4S2  c,  485. 
akdm  ‘I’,  inflected  391,  I. 

d  ‘near’,  prep,  with  loc.  abl. 
acc.  603. 

ad  ‘then’,  Sandhi  of  67. 
an-  pf.  red.  syllable  482  c  «. 
-and  pf.  pt.  suffix  491. 
yap-  ‘obtain’,  pr.  470,  impv. 
472,  impf.  474,  pt.  479;  pf. 
482  c,  485,  pt.  493;  prec. 
504;  a-aor.  508,  opt.  51 1; 
des.  542,  sj.  544. 
abhu-  ‘present’,  inflected  383. 
yar-  ‘praise’ (?),  pr.  439. 
avayas,  nom.  of  dvaydj-  302. 
avis  ‘openly’,  adv.  with  yas-, 

ybhti-,  ykr-  651. 

yds-  ‘sit’,  pr.  451,  sj.  452,  opt. 
453,  impv.  454,  pt.  455, 
impf.  456. 

yi-  ‘go’,  pr.  422,  439,  451, 
sj.  452,  inj.  424,  452,  opt. 
453,  impv. 426,  454,  pt.  427, 
442,  455;  impf-  428,  456; 
pf.  482  c,  485,  pt.  492; 
plup.  495  ;  ft-  537,  539,  pt. 
538;  gdv.  578,  I ;  inf.  585, 
I,  4,  5,  6,  7,  587  b;  gd. 
590  b,  591  b. 
yihg-  ‘move’  cs.  554  a. 
id-  ‘refreshment’  304. 
yidh-  ‘kindle’,  pr.  464,  sj.  465, 
impv.  466;  pf.  485;  root 


438 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


aor.  sj.  502,  opt.  504,  pt. 
506;  ps.  44A  impv.  446, 
pt. 447.  455»467,  impf.468; 
pp.  573;  inf-  584  b,  586  a- 
\/inv-  ‘send’,  pr.  422,  470,  sj. 
423,  impv.  426,472,  pt.  427, 
impf.  474- 

iya/ha,  2.  s.  pf.  J/A  485. 
|///-*be  quiet’,  cs. 554.  aor. 560  a. 
]/l.  is-  ‘desire’,  pr.  430,  sj.431, 
inj.  432,  opt.  433,  impv. 434, 
pt* 435)  impf.  436;  gd.591  a. 
\  2.  is-  ‘send’,  pr.  430,  439, 
476,  inj.  432,  impf.  436, 
impv.  441,  pt.  442,  479; 
485;  PP-  575  b- 

isanaya-  den.,  impf.  569 f . ; 

inf.  585,  I  a  3;  588  c  a. 
isanya-  den.,  impv.  569  d. 
isaya-  den.,  opt.  569  c. 

VJ-  =  \/l->  Pr*  45 1  * 

\/tks-  ‘see’,  pr.  422,  pt.  427, 

impf.  428;  A-aor.  529;  cs. 
554;  gdv.  580  a. 
inkh-  ‘swing’,  cs.  554  a,  sj. 

559  b,  pp.  575  c. 

\id-  ‘praise’,  pr.  451,  sj.  452, 
inj.  452,  opt.  453,  impv. 
454,  Pt.  455;  pf-  482  c, 
485;  PP*  575  a  35  gdv. 
578,4,  580. 

]//>-  ‘set  in  motion’,  pr.  45 1, 
sj.  452,  impv.  454,  impf. 
42S,  456,  pt.  455;  pf.  482  c, 
4S5;  cs.  554  a,  sj.  559  b. 
j /is-  ‘be  master’,  pr.  422,  451, 
inj.  424,  opt.  453,  pt.  455, 
impf.  428;  ‘be  able  to’  with 
inf.  587  a  a,  b  a. 

\/is-  ‘move’,  pr.  422,  inj.  424, 
impv. 426,  pt.427;  pp.  575b. 
\ih-  ‘desire’,  pr.  422;  pf.  485. 

u  particle  647 ;  Sandhi  of  7 1  b. 
]/u-  ‘proclaim’  45 1,  470. 

1 /uks-  ‘sprinkle’,  pr.  pt.  427; 
A-aor.  529;  cs.  554  a;  pp. 
575  a  i- 

\'uc-  ‘be  pleased’,  pr.  437, 
impv.  441;  pf.  482  c,  485, 
pt.  492. 

\ud-  ‘wet’,  pr.  464,  impv.  466, 
pt.  427,  467,  impf.  468;  pf. 
,  485;  ps.  445* 
upa  ‘up  to’,  prep,  with  acc. 
loc.  inst.  604. 

upari  ‘above’,  prep,  with  acc. 
614. 

\/ubj-  ‘force’,  pr.  impv.  434,  pt. 

435>  impf. 436 ;  pp.  575  ai. 
\ubh-  ‘confine’,  pr.  impv.  434, 
impf.  468,  480. 
urusyd-  den.,  sj.  569  a,  opt. 
569  c,  impv.  569  d,  impf. 
569  f;  PP-  574,  2. 


uloka-  p.  59,  note  x. 
j/us-  ‘burn’,  p.  422,  inj.  424, 
impv.  426,  pt.  427,  479. 
usds-  f.  ‘dawn’  44  a  3;  344 

(P*  233)* 

iiii-  ‘aid’,  d.  s.  =  inf.  585,3 
contracted  dat.  s.  p.  282; 
inst.  s.  =  inst.  pi.  p.  287. 
iinaya-  den.,  aor.  570. 

]/ 1.  ii h-  ‘remove’,  pr.  422, 
impv.  426,  impf.  428. 
y 2.  vh-  ‘consider’,  pr.  422, 

45 1  (3-  pb),  pt  455;  pf* 
482  c,  485  ;  s  aor.  pt.  527; 
A-aor.  529* 

lr-  ‘go’,  pr-  430,  458,  470, 
SJ-  43A  471,  inj-  471,  impv. 
434,  460,  472,  pt.  473,  impf. 
474;  pf-  482  c,  485,  pt. 
492,  493;  root  aor.  500, 
inj.  503,  opt.  504,  pt.  506; 
a-aor.  50S,  sj.  509,  inj.  510, 
impv.  512;  red.  aor.  514; 
intv.  545,  2,  546;  cs.  558  a, 
aor.  560,  pp.  575  c,  gd. 
590  b,  591  a,  b. 
rghaya-  den.,  inj.  569  b. 
yrh  ‘direct’,  pr.  430,  439, 
464,  impv.  434,  Pt-  442, 
467,  impf.  468. 
yrnv-  ‘go’,  pr.  430. 
rtaya-  den.,  inj.  569  b. 
rte  ‘without’,  prep,  with  abl. 
615. 

\/rd-  ‘stir’,  pr.  422,  impv.  434, 
impf.  436;  cs.  553  c,  sj. 
559  b. 

yrdh-  ‘thrive’,  pr.  470,  sj.  464, 
impv.  441,  pt.  467,  impf. 
474;  pf.  485;  root  aor.  sj. 
502,  opt.  504,  prec.  504, 
pt.  506;  a-aor.  opt.  51 1; 
des.  542,  pt.  544;  ps.  445, 
impv.  446;  gdv.  578,  4. 
yrs-  ‘injure’(?),  j-aor.  pt.  527. 
y.rs-  ‘rush’,  pr.  422,  430,  sj. 
423,  inj-  424,  impv.  426, 
pt-  427,  435- 

cka-  ‘one’  403,  2,  406  a  I. 
eka-pad-  ‘one-footed’  319  a. 
yej-  ‘stir’,  pr.  422,  sj.  423, 
impv.  426,  pt.  427,  impf. 
428. 

yedh-  ‘thrive’,  pr.  422,  impv. 

426;  A-aor.  opt.  532. 
ena-  ‘he,  she,  it’,  inflected  395. 

okivdms-  pf.  pt.  492  a. 

ka-  ‘who?’,  pron.  397. 
kanduya-  den.,  ft.  and  pp.  570. 
ykan-  ‘enjoy,  pr.pt.  442;  pf. 
4S2,  sj.  487,  inj.  4S8,  impv. 


490;  plup.  =  pf.  inj.  495; 
A-aor.  529,  sj.  530. 
kdriiyams-  ‘younger’,  inflected 
34b.' 

ykam-  ‘love’,  pf.  pt.  493;  cs. 

555,  sj-  559  b,  pt.  559  e. 
barman-  ‘act’,  inflected  329. 
ybas-  ‘scratch’,  impf.  428. 
\/bas-  ‘open’,  pr.  impv.  426; 
PP-  573- 

y/ca-  =  yban-  ‘enjoy’,  pf. 
485,  pt-  493- 

ybas-  ‘appear’,  intv.  545,  1, 
54b,  547,  Pt-  548,  impf. 
_549;  cs.  5564. 
birtdya-  den.,  sj.  569  a. 
ybnp-  ‘be  angry’,  pr.pt.  442; 

cs-  553  b;  pp.  575  b. 
ykuj-  ‘hum’,  pr.  pt.  427. 
ybftd-  ‘burn’,  cs.  554  a,  sj. 
559  b. 

y  1.  kr-  ‘make’,  pr.  45 1,  470 
(inflected),  sj.471,  inj.  471, 
opt.  471,  impv.  472,  pt.  473, 
impf.  474;  pf.  482  a,  485 
(inflected),  opt. 489,  pt.  492, 
493;  plup.  495;  root  aor. 
(inflected)  498,  499,  500, 
sj.  502,  inj.  503,  opt.  504, 
prec.  504,  impv.  505,  pt. 
506;  a-aor.  508,  impv.  512; 
j-aor.  522;  ft.  537,  539  (in¬ 
flected),  sj.  538,  pt.  538; 
des.  542  b;  intv.  545,3,  pt. 
548;  ps.  445,  pt.  447,  aor. 

5°G  PP-  573;  gdv.  578,  I, 
581;  inf. 585,4,  586b,  587b; 
gd.  590  a,  b,  c,  591  b. 
y'2.  kr-  ‘commemorate’,  A-aor. 
529;  intv.  545,  2,  546,  547, 
aor.  550b,  gdv.  578,  I. 
yi.  brt-  ‘cut’,  pr.  430,  inj. 
432,  impv.  434,  pt.  435, 
impf.  436;  pf.  4S5;  a-aor. 
50S,  pt.  512;  ft.  537,  539; 
gd.  591  a. 

y 2.  brt-  ‘spin’,  pr.  464;  ps. 
pr.  pt.  447. 

ybrp-  ‘lament’,  pr.  422,  pt. 
427,  impf.  428;  plup.  495; 
root  aor.  500;  A-aor.  529; 
cs-  554. 

brpana-  den.,  sj.  569  a. 
ykrs-  ‘be  lean’,  pr.  impv.  434; 

pf.  485;  cs.  553  c. 
ykrs-  ‘plough’,  pr.  422,  430, 
inj. 424,  impv. 426,  pt.  435; 
pf.  485  ;  red.  aor.  5 14;  intv. 
545,  2,  547,  impf.  549. 
ykr-  ‘scatter’,  pr.  430,  sj.  431, 
impv.  434;  A-aor.  sj.  530. 
ykjp-  ‘be  adapted’,  pr.  422, 
opt,  425,  impv.  426,  pt.  427, 
impf.  428;  pf.  482,  485;  sj. 
487;  red.  aor.  514,  sj.  515; 
cs-  553  d,  559  (inflected),  sj. 


I.  Sanskrit  Index. 


439 


559b, impv. 559  d  (inflected); 
gd.  590  b. 

ykraks-  ‘crash’,  pr.  pt.  427. 
/crania ,  root  aor.  \/kr-,  p.  367, 
n.  l6. 

| /krand-  ‘cry  out’,  pr.  422,  inj. 
424,  impv.  426,  pt.  427, 
impf.  428;  pf.  485,  sj.  487; 
plup.  495;  tf-aor.  inj.  510; 
red.  aor.  5  14,  inj.  516;  j-aor. 
522;  intv.  545,3,  546,  pt. 
548;  cs.  556  a. 

| /kram-  ‘stride’,  pr.  422,  sj. 
423,  inj.  424,  opt.  425, 
impv.  426,  434,  pt.  427, 

impf.  428;  pf.  485,  inj.  488, 
pt.  493;  root  aor.  66,  4  a, 
499,  inj.  503;  a- aor.  508; 
j-aor.  522,  sj.  523;  zj-aor. 
529  (inflected),  inj.  531, 
impv.  533,  ft.  537;  intv. 
547  c;  pp.  574,2;  inf.  584b; 
gd.  591  a. 

ykrT-  ‘buy’,  pr.  476,  sj.  477, 
impf.  480;  gd.  590  b. 
\krid-  ‘play’,  pr.  422,  sj.  423, 
pt.  427. 

ykrudh -  ‘be  angry’,  pr.  439; 
a-aor.  inj.  510;  red.  aor. 
512,  sj.  515,  inj.  516;  cs. 

553  b;  pp.  573- 
y/crus-  ‘cry  out’,  pr.  422,  impv. 

426,  pt.  427;  .M-aor.  536. 
\'ksad-  ‘divide’,  pr.  422;  pf. 

485,  pt.  493;  inf.  585,  I.  _ 
yksan-  ‘wound’,  is- aor.  inj. 

53i;  PP-  574,  2. 
yksam-  ‘endure’,  pr.  opt.  425, 
impv.  426,  pt.  427;  pf.  opt. 
489. 

yksar-  ‘flow’,  pr.  422,  inj.  424, 
impv.  426,  pt.  427,  impf. 
428;  j-aor.  522;  inf.  585,  7. 
yksd-  ‘burn’,  cs.  558. 
j/l.  ksi-  ‘possess’,  pr.  422,  430, 

451,  sj.  452,  opt.  425,433, 
pt.  427,  435,  455,  impv. 
434,  j-acr.  sj.  523;  ft.  537, 
pt.  538;  cs.  557  a,  558  a. 
y 2.  ksi-  ‘destroy’,  pr.  439,470, 
476,  inj.  477,  impf.  480; 
j--aor.  inj.  524;  ps.  445,  pt. 
447* 

yksip-  ‘throw’,  pr.  430,  inj. 
432,  impv.  434,  pt.  435; 
red.  aor.  inj.  516. 
yksi-  =  ksi-  ‘destroy’,  pp. 
576  d. 

yksud-  ‘be  agitated’,  ‘crush’, 
pr.  422,  pt.  442;  cs.  553b. 
y/csudh-  ‘be  hungry’,  cs.  aor. 
inj.  510. 

yksubh-  ‘quake’,  pf.  4S5. 
yksnu-  ‘whet’,  pr.  45 1,  pt.  45  5. 

ykhan-  ‘dig’,  pr.  422,  sj.  423, 


opt.  425,  pt.  427,  impf.  428, 
pf.  485;  ft.  pt.  538;  pp. 
574,2;  inf.  5 86b;  gd.59oa. 
y k kct -  =  khan-,  pf.  pt.  492. 
ykhdd-  ‘chew’,  pr.  422,  impv. 

426,  pt.  427;  pf.  482b,  485. 
y/chid-  ‘tear’,  pr.  420,  inj.  432, 
opt.  433,  impv.  434,  pt. 
435,  impf.  436;  pf.pt. 482  d, 
492  b. 

y/chud-  ‘futuere’,  pr.  impv.  434. 
y/chya-  ‘see’,  pf.  485;  a- aor. 
508,  inj.  510,  impv.  5 12; 
gdv.  578,3;  inf.  584  a;  gd. 
591  a. 

ygad-  ‘say’,  pr.  impv.  426. 
ygam-  ‘go’,  pr.  422,  45 1,  sj. 
423,  opt.  425,  impv.  426, 
pt.  427,  impf.  428;  pf.  485, 

opt.  489,  pt.  492,  493;  plup. 

495;  periphr.pf.  496,  560b; 
root  aor.  499,  500,  sj.  502, 
inj.  503,  opt.  504,  prec.  504, 
impv.  505,  pt.506;  a-aor.508, 
sj-  5°9, inj- 5 1°, opt. 51 1;  red. 
aor.  514;  j--aor.  522,  is-a or. 
opt.  532,  impv.  533;  ft.  537, 
539,  periph.  ft.  540;  des. 
542;  intv.  545.  I,  3,  546; 

cs-  555  a;  Ps-  445,  aor-  5QI  ; 
PP-  572,  574,2;  inf.  585,4, 
5,  7,  587  b;  gd.  590  b,  c. 
ygarh-  ‘chide’,  pr.  422. 
yi.gd-  ‘go’,  pr.  458,  inj.  459, 
impv.  460,  pt.  461,  impf. 
462;  pf.  489;  root  aor.  499, 
sj.  502,  inj.  503,  impv.  505; 
j--aor.  inj.  524;  des.  542  c; 
inf.  585,4- 

\  2 .ga-  ‘sing’,  pr.  439,  inj. 
440,  impv.  441,  pt.  442; 
j--aor.  inj.  524;  jvh-aor.  534; 

pr.  pt.  447;  pp.  574,  3- 
gatuyd-  den.,  impv.  569  d. 
ygah-  ‘plunge’,  pr.  422,  opt. 
425,  impv.  426,  pt.  427, 
impf.428;  intv.  545, 2  a,  546. 
ygu-  ‘sound’,  intv.  545,  I,  546. 
ygtip-  ‘protect’,  pf.  485  (cp. 
p.  358,  note  i3);  ft.  537, 

539;  PP-  575  b. 
ygur-  ‘greet’,  pr.  impv.  434; 
pf.  sj.  487,  opt.  489;  root 
aor.  5 co;  intv.  545,  2a;  pp. 

573  a;  gd.  591  a- 
yguh-  ‘hide’,  pr.  422,  inj. 
424,  impv.  426,  pt.  427, 

impf.  428;  tf-aor.  508,  inj. 

510,  pt.  512  a ;  jvz-aor. 
536;  des.  542;  ps.  pt.  447; 

PP-  573;  gdv.  578,  4;  gd- 
590  a. 

gurdhaya-  den.,  impv.  569  d. 
j/i.  gr-  ‘sing’,  pr.  476,  inj. 

477,  impv.  434,  478,  pt. 


479,  impf.  436;  inf.  585,7, 
588  c. 


V2.gr- 

‘awake’, 

pf.  482; 

red. 

aor. 

512,  impv.  518; 

intv. 

545, 

lb,  546, 

547,  pt. 

548, 

impf 

549,  pf- 

550. 

Vg.rdh- 

‘be  gre 

edy’,  pr 

.  pt. 

442; 

pf.  482, 

485;  a 

-aor. 

5°8, 

inj.  510. 

grbhaya-  den.,  impv.  569  d. 
\/gr-  ‘swallow)’,  pr.  430,  479 ; 
root  aor.  sj.  502;  red.  aor. 
514;  />-aor.  inj.  531 ;  intv. 
545,  lb,  2  a,  547;  pp.  576; 
gd.  591  a. 

g6-  ‘cow’,  inflected  365. 
gopdya-  den.,  impv.  569  d; 
p.  402,  -n.  2. 

gdka,  3.  s.  root  aor.  yghas-, 
p.  367,  note  *3. 
gna-  ‘woman’,  367  (bottom); 
p.  263,  note  T. 

ygrath-  ‘tie’,  pr.  464;  pp. 
575  a  2. 

ygrabh -  ‘seize’,  pr.  476  (in¬ 
flected),  sj.  477,  inj.  4 77, 
impv.  478,  impf.  480;  pf. 
485,  opt.  489,  pt.  492;  plup. 
495;  root  aor.  499,  500; 
a-aor.  508;  w-aor.  529;  cs. 

554;  pp-  575  b;  inf.  584b; 
gd.  591  a 

\'gras-  ‘devour’,  pr.  opt.  425; 
pf.  opt.  489,  pt.  493;  PP- 
575  b. 

ygrah-  ‘seize’,  pr.  476,  opt. 
477,  impv.  478,  pt.  479, 
impf  4S0;  pf.  485;  a- aor. 
inj.  510;  z>-aor.  529;  pp. 
575  b;  gd-  59ob,  591  a. 
gravan-  ‘pressing- stone’,  in¬ 
flected  331. 

ygld-  ‘be  weary’,  pr.pt.  442; 
cs.  558. 

yghas-  ‘eat’,  pr.  sj.  452;  pf. 
485,  opt.  489,  pt.  492;  root 
aor.  499,  impv.  505;  j-aor. 
522;  des.  542  (p.389,  top); 
PP-  574,  3  «• 

yghus-  ‘sound’,  pr.  sj.  423, 
pt.  427;  cs.  553  b;  ps.  aor. 
501;  gd.  591  a. 
yghr-  ‘drip’,  pr.  458  ;  cs.  557  c, 
ps.  pt.  561  a. 
yghrd-  ‘smell’,  pr.  458. 

ycaks-  ‘see’,  pr.  422,  451, 

impv.  454,  impf.  428,456; 
pf.  4S5;  plup.  495;  cs. 
556  a;  gdv.  578,  4;  inf. 
584  b,  585>  h  588  a;  gd. 
591  a,  b. 

caksus -  ‘eye’,  inflected  342. 
ycat-  ‘hide’,  pr.  pt.  427;  cs. 
555,  Pt-  559  e. 


440 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar 


catuspad -  ‘four-footed’ 3 19  a. 
yean-  ‘be  pleased’,  zjr-aor. 
impv.  533. 

canasta-  den.,  impv.  569 d. 
car-  ‘move’,  pr.  422,  sj.  423, 
inj.  424,  opt.  425,  impv. 
426,  pt.  427,  impf.  428 ; 
pf.  485  ;  red.  aor.  5 14;  is- 
aor.  529,  inj.  531;  ft.  539; 
intv.  545,  2  b,  546,  551;  pp. 
575  a  3;  gdv.  5S0;  inf. 
585,  h  4,  7- 

car  any  a-  den.,  sj.  569  a,  opt.  c. 
carmamna-  ‘tanner’  p.  38  n.  1 ; 
p.  249  note  4. 

| /cal-  ‘stir’,  impf.  428;  intv. 

545,  2,  546. 

cdkan  inj.  pf.  488  (cp.  p.  392 
note  8). 

| /cay-  ‘note’,  pr.  pt.  427;  is- 
aor.  529;  gd.  590  b,  591  a. 
j/l.  ci-  ‘gather’,  pr.  422,  470, 
sj-  452,  47 1  >  opt.  425,  471, 
impv.  472,  pt.  473,  impf. 
474;  pf.  485  ;  root  aor.  499; 
zj-aor.  impv.  533;  gd.  590b 
4/2 .  ci -  ‘note’,  pr.  458,  impv. 
460,  pt.  461,  462;  pf.  485; 
root  aor.  500;  des.  542. 

| feit-  ‘perceive’,  pr.  422,  451, 
inj.  424,  impv. 426,  pt.  427, 
impf.  42S;  [if.  485,  sj.  487, 
impv.  490,  pt.  492,  493; 
plup.  495 ;  root  aor.  499, 
pt.  506;  j-aor.  522;  des. 
542,  sj.  544;  intv.  545,  1, 

546,  547,  pt-  548;  cs.  553, 
554,  sj.  559  b,  opt.  559  c; 
ps.  aor.  501;  pp.  57 3;  inf. 
585,2. 

~\'cud-  ‘impel’,  pr.  422,  inj. 
424,  impv.  426;  cs.  553  b, 
sj-  559  b,  ps.pt.  561  a,  pp. 
575  cq 

\/crt-  ‘bind’,  pr.  430,  impv. 

4345  Pf-  485;  inf.  5S6  a. 
cetatur  pf.  } /cit-,  p.  358  n.  x. 
]/ces/-  ‘stir’,  pr.  pt.  427. 
j /cyu-  ‘move’,  pr.  422,  inj. 
424,  impv.  426;  pf.  482b  I, 
485;  plup.  495;  red.  aor. 
5H,  inj-  516,  °Pt-  517; 
j-aor.  inj.  524;  cs.  557b. 

| /chad-  or  chand-  ‘seem’,  pr. 
45 1;  Pf-  485,  opt.  4S9; 
s- aor.  522,  sj.  523;  cs.  556, 
556  a,  sj.  559  b. 

\chad-  ‘cover’,  cs.  555. 

]/chd-  ‘cut  up’,  pr.  430,  impv. 
434- 

]A ‘hid-  ‘cut  off’,  pr.  464,  impv. 
466;  root  aor.  inj.  503; 
a- aor.  508;  j-aor.  inj.  524; 
ps.445,  aor.  501;  pp.  576a; 
gd.  591  a. 


yjaks-  ‘eat’,  gd.  590  b,  c. 
\/jajh-,  pr.  pt.  427. 

\janj-  pr.  pt.  427. 

\tjan-  ‘generate’,  pr.  422,  sj. 
423,  inj.  424,  impv.  426, 

454,  pt.  427,  impf.  428, 

456;  pf.  485,  pt.  493;  root 
aor.  500;  red.  aor.  514  (in¬ 
flected),  inj.  516;  is- aor. 
529,  opt.  532;  ft.  537,  539; 
cs.  556,  sj.  559b,  opt.  559  c, 
pt.  559  e,  impf.  559  f  (in¬ 
flected);  pp.  574,  2;  gdv. 
580,  581;  inf.  587  b;  gd. 

590  a. 

jdni-  ‘wife’  380  b  2. 
janitdr-  ‘begetter’  390. 
yjambh-  ‘chew’,  red.  aor.  5 1 4 ; 
z>-aor.  530;  intv.  545,  2, 
pt.  548;  cs.  556  a. 

\jas-  ‘be  exhausted’,  pr.  impv. 

441,  pt.  427;  pf. impv.  490. 
jaha,  3.  s.  pf.?  p.357  note  4. 
jahi ,  2.  s.  impv.  \han-  32  c; 
p.  50  note  9. 

jd-  ‘offspring’,  inflected  368. 
\ja-  ‘be  born’,  pr.  439,  inj. 
446,  opt.  440,  impv.  441, 
pt.  442,  impf.  443. 
janivdms -  pf.  pt.  482  d. 
jdraya-  den.,  ps.  aor.  501. 
\ji-  ‘conquer’,  pr.  422,  451, 
sj.  423,  inj.  424,  opt.  425, 
impv.  426,  pt.  427,  impf. 
428;  pf.  485,  pt.  492;  root 
aor.  inj.  503,  impv.  505, 
red.  aor.  514;  j-aor.  522, 
sj-  523,  inj-  524;  ft-  537, 
539,  pt-  538;  des.  542,  pt. 
544;  cs.  558  a;  pp.  573; 
gdv.  5S1;  inf.  585,  I  a;  gd. 

591  b. 

)/ji-  oxjihv-  ‘quicken’,  pr.  422, 
470,  impv.  426,  pt.  427, 
impf.  428;  pf.  485. 
yjiv-  ‘live’,  pr.  422,  sj.  423, 
opt.  425,  impv.  426,  pt. 
427;  prec.  504;  z>-aor.  inj. 
531;  cs.  554a;  pp- 575  a  3; 
gdv.  581  b;  inf.  585, 1,4,5. 
YJus-  ‘enjoy’,  pr.  422,  430, 
451,  inj.  424,  432,  sj.  431, 
opt.  433,  impv.  426,  434, 
pt.  435,  impf.  436;  pf.  485, 
sj.  487,  impv.  490,  pt.  492, 
493;  root  aor.  500,  sj.  502, 
pt-  5°d;  zr-aor.  sj.  530;  cs. 
553  b,  sj.  559b;  pp.  57 3; 
gd.  590  a. 

yju-  ‘be  swift’,  pr.  422,  476, 
sj-  477;  pf-  482,  485,  sj. 
487,  pt.  492,  493;  inf.585,1. 
yjurv-  ‘consume’,  pr.  422,  sj. 
423,  impv.  426,  pt.  427; 
Aaor.  529. 

}/jr-  ‘sing’,  pr.  422  (p.  322), 


sj.  423,  opt.  425,  impv.  426 
(top),  pt.  427;  inf.  585,7. 
yjrmbh-  ‘gape’,  pr.  422. 
yjf-  ‘waste  away’,  pr.  422, 
439,  impv.  426,  pt.  427, 
435,  impf-  443;  pf-  485, 
pt.  492;  z>-aor.  inj.  53 1;  cs. 

557  c;  pp.  576  e. 
yj eh-  ‘pant’,  pr.  pt.  427. 
yjhd-  ‘know’,  pr.  476,  sj.  477, 
opt.  477,  impv.  47S,  pt. 
479,  impf-  4S0;  pf.  pt.  492, 
492  a;  root  aor.  opt.  504; 
red.  aor.  514;  J-aor.  522; 
des.  542;  cs.  558,  aor.  560; 
gdv.  578,3;  ps.  445,  aor. 
5QI- 

yjya-  ‘overpower’,  pr.  439, 
476,  opt.  477,  pt.  479;  des. 
542;  ps.  445;  pp.  574,  2. 
yjyut-  ‘shine’,  cs.  553  b. 
yjri-  ‘go’,  pr.  422;  j-aor.  pt. 
527- 

ta-  ‘that’,  inflected  392,  1. 
\/tams-  ‘shake’,  pf.  485;  plup. 
495;  a- aor.  508;  intv.  545, 
2  b;  sj.  547,  gdv.  579;  cs. 
556a;  inf.  585,7. 
ytak-  ‘rush’,  pr.  451,  impf. 
45b- 

ytaks-  ‘fashion’,  pr.  422,  sj. 
423,  inj.  424,  impv.  426, 

454,  pt.  427,  impf.  428, 

456;  pf.  485;  zV-aor.  529; 
pp.  575  a  1. 

\'l.  tan-  ‘stretch’,  pr.  470,  sj. 

471,  inj.  471,  impv.  472, 

Pt-  473,  impf-  474;  pf-  485, 
sj.  487,  inj.  488,  opt.  489, 
pt.  492;  root  aor.  499,500; 
a- aor.  508,  inj.  510;  .r-aor. 
522;  cs.  555;  pp.  574,  2; 
gd.  591  b. 

]/2.  tan-  ‘roar’,  pr.  439. 
tanu-  ‘body’,  inflected  385 ; 

—  ‘self’  400,  3. 
ytand-  ‘be  weary’,  pr.  422, 
inj  -  (?)  424- 

ytap-  ‘be  hot’,  pr.  422,  sj. 
423,  inj.  424,  impv.  426, 
I  t  427,  impf.  428;  pf.  485, 
sj.  4S7,  pt.  493;  red-  aor. 
514,  sj.  515;  s- aor.  522, 
inj  *  524;  cs.  555;  ps.445, 
impv.  446,  pt.  447,  impf. 
44S;  aor.  501;  pp.  573; 
gd.  591  a. 

\'tam-  ‘faint’,  a- aor.  inj.  510. 
tarusa-  den.,  inj.  569  b,  opt. 
,569  c. 

tat ,  abl.  adv.  ‘in  this  way’ 
629. 

tij-  ‘be  sharp’,  pr.  422,  pt. 
427;  des.  542;  intv.  545,  1, 
546;  pp.  573. 


I.  S  anskrit  Index. 


441 


tiras  ‘across’,  prep,  with  acc. 
6o5-  / 

tilvilaya -  den.,  impv.  569  d. 
ytu-  ‘be  strong’,  pr.  451;  pf. 
482,  485;  red.  aor.  514; 
intv.  545,  3. 

ytuj-  ‘urge’,  pr.  430,  464, 
pt.  427,  435,  467;  pf.  opt. 
489,  pt.  493;  cs.  554;  Ps. 
445,  pt.  447;  inf.  584  b, 
585,  1,  2. 

ytud-  ‘thrust’,  pr.  430,  impv. 
434,  pt.  435,  467,  impf. 
436;  pf.^485 ;  pp.  576  a. 

1 /tur-  —  tr-  ‘pass’,  pr.  430, 
opt-  453;  des.  542;  cs.554; 
gd.  591  a. 

iuranya-  den.,  inj.  569b,  impf. 
569  f. 

\ ftus-  ‘drip’,  pr.  422,  pt.  427; 
cs.  553  b. 

| /ins-  ‘be  content’,  cs.  554. 
ytiirv-  ‘overcome’,  pr.  422, 
impv.  426,  pt.  427. 

\trd-  ‘split’,  pr.  464,  impf. 
468;  pf.  485,  pt.  493;  root 
aor.  sj.  502  ;  des.  542,  sj. 
544;  pp.  576  a;  inf.  587  a. 
ytrp-  ‘be  pleased’,  pr.  430, 
sj.  471,  impv.  434,  44D 
472,  pt.  435;  pf.  482,  485, 
pt.  493;  a- aor.  508,  inj. 
5  io,  pt.  512;  red.  aor.  514  ; 
des.  542,  sj.  544;  cs.  553c, 

(  sj.  559  b. 

ytrs-  ‘be  thirsty’,  pr.  439,  pt. 
442;  pf-  4S2,  485.  pt.  493; 
root  aor.  pt.  506  ;  a- aor.  50S, 
inj.  510;  red.  aor.  514,  inj. 
516. 

ytrh-  ‘crush’,  pr.  sj.  465,  impf. 
436;  pf.  485;  a-aor.  508; 

ps.  445,  impv.  446,  pt.  447; 

PP-  573  5  gd.  59ob,  c. 
ytr -  ‘pass’,  pr.  422,  430,  470, 
sj.  423,  431,  inj.  424,  432, 
opt.  425,  433,  impv.  426, 
434,  pt.  427,435,461,  impf. 
428,436;  pf.  485,  opt.  489, 

pt.  492;  red.  aor.  514;  is- 
aor.  529,  sj.  530,  inj.  531, 
opt.  532;  intv.  545,  2,  3,  546, 
551  ;  ps.  aor.  501 ;  pp.576e; 
inf.  584  a,  585,7,9,  586  a, 
588  c;  gd.  590  a. 

ytyaj-  ‘forsake’,  pf.  482  b  I, 
485. 

ytras-  ‘be  terrified’,  pr.  422, 
impv.  426,  impf.  428;  red. 
aor.  514;  cs.  555. 
ytr  a-  ‘rescue’,  pr.  439,  impv. 
441,  454,  Pt-  442;  pf.  485; 
S'  aor.  sj.  523,  opt.  525, 
cs.  gdv.  561  b,  579;  inf. 

585,  8. 

tripad -  ‘three-footed’  319  a. 


/^//-‘threefold’,  inflected3o6. 
tva-  ‘many  a  one’,  inflected 
396. 

yivaks-  ‘fashion’,  pr.  pt.  455. 
tvam  ‘thou’,  inflected  39 1,  2. 
ytvar-  ‘make  haste’,  cs.  556. 
ytvis-  ‘be  stirred’,  impf.  436, 
456;  pf.485,  pt.493;  pluP- 
495;  PP-  575  b;  inf.  584  b. 
ytsar-  ‘approach  stealthily’, 

pr.  422,  impf.  428;  pf. 
485;  j-aor.  522. 

ydams-  ‘bite’,  pr.  impv.  426, 
pt.  427;  pf.  pt.  492;  intv. 
545  2  b,  pt.  548;  pp.  574,2. 
ydaks-  ‘be  able’,  pr.  422, 
impv.  426,  pt.  427;  gdv. 
579- 

ydayh-  ‘reach  to’,  root  aor. 
inJ-  5°3;  Prec-  5°4,  impv. 
5°5- 

dan ,  g.  of  dam-  ‘house’,  p.  37 
(bottom);  66,4a;  338. 
ydan-  ‘straighten’?,  pr.  sj. 

45 2,  inj-  452. 
dant-  ‘tooth’  313. 
ydabh-  or  dambh -  ‘harm’,  pr. 
422,  470,  sj.  423,  inj.  424, 
impv.  472;  pf.  485,  inj. 
488  ;  root  aor.  499,  inj.  503  ; 
des.  542,  sj.  544;  cs.  556a; 

ps.  445;  gdv.  578,4;  inf. 
584  b. 

ydam-  ‘control’,  cs.  556. 
damanya-  den.,  impf.  569  f. 
dasasya-  den.,  opt.  569  c,  impv. 
569  d. 

ydas-  or  das -  ‘waste’,  pr.  422, 

439,  sj.  423,  inj.  424,  pt. 
427,  opt.  440;  pf.  pt.  492; 
tf-aor.  inj.  510,  pt.  512; 
zk-aor.  inj.  531;  cs.  555. 

ydah-  ‘burn’,  pr.  422,  439, 
451,  sj.  423,  inj.  424,  impv. 
426,  pt.  427,  impf.  428; 
•f-aor.  522,  inj.  524,  pt.527; 

ft.  537,  pt.  538;  PP-  573- 
y I.  da-  ‘give’,  pr.  422,  458, 
sj.  459,  inj.  424,  459,  opt. 
459,  impv.  426,  460,  pt. 
461,  impf. 428,  462  ;  pf.485, 

pt.  492;  root  aor.  499,  500, 

sj.  50?,  inj.  503,  opt.  504; 
impv.  505;  tf-aor.  508; 
J- aor.  522,  sj.  523,  inj.  524; 
ft.  537,  Pt-  538;  des.  542; 
cs.  558;  ps.  445,  aor-  5QI  ; 
PP-  572,  573  «,  574,  3  «; 

gdv.  578,  3;  inf.  584  a, 
585,  4,  5.  8,  9,  586b,  587b; 
gd.  590  b,  c,  591  a. 

\/i .da-  ‘divide’,  pr.  422,430, 
451,  impv.  426,  434,  inj. 

440,  impv.  441,  pt.  442, 
impf.  436;  pf.  pt.  493; 


root  aor.  impv.  505;  j-aor. 
inj.'  525;  ps-  445,  ft-  4475 
PP-  574-,  3  “,  576  c. 
y^.  da-  ‘bind’,  impf.  443;  ps. 

aor.  501;  pp.  574,3- 
ydas-  ‘make  offering’,  pr.  422, 
45 1,  470,  sj.  423,  opt.  425, 
pt.  455,  impf.  428;  pf. 
485,  sj.  487,  pt.  492,  492  b. 
\/dis-  ‘point’,  pr.  430,  opt. 

434,  Pt-  435  5  Pf-  4S5,  sj. 
487,  impv.  490;  plup.  495; 
root  aor.  500;  j-- aor.  522; 
intv.  545,  I,  546,  impf.  549, 

55 1;  PP-  573;  inf.  5S4  b. 
y dik-  ‘smear’,  pr.  sj.  452,  pt. 

455,  impf.  456;  pp-  573- 
|/l.  di-  ‘fly’,  pr.  439,  inj.  440, 
impv.  441,  pt.  442,  impf. 
443- 

y 2.  di-  ‘shine’,  pr.  458,  sj. 
459,  impv.  460,  pt.  461, 
impf.  462;  pf.  482,  485, 

sj.  487,  pt.  492. 

\Uiip-  ‘shine’,  pr.  439,  impv. 
441 ;  red.  aor.  inj.  516;  cs. 
554  a. 

ydiv-  ‘play’,  pr.  439,  inj.  440; 

Pf.  4S5;  pp.  573  «;  gd- 

591  a. 

ydu-  or  dii-  ‘burn’,  pr.  470, 
pt-  473;  *>-aor.  sj.  530;  pp. 
576  d. 

ydudh-  ‘stir  up’,  pp.  575  b. 
durasya-  den.,  sj.  569  a. 
duvasya-  den.,  sj.  569  a,  opt. 

569  c,  impv.  569  d. 
ydus-  ‘spoil’,  pr.  439 ;  red. 
aor.  514,  inj.  516;  ft.  cs. 

537,  560;  cs.  554. 
dus-  ‘ill’,  adverbial  particle  as 
first  member  of  compounds 

251,  657. 

yduh-  ‘milk’,  pr.  422,  45 1, 
sj.  452,  opt.  453,  impv.  454, 
pt.  455,  impf.  436,  456; 
pf.  485,  pt.493;  -r'aor-  522, 
inj.  524,  opt.  525;  j«-aor. 
536;  des.  542,  pt.  544;  ps. 
445,  pt.  447;  PP-  5 73;  inf- 
585,  t,  7-  . 

dudabha -,  Sandhi  of,  p.  7° 
note  3;  8 1,  I  b. 
yi.dr-  ‘pierce’,  pr.  451;  pf- 
485,  pt.  492;  root  aor.  499; 
j-aor.  sj.  523,  opt.  525; 
intv.  545,1,2,  546,  547,  pt. 
547,  impf.  549;  cs.  557  c. 
yi.dr-  ‘heed’,  gd.  591b. 
ydrp-  ‘rave’,  m-aor.  5°8;  PP- 
575  b- 

ydrs-  ‘see’,  pf.  4S5,  pt.  492, 
493;  root  aor.  499,  500,  sj. 
502,  pt.  506;  a- aor.  508, 
inj.  510,  opt.  51 1 ;  s--aor. 
522,  sj.  523;  des.  542,  gdv. 


442 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


544  i,  580;  cs.  553  c;  ps. 

445,  aor.  501;  gdv.  580; 
inf.  584  b,  585,  2,  586  b, 
588  a;  gd.  590  b,  c,  591  a. 

ydrh-  ‘be  firm’,  pr.  430,  impv. 
426,  441,  pt.  435,  impf. 
428,  436;  pf.  pt.  493;  plup. 
4955  "-aor.  529;  cs.  554a; 
PP*  573* 

devi-,  inflected  378. 
debt,  pr.  impv.  \ /da-  ‘give’ 
62,  4  b. 

dyav -  ‘heaven’,  inflected  364. 
ydyut-  ‘shine’,  pr.  422,  impv. 
426,  pt.  427;  pf.  482  b  I, 
485,  pt.  493;  root  aor.  pt. 
506;  red.  aor.  514,  inj. 
516;  intv.  545,  3,  546,  pt. 
547,  impf.  549;  cs.  553  b, 
554- 

dyaus,  accentuation  of  voc. 

85,  93,  064  note  11  (p.  247). 
■j/l .  dra-  ‘run’,  pr.  impv.  454; 
pf.  pt.  493;  j-aor.  sj.  523; 
intv.  pt.  547. 

|/2.  dra-  ‘sleep’,  pp.  576  c. 
ydru-  ‘run’,  pr.  422,  impv. 
426,  pt.  427,  impf.  428; 
pf.  485;  red.  aor.  514,  inj. 
516;  cs.  557  b. 
ydruh-  ‘be  hostile’,  pf.  4S5; 
a- aor.  508,  inj.  510;  pp. 
573- 

ydru-  ‘hurl’(?),  pr.  pt.  479. 
dvipdd-  ‘two-footed’  319  a. 
dvis -  ‘hatred’,  inflected  340. 
ydvis-  ‘hate’,  pr.  451,  sj.  452, 
impv.  454,  pt.  455;  sa- aor. 
inj;  536;  gdv.  57S, 4,  580. 
dvipa-  ‘island’  255,  4. 

ydhan-  ‘run’,  pf.  sj.  487,  opt. 
489;  cs.  556. 

ydhanv-  ‘run’,  pr.  422,  sj.423, 
impv. 426;  pf.  485,  pt.  492; 
is- aor.  529. 

dhdnvnn-  ‘bow’,  inflected  33 1. 
ydham-  or  dhmd-  ‘blow’,  pr. 
422,  impv.  426,  pt.  427, 
impf.  428:  ps.  445;  PP* 
574,2,  575  b. 
ydhav-  ‘flow’,  impf.  428. 
yi*  dha-  ‘put’,  pr.  422,  458, 
sj.  459,  opt.  459,  impv.  460, 
pt.  461,  impf.  462;  pf.  485, 
impv.  490;  root  aor.  499, 
500;  a-aor.  508;  j-aor.  sj. 
523,  inj.  524;  des.  542, 
s.i-  544,  gdv.  579;  cs.  558, 
sj-  559  b;  ps.  445,  impv. 

446,  pt.  447,  aor.  501,  sj. 
502,  inj.  503,  opt.  504, 
impv.  505;  pp.  574,3;  inf. 
584  a,  585,4,5,7,  586  a, 
587  b;  gd.  591  a. 

y 2.  dha.-  ‘suck’,  pr.  439,  opt. 


440;  root  aor.  499;  cs. 

558;  PP-  5745  inf.  585,1,  4- 

J/l  dhdv-  ‘run’,  pr.  422,  sj. 

423,  inj.  424,  impv.  426, 
pt.  427;  plup.  495. 

y 2.  dhav-  ‘wash’,  pr.  422, 
impv.  426;  A* aor.  529. 
dht-  ‘thought’,  inflected  376. 
yd  hi-  ‘think’,  pr.  sj.  459,  pt. 
461,  impf.  462;  ]  f.  482; 
r-aor.  pt.  527. 

dkunaya •  den.,  inj.  569  b,  I 
impv.  569  d. 

ydhii-  ‘shake’,  pr.  430,  470, 
sj.  44  r,  impv.  446,  472, 
pt.  473,  impf.  474;  pf.485, 
inj.  4.8S,  opt.  489;  root  aor. 
pt.  506;  red.  aor.  514; 
J-aor.  522;  intv.  545,  I,  3, 
546,  pf.  550;  gd.  591  a. 
dhupaya-  den.,  impf.  569  f. 
ydhutv-  ‘injure’,  pr.422,  impv. 
426,  pt.  427. 

\/dhr-  ‘hold’,  red.  aor.  514, 
inj.  516,  impv.  518;  pf. 
482,485;  root  aor.  ini.  503 ; 
ft-  537,  539;  intv.  545, 1,  2, 
546,  impf.  549;  cs.  557  c, 
sj-  559  b,  opt.  559  c,  ft. 
537,  560 ;  ps.  445,  impv. 
446;  inf.  585,  I,  8,  588  b. 
\'dhrs-  ‘dare’,  pr.  impv.  472; 
pf.  485,  sj.  487,  inj.  4S8, 
pt.  492;  plup.  495;  <2-aor. 
inj.  510,  pt.  512;  pp.  575  b; 
gdv.  578,  4;  inf.  584  b. 
ydhraj-  ‘sweep’,  pr.  pt.  427, 
impf.  428. 

ydhvams-  ‘scatter’,  pf.  485; 

tz-aor.  50S;  cs.  556. 
ydhvan-  ‘sound’,  cs.  555,  aor. 

560  a;  pp.  574,  2  a. 
ydhvr-  ‘injure’,  r-aor.  522; 
des.  542;  inf.  585,  I. 

nd  ‘like’,  Sandhi  of  67,  p.  63 
note  9. 

nakis ,  indecl.  p-ron.,  old  nom, 
sing.  38 1  b  (p.  279,  bottom). 
ndkta-  n.  ‘night’,  irreg.  nom. 
du.  372. 

J hiaks-  ‘attain’,  pr.  422,  inj. 

424,  impv.  426,  pt.  427, 

impf.  428;  pf.  485. 

y-nad-  ‘sound’,  pr.  j  t.  427, 

impf,  428;  in  tv.  545,1  b, 
546,  pt.  548;  cs.  556. 
nddbhyas,  dat.  of napat-  62,  3  b ; 
321  note  -. 

ynand-  ‘rejoice’,  pr.  422. 
\/nabh-  ‘burst’,  pr.  impv.  426. 
ynam-  ‘bend’,  pr.  422,  sj. 

423,  inj.  424,  impv.  426, 
pt.  427,  impf.  428;  pf.  482, 
485;  plup.  495;  red.  aor. 
inj.  516;  j  aor.  sj.  523;  pt. 


527;  intv.  545,2,  546,  pt. 
548,  impf.  549;  cs.  556; 
PP-  574,2;  gdv.  581;  inf. 
584  b. 

J/l.  nas-  ‘be  lost’,  pr.  439, 
inj.  424,  impv.  441  ;  pf. 
485;  red.  aor.  514,  inj.  5 1  6; 
ft-  537,  539;  'cs.  555,  inf. 
585,  7;  PP*  573- 
J/2.  nas-  ‘obtain’,  pr.  45 1 ,  sj. 
423,  inj.  424;  root  aor.  499, 
inj.  503,  opt.  504,  r- aor.  sj. 
523;  des.  542  a,  sj.  544;  inf. 

5S4  b. 

y?ias-  ‘unite’,  pr.  422,  inj. 

424;  root  aor.  opt.  504. 
y  11  ah-  ‘bind’,  pr.  439,  impv. 
441,  pt.  442,  impf.  443; 
pf.  485;  ps.  pt.  447;  PP* 
573* 

ynath-  ‘seek  aid’,  pp.  575  a2. 
y-nadh-  ‘seek  aid’,  pr.  part. 

,427;  PP-  575  b. 
nav-  ‘ship’,  inflected  365. 
ynitns-  ‘kiss’,  pr.  451,  impf. 
428. 

yniks-  ‘pierce’,  pr.  422,  impv. 

426;  inf.  584  b. 
ynij-  ‘wash’,  pr.  impv.  460, 
pt.  455;  a-aor.  508;  .r-aor. 

522,  inj.  524;  intv.  545,  I, 
546  (inflected),  547. 

ynind-  ‘revile’,  pr.  422,  sj. 

423,  impv.  426;  pf.  485; 
root  aor.  pt.  5°b;  is-aor. 
529,  sj.  530;  des.  542,  sj. 
544;  ps.  pt.447;  PP-  575  a  1. 

ym-  ‘lead’,  pr.422,  451,458, 
sj.  423,  inj.  424,  impv.  426, 
pt.427,  impf.  428;  pf.485; 
sj.  487  (cp.  p.  361  note  *), 
opt.  489;  s--aor.  522,  sj. 

523,  inj.  524,  impv.  526; 
is- aor.  529;  ft.  537,  539; 
des.  542;  intv.  545, 1,  551 ; 
ps.  445,  pt.447,  impf.  448; 
inf.  588  c;  gd.  591  a. 

mldya-  den.,  sj.  569  a. 

J/l.  nu-  ‘praise’,  pr,  422,  ini. 

424,  pt.  427,  impf.  428, 

45b,  pt-  435;  red-  aor-  5  [4, 
inj.  516;  .r-aor.  522,  inj. 
524;  /j-aor.529;  intv. 545, 1, 
546,  547,  impf.  549,  pf* 
55°;  gdv-  578,  2.  _ 

J/2.  rue-  ‘move’,  pr.  422,  impf. 
428. 

ynud-  ‘push’,  pr.  430,  sj.  431, 
inj.  432,  impv.  434,  pt-435, 
impf.  436;  pf-  485;  ro°t 
aor.  inj.  503;  is-aor.  inj. 
531;  PP*  57b  a;  inf.  584  b. 

J 'nrt-  ‘dance’,  pr.  439,  impv. 
441,  pt.  442;  root  aor.  499; 
tf-aor.  pt.  512;  A- aor.  529; 
cs.  553  c. 


I.  Sanskrit  Index. 


443 


1 tpae-  ‘cook’,  pr.  422,  439,  sj.  | 
423,  in j .  424,  impv.  426, 
pt.  427,  impf.  428;  pf.  485; 
plup.  495;  -r-aor.  si.  523; 

ps.  445,  pt.  447,  impf.  448; 
inf.  585,4;  gd.  590  b. 

padbhis,  inst.  pi.  42  c,  43  b  I, 
62,  4  b  (p.  57)  note  350 
(p.  23S  note  I). 

V I . pat-  ‘fly’,  pr.  422,  sj.  423, 
inj.  424,  opt.  425,  impv. 
426,  pt.  427,  impf.  428; 
pf.  485,  opt.  489,  pt.  492I 
red.  aor.  5  14,  inj.  5  [6,  impv. 

5[S;  ft-  537,  539,  pt.  53§ ; 
des.  542;  intv.  545,  1,  546, 

5475  cs.  555  a;  pp.  572, 
575b;  inf.  585,4. 

1/2 .pat-  ‘rule’,  pr.  439,  pt. 

442,  565  p,  impf.  443. 
pati-  ‘husband’,  inflected  380b ; 
in  compounds  2S0;  accen¬ 
tuation  p.  95  a,  p.  96,  3. 
ypad-  ‘go’,  pr.  439,  sj.  423, 
impv.  441,  pt.  442,  impf. 
443;  pf-  485  ;  root  aor.  500, 
sj.  502,  prec.  5°4;  red.  aor. 
514;  j--aor.  inj.  524;  cs. 
555,  sj.  559b;  ps.  aor.  501 ; 
pp.  576  a;  inf.  587  a;  gd. 
591  a. 

pad -  ‘foot’,  inflected  319. 

| /pan-  ‘admire’,  pf.  485;  is - 
aor.  inj.  53 1;  intv.  545,  3, 

pt. 548;  cs. 556,  gdv.  561b; 

ps.  445;  pp.  575  b;  gdv. 
579- 

panaya-  den.,  inj.  569  b. 
papra,  3.  s.  pf.  ]/prd-  484. 
paras  ‘beyond’,  prep,  with  acc. 

inst.  loc.  abl.  616. 
pari  ‘around’,  prep,  with  acc. 
abl.  606. 

\/pas-  ‘see’,  pr.  439,  sj..  44°, 
inj.  440,  opt.  440,  impv. 
44 !,  pt-  442,  impf.  443- 
|/l.  pa-  ‘drink’,  pres.  422,  sj. 
423,  inj.  424,  impv.  426, 

pt.  427,  461,  impf.  428;  pf. 
485,  opt.  489,  pt.  492,  493; 
root  aor.  499,  sj.  502,  prec. 
504,  impv.  505,  pt.  506; 
j--aor.  inj.  524;  des.  542, 
pt.  544;  cs.  558  a;  ps.  445, 
aor.  501;  pp.  574,  3  5  inf* 
585,  3,  4,  5,  7;  gd.  590  a,  b; 
591  a. 

|/2 .pa-  ‘protect’,  pr.  451,  sj. 
452,  impv.  454,  pt.  455, 
impf.  456;  J-aor.  sj.  523. 
papaya -  den.,  aor.  inj.  570. 
ypi-  or  pi-  ‘swell’,  pr.  422, 
470,  pt.  442,  461,  473;  pf. 
482,  485,  pt.  492,  493; 
pp.  576  d. 

ypinv-  ‘fatten’,  pr.  422,  inj. 


424,  impv.  426,  pt.  427, 
impf.  428;  pf.  485. 
ypibd-  ‘stand  firm’,  pr.  pt. 
427. 

ypis-  ‘adorn’,  pr.  430,  impv. 
434,  impf.  436;  pf.  485; 
root  aor.  pt.  506;  intv.  545, 
I  a,  pt.  548;  ps.  pt.  447; 
PP-  575  b- 

ypis-  ‘crush’,  pr.  464,  inj.  465, 
impv.  466,  impf.  436,  pt. 
467,  impf.  468;  pf.  485; 
PP-  573- 

ypid-  ‘press’,  pf.  485;  cs. 
,554  a. 

pur-  ‘stronghold’,  inflected  3 55. 
pur  as  ‘before’,  prep,  with  acc. 
abl.  loc.  607. 

purcistad  ‘in  front  of’,  prep, 
with  gen.  617. 

purd  ‘before’,  prep,  with  abl. 
617. 

purodds-  42  c,  66  c  p  I  (p.  61, 
mid.),  349  b,  350. 
ypus-  ‘thrive’,  pr.  439,  sj.440, 
opt.  440,  impv.  441,  pt. 
442;  pf.  485,  opt.  489,  pt. 
492;  a- aor.  opt.  51 1;  cs. 
553  b,  inf.  585,  I. 
ypu-  ‘cleanse’,  pr.  422,  476, 
sj.  423,  impv.  426,  478,  pt. 
427,  479,  impf.  428,  480; 
red.  aor.  5 14;  Tr-aor.  529, 
inj-  53i;  Ps-  445,  Pf-  447; 
gd.  590  a,  b. 

ypr- ‘pass’,  pr.  451,  458,  impv. 
460;  red.  aor.  514,  inj.  516; 
j-aor.  sj.  523,  impv.  526; 
//-aor.  sj.  530;  cs.  557  c, 
sj.  559  b;  inf.  588  b. 
yprn-  ‘fill’,  pr.  430,  sj.  431, 

impv.  434,  impf.  436;  inf. 
585,  7- 

\/prc-  ‘mix’,  pr.  430,  464,  inj. 
465,  opt.  465,  impv.  434, 
460,  466,  pt.  467,  impf. 
468;  pf.  sj.  487,  opt.  489; 
root  aor.  sj.  502,  opt. 
504,  pt.  506;  j-aor.  522,  sj. 
523;  ps.  445,  impv.  446, 
pt.447,  impf. 44S;  pp.576  b; 
inf.  584  b,  587  a. 
prtajiya-  den.,  sj.  569  a,  impf. 

569  f- 

yprs-  ‘sprinkle’,  pr.  pt.  427, 
=  adj.  ‘spotted’  313. 
ypr-  ‘fill’,  pr.  458,  476,  sj. 

477,  opt.  477,  impv.  460, 

478,  pt.  442,  479,  impf. 
462,  480;  pf.  opt.  489,  pt. 
492;  red.  aor.  inj.  516, 
impv.  518;  cs.  557  c,  sj. 
^59  b  ;  pp.  576  e. 

\/pya-  ‘fill  up’,  pr.  439,  impv. 
441,  pt.  442;  sis- aor.  oj  t. 
534;  cs.  558  «. 


ypraks-  —  prach-  ‘ask’,  pf.  485 
(CP-  P*  359  note  6);  inf.  585, 
I  a. 

y prach-  ‘ask’,  pr.  430,  sj.431, 
opt.  433,  impv.  434,  part. 
435,  impf.  436;  j-aor.  522; 
gdv.  544  i,  580;  pp.  574,  I; 
inf.  584  b,  586  a,  b. 
prdti  ‘against’,  prep,  with  acc. 
608. 

pratyanc -,  inflected  299. 
ypraih-1  spread’,  pr.  422,  impv. 
426,  pt.  427,  impf.  428;  pf. 
4S5  (cp.  p.  357  note  2),  sj. 
487,  inj.  488,  pt.  493;  root 
aor.  pt.  506;  is- aor.  529; 
cs.  556. 

yprd-  ‘fill’,  pr.  451;  pf.  485; 
root  aor.  499,  sj.  502  ;  j-aor. 
522;  ps.  aor.  501. 
prddur-  ‘out  of  doors’,  adv. 

compounded  with  ybhu-  65  t. 
priyd-  m.,  inflected  372. 
priyd-  f.,  inflected  374. 
priydya-  den.,  impf.  569  f. 
ypri-  ‘please’,  pr.  476,  pt.  479, 
impf.  480;  pf.  sj.  487,  impv. 
490,  pt.  493;  plup.  495  ; 
root  aor.  prec.  504;  j-aor. 
sj.  523;  des.  542;  pp.  573. 
ypru-  ‘flow’,  pr.  inf.  424. 
ypraih-  ‘snort’,  pr.  inj.  424, 
impv.426,  pt.427;  pf.  485; 
intv.  545,  I ;  gd.  591  a. 
yprus-  ‘sprinkle’,  pr.  470,  sj. 
471,  impv.  434,  pt.  435; 
PP-  575  b- 

yplu-  ‘float’,  pr.  422,  impv. 
426. 

ypsd-  ‘devour’,  pr.  451,  impv. 
454- 

yphan-  ‘spring’,  intv.  545,  3, 
pt.  548;  cs.  555. 
yphar-  ‘scatter’,  intv.  545,  2, 
547  a. 

ybarnh-  ‘make  firm’,  pp.574, 2. 
ybandh-  ‘bind’,  pr.  476,  impv. 
47S,  impf.  480;  pf.  485; 

ft.  537,  539;  ps-  445,  impv. 
446,  pt.  447;  inf.  584  b, 

590  b. 

bahirdha  ‘outside1,  prep,  with 
abl.  618. 

ybddh-  ‘oppress’,  pr.  422,  inj. 
424,  impv.  426,  pt.  427, 
impf.  42S;  pf.  4S5 ;  z>-aor. 
inj.  531;  des.  542;  intv. 
545,  1  b,  2  a,  546,  pt.  548; 
cs.  556  a;  pp.  575  b. 
ybudh-  ‘wake’,  pr.  422,  439, 
sj.  423,  inj.  424,  opt.  440, 
impv.  426,  441,  pt.  442; 
pf.  482  b,  sj.  487,  pt.  493; 
root  aor.  500,  pt.  506; 


444 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


zz-aor.  inj.  510;  red.  aor. 
514;  j-aor.  522;  zj-aor.  si. 
530;  ps.  aor.  501 ;  inf. 
584  b,  588  a. 

| /brh-  ‘make  big’,  pr.  impv. 
434;  Pb  435,  pt.  493;  is- 
aor.  inj.  53 1;  intv.  545,  2, 
d4  /  a. 

bod  hi,  impv.  of  \bhu-  and 
]/budk-  32  c,  505  note  3. 
ybru-  ‘say’,  pr.  (inflected)  451, 
sj.  (inflected)  452,  opt.  453, 
impv.454,  pt.  455»  impf.456. 
\bli -  ‘crush’,  pp.  576  d. 

ybhaks-  ‘partake  of’,  cs.  556  a. 
\bhaj-  ‘divide’,  pr.  422,  451, 
sj.  423,  inj.  424,  opt.  425, 
impv.  426,  pt.  427,  impf. 
42S;  pf.  485,  pt.  493;  J-aor. 
522,  sj.  523,  inj.  524,  opt. 

525;  cs.  555,  Ps-  Pt-  447, 
561,  gd.  591  a;  ps.  pr.  pt. 
4475  gd.  59ob,  c. 
ybhahj-  ‘break’,  pr.  464.  impv. 
4 66,  pt.  467,  impf.  468; 
pf.  485;  ps.  impv.  446. 
ybhan-  ‘speak’,  pr.  422,  inj. 

424,  impf.  428. 
ybhand-  ‘be  bright’,  pr.  422, 
pt.  427. 

ybharv -  ‘devour’,  pr.  422. 
bhavant -  ‘being’,  inflected  3 14. 
ybhas-  ‘devour,  pr.  430,  458, 
sj.  459- ,  inj.  424,  Pt.  461. 
ybhd-  'shine’,  pr.  45 1,  impv. 

,  454,  Pt-  455- 

bhamaya-  ‘be  angry’,  den.,  pp. 
575  c. 

ybhas-  ‘shine’,  pr.  422,  sj.  423, 
Pt-  427. 

ybhiks-  ‘beg’,  pr.  422,  inj.  424, 
opt.  425,  pt.  427. 
ybhid-  ‘split’,  pr.  422,  464, 
sj.  465,  inj.  465,  opt.  465, 
impv.  466,  pt.  467,  impf. 
428,468;  pf.  4S5  ;  root  aor. 
499,  sj.  502,  inj.  503,  pt. 
506;  a- aor.  opt.  51 1;  .r-aor. 
inj.  524;  des.  542,  impf. 
544;  ps.aor.50i;  pp.576a; 
gd.  590  b,  591  a. 
bhisaj-  ‘heal’,  den.,  pr.  568. 
bhisajya-  den.,  impv.  569  d. 
bhisnaj-  ‘heal’,  den.,  impf.  568, 
569  f. 

ybhi-  ‘fear’,  pr.  422,  458,  sj. 
423,  inj.  opt.  459,  impv. 
426,  460,  pt.  427,  461,  impf. 
428,  462;  pf.  482  b,  485, 
pt.  492;  plup.  495;  root 
aor.  inj.  503,  pt.  506;  red. 
aor.  514,  inj.  516;  j-aor. 
522,  pt.  527;  cs.  aor.  560; 
inf.  585,  I. 

ybhuj-  ‘enjoy’,  pr.  464,  sj. 


465,  pt.  467;  pf.  485;  root 
aor.  sj.  502,  inj.  503  ;  zz-aor. 
opt.  51 1,  impv.  512;  inf. 
584b,  585,  I. 

ybhur-  ‘quiver’,  pr.  inj.  432, 
impv.  434,  pt.  4.35;  intv. 
545,  2  «,  546,  pt.  548. 
ybhu-  ‘be’,  pr.  422,  sj.  423, 
inj.  424,  opt.  425,  impv. 
426,  pt.  427,  impf.  428; 
pf.  482  b  I,  4S5,  opt.  489, 
pt.  492;  root  aor.  499,  sj. 
502,  inj.  503,  opt.  504,  prec. 
504;  zz-aor.  508;  red.  aor. 

5*4;  ft-  537,  539,  pt.  538; 
des.  542,  pt.  544;  intv. 
545,  I,  546,  pt.  548;  cs. 
557b;  pp.  573;  gdv.  578,2, 
581;  inf.  584a,  588c;  gd. 
59°  a,  b,  59 1  a. 
bhu-  ‘earth’,  inflected  383. 
ybhiis-  ‘adorn’,  pr.  422,  sj. 
423,  opt.  425,  impv.  426, 
pt.  427,  impf.  428;  gdv. 
580. 

ybhr-  ‘bear’,  pr.  422,  451, 
458  (inflected),  sj.  423,459, 
inj.  424,  opt.  425,  459, 
impv.  426,  460,  pt.  427, 
461,  impf.  428,  462;  pf. 
482  d,  485,  sj.  487,  pt.  493; 
plup.  495 ;  root  aor.  prec. 
504,  impv.  505;  .r-aor.  (in¬ 
flected)  522,  sj.  523,  inj. 
^24;  //-aor.  529;  cond.538, 
ft-Pt. 538;  intv.  545, 2,  546; 

ps.  445,  sj.  446,  aor.  501; 
pp.573;  inf. 585, 585,4,5,7,8, 
5S6  b;  gd.  591  b. 

ybhrjj-  ‘roast’,  pr.  sj.  431. 
\bhyas-  ‘fear’,  impf.  428. 
ybhrams-  ‘fall’,  pr.  inj.  424; 
a-aor.  inj.  510;  cs.  555; 
PP-  574-  _ 

y bhraj -  ‘shine’,  pr.  422,  pt. 
427;  root  aor.  499,  prec. 
504;  ps.  aor.  501. 
ybhri-  ‘consume’,  pr.  476. 

] /bhres-  ‘totter’,  pr.  422. 

ymamh-  or  i?iah-  ‘be  great’, 
pr.422,  opt.  425,  impv.  426, 

pt.  427,  impf.  428;  pf.  482, 
485,  sj.  487,  inj.  488,  impv. 
490,  pt.  493;  cs.  556,  556a, 
pt.  559  e;  inf.  584b,  5S5,  2. 

ymajj-  ‘sink’,  pr.  422;  gd. 
591  a. 

madgu-  38  c,  44  a  3  a  (p.  36), 
62,  4  b  note  3  (p.  57). 
ymath-  or  manih-  ‘stir’,  pr. 
422,476,  sj.423,  impv. 426, 
478,  pt.  479,  impf.  428,  480; 
pf.  485;  root  aor.  sj.  502; 
zip  aor.  529,  inj.  53 1;  ps. 
445,  pt-  447;  PP-  575  a  2- 


ymad-  or  tnand-  ‘exhilarate’, 

pr.  422,  451,  458,  sj.  423, 
inj. 424,  opt. 425,  impv.  426, 
460,  pt.  427,  impf.  428,462; 
pf.  485,  sj.  487,  opt.  489, 
impv.  490,  pt.  492;  root 
aor.  499,  impv.  505,  pt.  506; 
red.  aor.  514;  .r-aor.  522, 
sj.  523,  inj.  524,  pt.  527; 
z;-aor.  529,  opt.  532;  cs. 
555  a,  556  a,  sj.  559b;  ps. 
pt.  447;  pp.  573;  gdv.  578, 
45  inf-  5s5,  7- 

madhu-  ‘sweet’,  inflected  389. 
madhya-  ‘in  the  midst  of’ 
587  b  a. 

yman-  ‘think’,  pr.  422,  439, 

470,  sj.  423,  440,  471,  inj. 
440,  471,  opt.  440,  459, 

471,  impv.  441,  472,  pt. 
442,  473,  impf.  443,  474; 
pf.  485;  root  aor.  500,  sj. 
502,  pt.  506;  .r-aor.  522, 
sj-  523,  inj-  524;  ft-  537, 
539;  des.  542,  ps.  544  h, 
pp.  544h;  cs.555,  opt. 559c; 
pp.  574,2;  inf.  585,4,5. 

ma?iasya-  den.,  pr.  (inflected) 
569,  opt.  569  c. 
mantran'iya-  gdv.  5S1  b. 

]/i.  md-  ‘measure’,  pr.  451, 
opt.  459,  impv.  460,  pt.  461, 
impf.  462  ;  root  aor.  impv. 
505,  pt.  506;  .r-aor.  522; 

ps.  aor.  501;  pp.  574,  3; 
gdv.  578,3;  inf.  584  a; 
gd.  59°  b,  591  a. 

\2.  ma-  ‘exchange’,  pr.  439; 
gd.  591  b. 

|/3.  ma-  ‘bellow’,  pr.  422, 458; 
pf.  585;  red.  aor.  514,  inj. 
516;  inf.  585,  5. 
ma,  prohibitive  particle  used 
with  injunctive  648. 
matar-  ‘mother’,  inflected  360. 
mas-  ‘month’  44,  3,  340  (in¬ 
flected). 

ymi-  ‘fix’,  pr.  470,  sj.  471, 
inj.  471,  impv.  472,  part. 
473,  impf.  474;  pf.  485; 
ps.445,  pt.447;  gdv.  578, 1. 
ymiks-  ‘mix’,  pf.  485  (cp.  p. 

359  note  8),  impv.  490. 
ymigh-  ‘mingere’,  pr.  pt.  427. 
yviith-  ‘alternate’,  pr.  422,  pt. 
435;  pf.  485. 

ymis-  ‘mix’,  des.  542,  impv. 544. 
y mis-  ‘wink’,  pr.  430,  pt.  435; 
inf.  587  a  «. 

ymih-  ‘mingere’,  pr.  422,  impv. 
426,  pt.  427;  ft.  537,  539; 
cs.  553  a;  inf.  584  b. 
ymi-  ‘damage’,  pr.  439,  476, 
subj.  477,  inj-  477,  opt. 
440,  pt.  479,  impf.  480; 
pf.  485;  .r- aor.  inj.  524; 


I.  Sanskrit  Index. 


445 


intv.  545,1,  pt.  548;  inf. 
_584  a,  586  a. 
midvams -,  pf.  pt.  492  b. 
yniil-  ‘wink’,  gd.  591  a. 

\miv-  ‘push’,  pr.pt.  427;  pp. 

573  «- 

\muc-  ‘release’,  pr.  430, 
439,  sj.  431,  440,  impv. 

434,  pt.  435,  imPf-  43^5 
pf.  485,  sj.  487,  pt.  493; 
plup.  495;  root  aor.  499, 
500,  prec.  504;  zz-aor.  508, 
sj.  509,  inj.  510,  impv.  512; 
j-aor.  522,  inj.  524,  opt. 
525,  des.  542,  pt.  544;  ps. 
aor.  501 ;  gd.  591  a. 

1 /mud-  ‘be  merry’,  pr.  422, 
impv.  426,  pt.  427 ;  pf.  485 ; 
root  aor.  opt.  504;  is- aor. 
opt.  532;  ps.  aor.  501;  inf. 
584  b. 

y?nur-  =  mr-  ‘crush’,  pf.  sj. 
487. 

\'mus-  ‘steal’,  pr.  422,  476, 
pt.  479,  impf.  480;  zlr-aor. 
inj-  531;  PP-  575  b;  inf. 
584b;  gd.  591  a. 
j /muk-  ‘be  dazed’,  pr.  impv. 
441 ;  red.aor.514;  cs. 553b; 

PP-  573;  inf*  584  b- 
\murch-  ‘thicken’,  impf.  428. 
j/i.  mr-  ‘die’,  pr.  422,  sj. 
423;  pf.  485,  pt.  492;  root 
aor.  500,  inj.  503,  opt.  504; 

ft.  537,  539;  cs.  557  c;  ps. 
445,  impv.  446;  pp.  576  e. 
1/2.  mr-  ‘crush’,  pr.  impv. 

478,  pt.  479;  intv.  547  c. 
ymrks-  ‘stroke’,  pr.  sj.  431. 
y?nrc-  ‘injure’,  .r-aor.  opt.  525; 

cs.  553 c ;  si-  559b;  pp. 573. 
\'mrj-  ‘wipe’,  pr.  451,  impv. 

454,  pt-455,  impf.  456;  Pf- 
482,  485,  opt.  489;  sa- aor. 
536;  intv.  545,2,  547,  pt. 
548,  impf.  549,  55 1»  gdv. 
580;  cs.  553  c,  opt.  559  c; 

ps.  445,  pt-447;  PP-5735 
gdv.  578,4;  gd.  59ob. 
ymrd-  ‘be  gracious’,  pr.  sj. 
43 r,  impv-  434;  cs.  554, 
sj-  559  b. 

turn-  ‘crush’,  pr.  430,  inj. 432, 
impv.  434,  impf.  436;  red. 
aor.  514. 

ymrd-  ‘crush’,  pf.  opt.  489. 
ymrdh-  ‘neglect’,  pr.  422,  sj. 
43 1;  root  aor.  opt.  504; 
zlr-aor.  sj.  530,  inj.  531. 
j /mrs-  ‘touch’,  pr.  430,  sj. 
431,  impv.  434,  pt.  435; 
impf.  436;  pf-  482,  485; 
jzz-aor.  536;  intv.  545,2, 
547  a;  gd.  591  a. 
y»irs-  ‘not  heed’,  pr.  439; 
pf.  485;  root  aor.  inj.  503; 


zz-aor.  inj.  5 10;  red.  aor.  inj. 
516;  zlf-aor.  inj.  531 ;  inf. 
584  b. 

meghaya-  den.,  ft.  and  pp.  570. 
ymed-  ‘be  fat’,  pr.  impv.  441; 
cs.  554  «• 

y my  ads-  ‘be  situated’,  pr.  impv. 
426;  pf.  485;  root  aor. 499; 

ps.  aor.  501. 
ymruc-  ‘set’,  pr.  pt.  427. 
ymla-  ‘relax’,  cs.  558;  pp.  573. 

yd-  ‘who’,  rel.  pron.  398. 
yyaks-  ‘press  on’(?),  pr.  inj. 

424,  pt.  427;  inf.  584  b. 
yyaj-1  sacrifice’,  pr.  451,  opt. 

425,  impv.  426,  pt.  427, 
impf.  428;  pf.  482  b  I,  485, 
pt-  493;  root  aor.  impv. 
505;  s- aor.  522,  sj.  523,  inj. 
524;  sa- aor.  impv.  536;  ft. 
537;  des.  542,  sj.  544; 
pp.  574;  inf.  585,  4,  7;  gd. 
590b. 

yajnasri -,  inflected  376. 

] /yat-  ‘stretch’,  pr.  422,  sj. 
423,  opt.  425,  impv.  426, 

pt.  427;  pf.  485;  root  aor. 
pt.  506;  cs.  555,  sj.  559  b, 
pt.  559  e. 

yyabh-  ‘futuere’,  pr.  422,  impv. 

426, 

yyam-  ‘reach’,  pr.  422,  451, 
sj.  423,  inj.  424,  opt.  425, 
impv.  426,  pt.  427,  impf. 
428;  pf.  482  b  I,  485,  pt. 
493;  root  aor.  499,  sj.  502, 
opt.  504,  prec.  504,  impv. 
505;  zz-aor.  opt.  5 1 1 ;  ,r-aor. 
522,  sj.  523,  inj.  524,  pt. 
527;  /j-aor.529;  intv.  545,  2, 
546;  cs.555;  ps.pt.447,  aor. 
501;  PP-  574,  2;  aor.  gdv. 
580;  inf.  585,4,  5/J,  586  a; 
gd.  591  b. 

yj/as-  ‘be  heated’,  pr.  impv. 
460,  pt.  442. 

Yyd-  ‘go’,  pr.  451,  opt.  453, 
impv.  454,  pt.  455,  impf. 
456;  pf.  485,  pt.  493;  j-aor. 
522,  sj.  523,  inj.  524;  sis- 
aor.  534,  si.,  opt.,  impv. 
534;  ft-  537,  pt-  538;  pp- 
573;  inf.  584  a,  585,4- 
] /yac-  ‘ask’,  pr.  422,  opt.  425, 
impv.  426,  pt.  427,  impf. 

428;  zlf-aor.  sj.  530;  cs. 

55b  a;  pp.  575  b;  inf.  586b. 
yyad-  ‘unite ’(?),  pr.  pt.  427. 
f'l.yu-  ‘unite’,  pr.  430,  451, 
sj-  431,452,  inj.  432,  impv. 

434,  454,  pt.  435,  455, 

impf.  436;  pf.  485;  des. 

542,  pt.  544;  intv.  545, 1, 
54b,  pt.  548;  pp.  573;  gd. 
591  a. 


V2-  yu-  ‘separate’,  pr.  422, 
458;  sj.  459,  inj.  459,  opt. 
459,  impv.  426,  460,  pt. 
427;  root  aor.  sj.  502,  prec. 
504;  red.  aor.  inj.  516; 
.r-aor.  sj.  523,  inj.  524;  is- 
aor.inj.  531;  intv.  545, 1,  pt. 
548,  impf.  549;  cs.  557  b, 
sj-  559b;  ps.  aor.  501;  pp. 
573;  inf-  585,4,  587  b. 
Vyuj-  ‘join’,  pr.  451,  464  (in¬ 
flected),  sj.  465,  inj.  465, 
impv.  426,  466,  pt.  467, 
impf.  468;  pf.  485,  sj.  487, 
pt-  493;  root  aor.  500,  sj. 
502,  inj.  503,  opt.  504,  impv. 
5°5,  pt.  5°b;  -f-aor.  522; 
ft-  537,  539;  ps-  445,  impv. 
446,  aor.  501;  pp.  573;  inf. 
584  b;  gd.  589  b,  c. 
yyudh-  ‘fight’,  pr.  422,  439, 
451,  sj.  440,  impv.  441,  pt. 

442,  455,  impf-  443;  pf- 
485;  root  aor.  sj.  502,  impv. 
505;  .r-aor.  inj.  524;  zlr-aor. 
529,  sj.  53°,  inj-  53 1,  impv. 
533;  des.  542,  pt.  544;  cs. 
553b,  sj.  559b;  gdv.  578,  4, 
580;  inf.  584  b,  585,2,  586  a. 
Yyicp-  ‘obstruct’,  pf.  485;  cs. 

553, b;  pp.  575  b. 
yusmaka  ‘of  you’  391,  2. 
yiiyam  ‘you’,  pron.  49  a,  391,2. 
yyes-  ‘be  heated’,  pr.  pt. 
427. 

yramh-  ‘hasten’,  pr.  422,  pt. 
427,  impf.  428;  pf.pt.  493; 
cs.  556  a;  gdv.  578,  4. 
yraks-  ‘protect’,  pr.  422,  sj. 

423,  impv.  426,  pt.  427, 
impf.  428;  pf.  485,  pt.  493 ; 
zlr-aor.  530;  pp.  575  a  I. 

yraj-  or  ranj-  ‘colour’,  impf. 
443;  intv.  545,  i  b,  546;  cs. 
55,6. 

rat  hi-  m.f.  ‘charioteer’,  inflect¬ 
ed  376. 

\rad-  ‘dig’,  pr.  422,  451,  inj. 

424,  impv.  426,  pt.  427, 
impf.  428;  pf.  485;  pp. 
575  b. 

\radh-  or  randh-  ‘make  sub¬ 
ject’,  pr.  impv.  441;  pf. 
482;  root  aor.  impv.  505, 
zz-aor.  sj.  509,  inj.  510; 
red.  aor.  sj.  515,  inj.  516; 
is- aor.  inj.  53 1 ;  intv.  545, 1  b ; 
cs.  556  a,  sj.  559  b. 

\ran-  ‘rejoice’,  pr.  422,  439, 
inj.  424,  impv. 426;  pf.482, 
485,  sj.  487,  impv.  490; 
plup.  495;  zV-aor.  529,  inj. 
53 1;  cs.  556. 

randhanaya-  den.,  impf.  569  f. 
\rap-  ‘chatter’,  pr.  422,  inj. 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


446 

424,  opt.  425,  pt.  427,  impf.  y  I.  ru •  ‘cry’,  pr.  430,  inj. 


428;  intv.  545,  I  b,  546. 
yraps-  ‘be  full’,  pr.  422;  pf. 

485- 

yrabh-  or  rambh-  ‘grasp’,  pr. 

422,  sj.  423,  inj.  424,  opt. 
425,  impv.  426,  pt.  427, 
impf.  428;  pf.  482,  485, 
pt.  493;  J-aor.  522,  pt. 
527;  inf.  584  b,  586  a;  gd. 
591  a. 

y>am-  ‘reioice’,  pr.  422,  inj. 
424,  impv.  426,  impf.  428, 
480;  red.  aor.  514,  sj.  515, 
inj.  516;  j-aor.  522,  inj. 
524;  sis- aor.  inj.  534;  cs. 
555a. 

yramb-  ‘hang  down’,  pr.  422, 
pt.  427. 

\l.ra-  ‘give’,  pr.  451,  impv. 
460,  pt.  461,  impf.  456;  pf. 
485,  impv.  490,  pt.  492, 
493;  root  aor.  impv.  505; 
J- aor.  52 2,  sj.  523,  opt. 525, 
impv.  526;  pp.  573. 

\/2.  ra-  ‘bark’,  pr.  439,  pt.  442. 
j/rds-  ‘give’,  pr.  pt.  427. 
\/raj-  ‘be  kingly’,  pr.  422, 
45  l,  SJ-  423,  inj.  424,  452, 
impv.  426,  pt.  427,  impf. 
428;  zlr-aor.  529;  cs.  556  a, 
sj.  559  b;  inf.  585,  I. 
yradh-  ‘succeed’  pr.  422,  sj. 

423,  impv.  441,  pt.  442; 
pf.  485  ;  root  aor.  sj.  502, 
prec.  504;  j-aor.  522;  is- 
aor.  inj.  53 1;  ft.  537,  539; 
cs.  556  a;  ps.  aor.  501;  gdv. 
578,4;  inf.  585,  7. 

yri-  or  n-  ‘flow’,  pr.  439,  476, 
inj-  47 7 »  Pt.  479;  impf.480. 
yrikh-  ‘scratch’,  pr.  impv.  434. 
] /ricr  ‘leave’,  pr.  464,  sj.  465, 
inj.  465,  impf.  468;  pf.  485, 
opt.  489,  pt.  492,  493;  PluP- 
495;  loot  aor.  inj. 503,  impv. 
505;  j- aor.  522;  ps.  445, 
impf.  448,  aor.  501. 

X'rip-  ‘smear’,  pf.  485;  pp. 
573- 

yribh-  ‘sing’,  pr.  422,  pt.  427, 
impf.  428;  ps.  445;  pf.  485. 
\'ris-  ‘tear’,  pr.  430,  impv. 
434,  pt.  435- 

yris-  ‘be  hurt’,  pr.  439,  sj. 
423,  440,  inj.  424,  opt.  440; 
<r-aor.  sj.  509,  inj.  510,  pt. 
512;  red.  aor.  inj.  5  16,  opt. 
517,  prec.  517;  des.  542, 
pt.  544;  cs.  553,  554;  inf. 
.  585,  7- 

rifanya-  den.,  inj.,  impv. 

569  b,  d. 

yrih-  ‘lick’,  pr.  451,  pt.  455; 
pf.  pt.  492;  intv.  545,  1  a, 
pt-  548,  55i;  PP-  573- 


432,  impv.  434,  pt.  4355 
kr-aor.  529;  intv.  545,  1  a, 
pt.  548,  impf.  549. 
y 2.  ru-  ‘break’,  is- aor.  529; 

intv.  545,  I,  54G  pt.  548. 
yruc-  ‘shine’,  pr,  422,  inj. 
424,  impv.  426,  pt. 427,  impf. 
428;  pf.  485, inj.  488, opt. 489, 
pt.  492,  493;  root  aor.  pt. 
506;  red.  aor.  514;  z'j-aor. 
529,  opt.  532;  intv.  pt.  548; 
cs.  553  b,  554;  inf.  584  b. 

rucaya-  den.,  inj.  569  b. 
yruj-  ‘break’,  pr.  430,  sj.  431, 
inj.  432,  opt.  433,  impv. 

434,  pt.  435,  impf.  436; 
pf.  485;  root.  aor.  inj.  503; 
red.  aor.  5 14;  pp.  576  b; 
inf.  584  b. 

\'rud-  ‘weep’,  pr.  451,  sj.  452, 
pt-  455;  tf-aor.  508;  cs. 

553  b. 

y I.  rudh -  ‘grow’,  pr.  422,  inj. 

424,  pt.  435,  impf.  428. 

J/2.  rudh-  ‘obstruct’,  pr.  451, 
464,  sj.  465,  impv.  466,  pt. 
467,  impf.  468;  pf.  485; 
root.  aor.  499;  zz-aor.  508, 
inj.  510;  j-aor.  522;  ps. 
445;  gd-  59t  a. 
yrup-  ‘break’,  red-aor.  514; 
PP-  575  b. 

ruvanya-  den.,  inj.  569  b. 
yrus-  ‘be  vexed’,  pr.  422. 
\'ruh-  ‘ascend’,  pr.  422,  sj. 

423,  opt.  425,  impv.  426, 
pt.  427,  impf.  428;  pf. 
485;  root  aor.  pt.  506;  a- 
aor.  508,  sj.  509,  inj.  510, 
opt.  511;  jvz-aor.  536;  des. 
542,  pt.  544;  cs.  553  b; 
PP-  573;  illf-  586  a;  gd. 
590  b,  591  a. 

X'rej-  ‘tremble’,  pr.  422,  inj. 

424,  pt.  427,  impf.  428;  cs. 

554  «• 

ylap-  ‘prate’,  pr.  impv.  426, 
pt.  427  ;  intv.  545,  1  b,  546; 

cs.  555;  PP-  575  b. 

\/labh-  ‘take’,  pr.  422,  opt. 
425;  pf.  485,  pt.  493;  des. 
542,  pt.  544;  gd.  590  b. 
ylikh -  ‘scratch’,  impf.  436; 

z>-aor.  inj.  53  I;  pp.  575  a  2. 
ylip-  ‘smear’,  pr.  430 ;  j-aor. 
522.  _ 

yli-  ‘cling’,  pr.  422,  impv. 

426;  pp.  576  d;  gdv.  578,  2. 
yiitp-  ‘break’,  pr.  opt.  433; 

ps.  445;  gd.  591  a. 
yiubh-  ‘desire’,  pr.  pt.  442; 
cs.  533  b. 

X'vaks-  ‘increase’,  pr.  430, 


impv.  434,  pt.  435,  impf. 
436;  pf.  485;  cs.  556  a. 
yvac-  ‘speak’,  pr.  458,  impv. 
460;  pf.  482  b  I,  485,  pt. 
493;  red.  aor.  514,  sj.  515, 
inj.  516,  opt.  517,  impv. 
518;  ft.  537,  539,  pt.  538; 
intv.  545,  I  b,  impf. 549;  ps. 
445,  aor.  501;  pp.  574,  1; 
gdv.  578,  4,  581;  inf.  584b, 
585,  4- 

yvahc-  ‘move  crookedly’,  pr. 
422;  pf.  482,  485;  ps.  445, 
impv.  446,  pt.  447. 
y'vat-  ‘apprehend’,  pr.  opt. 

425,  pt.  427  ;  red.  aor.  514; 
cs.  555- 

yvad-  ‘speak’,  pr.  422,  sj. 
423,  inj.  424,  opt.  425,  433, 
impv.  426,  pt.  427,  impf. 
428;  pf.  485;  A-aor.  529, 
sj.  530,  inj.  531;  ft.  537, 
539;  intv.  545,  ib, 546,  547  c, 
opt-  559  c;  ps.  pt.  447, 
PP-  575  b. 

yvadh-  ‘slay’,  pr.  opt.  425, 
impv.  426;  root  aor.  prec. 
504;  z-r-aor.  529,  sj.  530, 
inj.  531,  impv.  533. 
yvan-  ‘win’,  pr.  422,  470:  sj. 

423,  43 1,  471,  inj.  424,  471, 

opt.  425,  433,  471,  impv. 

426,  47 2,  pt  473,  impf. 
474;  pf.  482,  485,  sj.  487, 
pt.  492 ;  root  aor.  impv.  505  ; 
j--aor.  sj.  523,  inj.  524,  opt. 
525;  zir-aor.  sj.530,  opt.  532; 
jz-r-aor.  opt.  534;  des.  542, 
543  (inflected),  sj.  544;  cs. 

555;  PP- 574, 2a;  inf. 585,4. 
vanusa-  den  ,  inj.  569  b. 
vault sya-  den.,  sj.  569  a. 
yvaud-  ‘greet’,  pr.  422,  impv. 
426,  pt.  427;  pf.  485;  is- 
aor.  opt.  532;  ps.  aor.  501; 
gdv.  578,  4;  inf.  585,  7. 
y  1.  vap-  ‘strew’,  pr.  422,  inj. 

424,  impv.  426,  pt.  427, 
impf.  428;  pf.  482  b  1,  485; 

ps.  445,  Pt-447;  PP-  574,  1  ; 
gd.  591  a. 

\  2.  vap-  ‘shear’,  pr.  (2.  s., 
3  pi.  act.)  422. 
vapusya-  den.,  impf.  569  f. 
vam,  1.  s.  aor.  of  vr-t cover’ 
66  c  /?  2,  499. 

yvam-  ‘vomit’,  pr.  sj.  452, 
impf.  456. 

varivasyd-  den.,  sj.  569  a,  impv. 

569  d. 

vareya-,  den.,  sj.  569  a. 
yval-,  j-aor.  sj.  523. 
yvalg-  ‘bound’,  pr.  422,  impf. 
428. 

vavrdhdnt-,  anom.  pf.  pt.,  p. 
363  note  7. 


I.  Sanskrit  Index. 


447 


}/vas-  ‘desire’,  pr.  422,  451, 
458,  sj.  423.  inj.  424,  opt. 

425,  impv.  426,  454,  pt. 
455*  impf.  428,  pt.  435; 
pf.  4S2,  485;  intv.  545,  I. 

]/ 1,  vas-  ‘shine’,  pr.  430,  sj. 
43 l*  inj.  432,  opt.  433* 
impv.  434,  pt.  435,  impf. 
436;  pf.  4S5,  pt.  492,  493; 
plup.  495;  root  aor.  500; 
j-aor.  522;  cs.  555;  pp. 
574;  inf.  5S5.  4.  588  a.' 
y 2 .  vas-  ‘wear’,  pr.  451,  inj. 
452,  opt.  453,  pt.  435,  impv. 

454,  pt.  455*  impf.  456; 
pf.  482,  485,  pt.  493;  is- 
aor.  529;  cs.  555,  ft.  537, 
560. 

j/3.  vas-  ‘dwell’,  pr.  422,  inj. 
424,  impv.  426,  pt.  427, 
impf.  428;  pf.  4S5,  pt.  492, 
493;  root  aor.  pt.  506; 
j-aor.  522;  cs.  555,  sj. 
559  b. 

yvah-  ‘carry’,  pr.  422,  45 1, 
sj.  423,  opt.  425,  impv. 

426,  pt.  427,  impf.  42S; 
pf.  4S2  b  I,  485;  root  aor. 
opt.  504,  impv.  505,  pt. 
506;  j-aor.  522,  si.  523, 
inj.  524;  ft.  537,  539;  ps.445, 
sj.446,  pt.  447;  PP-  574;  inf. 
585,  4,  7,  586  b;  gd.  591  a. 

J/I.  va-  ‘blow’,  pr.  439,  451, 
impv.  454,  pt.  455,  impf. 
456;  cs.  558. 

y  2 .  va-  ‘weave’,  pr.  439, 
impv.  441,  pt.  442,  impf. 
443;  pf.  485;  ft.  537,  pt. 
53S;  pp.  574,  I  «;  inf.  585, 
4*  5*  586  b. 

-vdms,  pf.  pt.  suffix,  1 8 1 ,  347, 
491. 

vac-,  inflected,  p.  180. 
vajaya-  den.,  impv.  569  d; 
inf.  585,  7. 


yvahch-  ‘desire’,  pr.  impv., 
426. 

vam  ‘we  two’  39  r,  1. 


vas- 

‘bellow’,  pt.  44 

2;  pf. 

482, 

485,  pt.  493; 

plup. 

495  5 

red.  aor.  514; 

intv. 

545* 

1  b,  pt.  548,  imp 

'f-  549- 

'vas  = 

=  3.  vas-  (?)  pr. 

422. 

vi-  ‘bird’  381  a. 


) /vie-  ‘sift’,  pr.  464,  impv.  466, 
pt.  467,  impf.  468;  pf,  pt. 
492;  ps.  impv.  446. 
yvij-  ‘tremble’,  pr.  430,  impv. 
434,  pt.  435,  impf.  4 36; 
pf.  4S5 ;  root  aor.  inj.  503; 
red.  aor.  inj.  516;  intv. 
545,  I  a,  551. 

}'[.  vid-  ‘know’,  pr.  45 1,  sj. 
452,  opt.  453,  impv.  454, 
impf.  456;  pf.  485,  pt. 


492  b;  cs.  553;  pp.  575  b; 
inf.  585*  8;  gd.  590  b. 
y 2.  vid-  ‘find’,  pr.  430,  451, 
inj.  432,  opt.  433,  impv. 
434,  454,  Pt.  455*  impf. 
436;  pf.  485,  sj.  487,  pt. 
492;  tf-aor.  (inflected)  50S, 
sj.  509,  inj.  510,  opt.  5 1 1, 
prec.  511,  impv.  512,  pt. 
512;  r-aor.  522;  intv.  547  a; 

ps.  445,  aor.  501 ;  pp.  576  a; 
gdv.  579;  inf.  584  b,  5S5, 
4;  gd.  590  b. 

vid-  ‘finding’,  inflected,  3  1 9. 
yvidk-  ‘worship’,  pr.  sj.  43 1, 
inj.  432,  opt.  433,  pt.  435, 
impf.  436. 

yvindh-  ‘lack’,  pr.  430. 
vasiiya-  den.,  sj.  569  a. 
yvip-  ‘tremble’,  pr.  422,  pt. 
427,  impf.  428;  pf.  485; 
root  aor.  pt.  506;  red.  aor. 
514;  cs.  553  a,  554. 
vibhu-,  inflected,  383. 
vis-,  inflected,  350. 
yvis-  ‘enter’,  pr.  430,  sj.  431, 
inj.  432*  °pt-  4 33,  impv. 
434,  Pt-  435*  impf.  436; 
pf.  483,  485,  opt.  489,  pt. 
492,  492  b ;  plup.  495;  root 
aor.  500,  impv.  505;  j-aor. 
522;  is- aor.  531;  cs.  553  a, 
opt-  559  c,  pp.  561  a; 
inf.  586  a;  gd.  591  a. 
visvataspad-  ‘having  feet  on 
every  side’,  319  a. 
yvis-  ‘be  active’,  pr.  458,  sj. 
459,  impv.  460,  pt.  427, 
impf.  428,  462;  pf.  485; 
/>-aor.  sj.  53°  j  intv.  545,  1  a, 
546,  547  b,  pt.  548;  inf. 
584  b. 

yvis/-  or  vest-  *wi  ap’,  pr.  impv. 
426;  cs.  553. 

\'vi  ‘enjoy’,  pr.451*  sj-452*  inj- 
452, impv.  454,  pt.  455;  impf. 
456;  pf.  485;  r-aor.  sj.  523; 
intv.  545,  I  a,  551;  ps.  445, 
Pt.  447*  inf.  585*  3- 
yvui-  ‘make  strong’,  cs.  554a. 
vTraya-  den.,  impv.  569  d, 
impf.  569  f. 

vilciya-.,  sj.  559  b,  impv. 

559  d*  PP-  575  c. 

■J/l.  vr-  ‘cover’,  pr.  422,  470, 
inj.  424,  471,  impv.  472, 

pt.  473*  impf.  474;  pf-  4§5, 
pt.  492;  plup.  495;  root 
aor.  499,  500,  inj.  503, 
impv.  505,  pt.  506;  red. 
aor.  514;  j-aor.  sj.  523; 
intv.  545,  3;  cs.  557  c.  sj. 
559  b;  ft.  537,  560;  ps.  aor. 
501,  pp.  5735  inf-  585,  4; 
gd.  59°  a*  b,  c,  591  b. 

|/2.  vp-  ‘chcose’,  pr.  470,  476, 


inj.  477,  opt.  477,  impv. 
478,  pt.  4  79,  impf.  480; 
pf.  485;  root  aor.  500,  sj. 
502,  inj.  503,  opt.  504,  pt. 
506;  j-aor.  522;  pp.  573; 
gdv.  578,  2,  580. 
yvrj-  ‘twist’,  pr.  422,  464, 
sj.  465,  impv.  466,  impf. 
46S;  pf.  482,  485,  opt.  489, 
impv.  490,  pt.  492,  492  b; 
root  aor.  499,  500,  sj.  502, 
inj.  503,  opt.  504,  prec. 
504,  impv.  505;  a-aor.  508; 
j--aor.  522,  inj.  524;  intv. 
545*  3*  cs.  550c;  cs.  553  c; 
inf.  584  b,  585,  I,  7;  gd. 
590  a. 

yvrl-  ‘turn’,  pr.  422,  458,  inj. 
424,  impv.  426,  pt.  427, 
impf.  428;  pf.  482,  485,  sj. 
487,  opt.  489,  impv.  490, 
pt.  492;  plup..  495;  root 
aor.  499,  500,  sj.  502,  impv. 
505;  a-aor.  508;  red.  aor. 
514;  j-aor.  522;  ft.  537, 
539;  des.  542;  intv.  545, 
2,3,  546;  cs.  553c,  sj.  559b; 
PP-  573;  inf-  584  b,  cs. 
585,  7;  gd.  59i  a- 
yvrdh-  ‘grow’,  pr.  422,  sj. 
423,  inj.  424,  impv.  426, 
pt.  427,  impf.  428;  pf.  482, 
485,  sj.  487,  inj.  488,  opt. 
489,  impv.  490,  pt.  492, 
4935  a' aor.  508,  pt.  512  a; 
red.  aor.  514;  J-aor.  pt. 
527;  zlr-aor.  opt.  532;  cs. 
553  c,  sj.  559  b,  pt.  559  e; 
intv.  gdv.  580;  inf.  584  b, 
585*  I*  7-  ' 

yvrs-  ‘rain’,  pr.  422,  impv. 
426,  434,  pt.  427;  pf.  482, 
impv.  490,  pt.  493;  zjr-aor. 
529;  cs.  553  c;  gd.  590  a. 
vrsaya-  den.,  impv.  569  d, 
aor.  570. 

yvrh-  ‘tear’,  pr.  430,  inj  432, 
opt-  433*  impv.  434,  impf. 
436;  pf.  485;  sa- aor.  536; 
cs.  553  c;  ps.  aor.  501. 
vedi-,  loc.  sing.  p.  2S4  (mid.). 


yven- 

‘long’,  pr.^ 

422, 

inj. 

424, 

impv.  426, 

pt.  . 

427, 

impf. 

.  428. 

\ /vyac- 

‘extend’,  pr. 

00 

to 

inj. 

459, 

impf.  462;  pf.  482 

b  I, 

485, 

inj.  488. 

| /vyath- 

■  ‘waver’,  pr. 

422, 

pt. 

427; 

is-aor.  sj. 

530* 

inj. 

531 ; 

cs.  556,  aor 

.  56° 

a. 

yvyadit 

-  ‘pierce’, 

pr. 

439, 

inj. 

440,  impv. 

441, 

pt. 

442, 

impf.  443 ;  pf.  pt.  , 

192; 

PP-  574,  1  ;  inf.  584  b. 

yvya- 

‘envelope’, 

pr. 

439, 

opt. 

440,  impv. 

44W 

pt. 

44§ 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


442, 

impf.  443 

;  pf. 

485, 

pt. 

493;  a- aor 

.  508; 

pp. 

574, 

0 

a- 

yvraj- 

‘proceed’, 

pr.  impv. 

426, 

r-t • 

to 

Ol 

428. 

\!vrad- 

‘weaken’, 

impf. 

yvrasc- 

■  ‘cut  up’, 

pr.  430,  sj. 

431, 

inj.  432, 

impv. 

434, 

pt. 

435,  impf- 

436; 

ps. 

impv.  446;  pp. 

576  b 

;  gd- 

590 

b. 

yvradh-  ‘stir  up  , 

pr.  inj. 

424, 

pt.  427. 

1 fvlag-  pursue(?)  gd.  5 91  a. 
j ivli-  ‘crush’  —  \bll-. 

| /Jams-  ‘praise’,  422,  sj.  423, 
opt.  425,  impv.  426,  pt. 
427,  impf.  428;  root  aor. 
impv.  505;  is- aor.  529,  sj. 

53°,  inj.  53 1 ;  cs.  556  a; 

ps.  445,  pt.  447,  aor.  501; 
gdv.  578,  4;  inf.  584  b. 

ysak-  ‘be  able’,  pr.  470,  sj. 
471,  impf.  4745  pf.  485; 
root  aor.  sj.  502,  opt.  504, 
impv.  505;  zz-aor.  508,  inj. 
510,  opt.  51 1  j  des.  542,2, 

pt.  544;  inf.  5S5,  4- 
ysat-  ‘cut  in  pieces’,  cs. 

555- 

j/i.  sad-  ‘prevail’,  pf.  482, 
485,  pt.  493- 

1/2.  sad-  ‘fall’,  ft.  537,  539. 
\sap-  ‘curse’,  pr.  422,  sj.  423, 
pt.  427,  impf.  42S;  pf. 
485;  J-aor.  inj.  524. 

"[/I.  sam-  ‘labour’,  pr.  439, 
impv.  441,  pt.  442;  pf. 
485,  sj.  487,  pt.  493;  zk-aor. 

529- 

|/2.  sam-  ‘be  quiet’,  impf. 
42S;  red.  aor.  514;  cs.  556; 
pp.  574,  2  a. 

\/sas-  ‘cut’,  pr.  impv.  454. 
j/sa-  ‘sharpen’,  pr.  458,  impv. 
460,  pt.  461,  impf.  436, 
462;  pf.  pt.  493;  pp.  574, 
3;  gd.  591  a. 

ysas-  ‘order’,  pr.  422,  45 1, 
sj.  452,  impv.  454,  pt.  455, 
impf.  428,  456'>  pt-  485. 
inj.  488,  impv.  490;  root 
aor.  sj.  502;  zz-aor.  508,  sj. 
509,  inj.  510,  pt.  512a;  pp. 

574-  3  «• 

ysiks-  —  des.  of  sak-  ‘be 
able’,  pr.  422,  sj.  423,  inj. 
424,  opt.  425,  impv.  426, 
pt.  427,  impf.  428:  these 
forms  strictly  speaking 
belong  to  543,  544. 
yHnj-  ‘twang’,  pr.  45 1. 
sitipad-  ‘white-footed’  319  a. 
\/sim-  ‘labour’  =  yi.  sam-. 
yAr-  ‘leave’,  zz-aor.  sj.  509, 


inj.  510;  ps.  445,  sj.  446, 
aor.  501. 

yi.  si-  ‘lie’,  pr.  422,  451,  opt. 
453,  impf.  428,  456,  impv. 

44 1,  454,  Pt-  455  ;  Pf- 
482  b  1  a,  pt.  493;  J-aor.  sj. 
523;  zk-aor.  529;  inf.  585,  7. 
|/2.  si-  ‘sharpen’  =  ]/sd-,  root 
aor.  500. 

sikdya-  den.,  ft.  and  pp.  570. 
ysuc-  ‘gleam’,  pr.  422,  inj. 
424,  impv.  426,  pt.  427, 
impf.  428;  pf.  485,  pt. 
492,  493,  opt.  489,  impv. 
490;  <z-aor.  508,  pt.  512  a; 
red.  aor.  514,  inj.  516;  is- 
aor.  inj.  53 1;  intv.  545,  I  a, 
547  a,  pt.  548;  cs.  553  b, 
5S4;  ps.  aor.  501 ;  inf. 

585»  7- 

siici-,  inflected,  381. 

yhij-  pf.  pt.  493  (p.  364  note  2). 

ysundh- ‘purity’,  pr. 422, impv. 

426,434;  cs.554a;  pp.574,2. 
ysubh-  or  sumbh-  '  ‘beautify’, 
422,  430,  sj.  423,  impv. 
426,  pt.  427,  435;  root  aor. 
pt.  506;  red.  aor.  514; 

cs.  553  b,  554;  PP-  575  a  1 J 
inf.  584  b,  585,  1,  586  a. 
ysus-  ‘dry’,  pr.  439,  impv. 

441;  cs.  553  b. 
ysu-  or  sz'i-  ‘swell’,  pr.  pt. 
427;  pf.  482,  485,  sj.  487, 
opt.  489,  pt.  492,  493  (p. 
364  note  3);  j--aor.  pt.  527; 
inf.  58S  c. 

ysrn-  —  ysr-  ‘crush’,  pr. 
impv.  434. 

ysrclh-  ‘be  defiant’,  inj.  424, 
impv.  426,  pt.  427;  cs. 
553  c. 

ysr-  ‘crush’,  476,  impv.  478; 
pt.  479,  impf.  480;  pf.  485; 
is- aor.  529,  inj.  531 ;  ps. 

445,  aor-  501;  PP-  573  «, 
576  e ;  inf.  587  b;  gd.  591a. 
sods-,  inflected,  342. 
yscand-  or  card-  intv.  545,  3. 
yscam-  ‘labour’(?),  pr.  inj.  477. 
ykut-  ‘drip’,  pr.  422. 
y snath-  ‘pierce’,  pr.  sj.  452, 
impv.  454;  red.  aor.  514, 
inj.  516;  is- a  or.  impv.  533; 
cs.  556;  cs.  pp.  575  c;  inf. 

584  b. 

ysyci-  ‘coagulate’,  pp.  574,  3, 
576  c. 

ysrath-  ‘slacken’,  pr.  476,  pt. 
479,  impf.  480;  pf.  4S5 ; 
red.  aor.  inj.  516,  impv. 
518;  cs.  556. 
srathar-ya-  den.  567  d. 
srathdya-  den.  564  a,  569  d. 
srad-  ‘heart’,  used  adverbially 
with  ykr-  and  ydha-,  652. 


yJram-  ‘be  weary’,  pr.  439; 
pf.  485,  pt.  493;  a- aor. 
508,  inj.  510;  zk-aor.  529, 
inj.  53i;  PP-  574,  20c. 
sravasyd-  den.,  sj.  569  a. 
ysrd-  (sri-,  sr-)  ‘boil’,  pr. 
476,  pt.  479,  impf.  480;  cs. 
558,  sj.  559  b;  pp.  574,  I  a. 
ysri-  ‘resort’,  pr.  422,  sj.  423, 
impv.  426,  pt.  427,  impf. 
428;  pf.  485,  opt.  489,  pt. 
493;  plup.  495;  root  aor. 
499;  red.  aor.  514;  J-aor. 
522;  ps.  aor.  501;  cs.  558  a; 
PP-  573- 

ysris-  ‘clasp’,  pr.  sj.  423; 

a- aor.  inj  510;  inf.  587  a. 
ysri-  ‘mix’,  pr.  476;  pp. 

573  «;  inf.  585,  I. 
ysnc-  ‘hear’,  pr.  451,  470, 
sj.  471,  opt.  471,  impv. 
472,  pt.  473,  impf.  474; 
pf.  485,  sj.  487,  opt.  4S9,  pt. 
492;  plup.  495;  root.  aor. 
499,  sj.  502,  prec.  504,  impv. 
505;  zz-aor.  inj.  510,  des. 
542  b,  pt.  544,  gdv.  544  i, 
580;  cs.  55 7  b;  ps.  445, 
aor.  501 ;  pp.  573;  gdv. 

578,  I,  579;  gd.  590  b, 
591  b. 

ysrus-  ‘hear’,  pr.  inj.  424, 
impv.  426,  pt.  427,  impf. 
428. 

ysvahc-  ‘spread’,  pr.  impv. 
426,  pt.  427;  pf.  sj.  487 
(cp.  p.  361  note  3);  cs. 

556  a- 

svcin-,  accentuation,  p.  80 
(bottom). 

ysvas-  ‘blow’,  451,  impv.  454, 
pt.  455;  intv.  545,  I  b;  cs. 
555;  inf.  587  a. 
ysvit-  ‘be  bright’,  root  aor. 
499,  pt-  506;  red.  aor.  514; 
j-aor.  522. 

sat  ‘six’  43  a  2. 
sat  53  a  2. 

ysthiv-  ‘spue’,  impf.  428. 

sa-,  adv.  particle  in  com¬ 
pounds,  250,  656. 
sakhi-,  inflected,  3S0  a. 
ysagh-  ‘be  equal  to’,  impf. 

474;  root  aor.  sj.  502. 
ysac-  ‘accompany’,  pr.  422, 
458,  sj.  423,  inj.  424,  459, 
opt.  425,  impv.  426,  460, 
pt.  427  b,  461,  impf.  428; 
pf.  485,  pt.  492;  root  aor. 
impv.  505,  pt.  506;  r-aor. 
522,  sj.  523,  inj.  524,  opt. 
525;  inf.  585,  7,  588  c. 
saca  ‘with’,  prep,  with  loc., 
619. 


I.  Sanskrit  Index. 


449 


\saj-  and  sahj-  ‘hang’,  pr.  422, 
impv.  426,  impf.  428  ;  s- aor. 
522. 

\sad-  ‘sit’,  pr.  422,  45 1,  sj. 

423,  inj.  424,  opt.  425, 
impv.  426,  pt.  427,  impf. 
428;  pf.  485;  opt.  487, 
pt.  492;  a-aor.  508,  inj. 
510,  opt.  5 1 1,  impv.  512, 
pt.  512;  red.  aor.  514; 
s- aor.  sj.  523;  cs.  sj.  559  b; 
ps.  aor.  501 ;  pp.  576  a; 
gdv.  578,  4;  inf.  584  b, 
586  a;  gd.  591  a. 

sadha -  ‘together’,  adv.  634  a. 
sadhamds,  nom.  of  sadhamad- 
66  c  /?,  319  a. 

\san-  ‘gain’,  470,  sj.  471,  opt. 
471,  impv.  472,  impf.  474; 
pf.  485,  pt.  492;  a- aor.  508, 
inj.  510,  opt.  511,  pt.  512; 
zr-aor.  529,  sj.  530;  ft.  537; 
539?  Pt-  538;  des.  542,  sj. 
544;  intv.  545,  3;  pp.  574, 
2;  gdv.  581;  inf.  585, 
2,3- 

sanitur  ‘apart  from’,  prep, 
with  acc.  620. 

sanutdr  ‘far  from’,  prep,  with 
abl.  621. 

| /sap-  ‘serve’,  pr.  422,  inj. 

424,  opt.  425,  pt.  427, 
impf.  428;  pf.  485;  red. 
aor.  inj.  516. 

sapctrya-  den.,  sj.  569  a,  opt. 
569  c,  impv.  569  d,  impf. 
569  f;  aor.  570;  gdv. 
580. 

sam  ‘with’,  prep.  with.  inst. 
593  note  3;  adv.  ‘together’ 
as  first  member  of  com¬ 
pounds  250. 
sama-  ‘any’,  pron.  399. 
saranyd-  den.,  sj.  569  a. 
sarvapad-  ‘all-footed’  3 19  a. 
\'sas -  ‘sleep’,  pr.  458,  impv. 

454,  pt-  455?  impf.  456- 
sah-,  inflected,  352. 

\sah-  ‘prevail’,  pr.  422,  451, 
2,  sj.  423,  opt.  425,  impv. 
426,  pt.  427,  impf.  428; 
pf.  482,  485,  sj.  487,  opt. 
489,  pt.  492,  492  b,  493; 
root  aor.  opt.  504,  prec. 
504;  s- aor.  522,  sj.  523, 
opt.  525,  pt.  527;  zif-aor. 
529,  opt.  532;  ft.  537,  539; 
des.  542,  pt.  544;  pp.  573; 
inf.  585,  1,  7;  gd.  591  a. 
sa/id  ‘with’  prep,  with  inst. 

622;  in  compounds  656. 
sahdsrapad -  ‘thousand- footed’, 
319  a. 

\'sa-  ‘bind’,  pr.  430,  impv. 
434,  impf.  436;  root  aor. 
sj.  502,  opt.  504,  impv. 

lndo-arische  Philologie.  I.  4. 


505;  a-aor.  opt.  51 1 ;  cs.  sj. 
559  b;  pp.  574,  3;  inf. 
584  a;  gd.  591  a. 
sdkam  ‘with’,  prep.  with.  inst. 

623. 

]/sadk-  ‘succeed’,  pr.  422,  inj. 
424,  impv.  426,  pt.  427, 
red.  aor.  sj.  515,  inj.  516. 
\/si-  ‘bind’,  476,  impv.  478; 
pf.  485,  sj.  487;  root  aor. 
impv.  505;  inf.  585,  4. 

I /sic-  ‘pour’,  pr.  422,  430,  sj. 

43 b  inj-  4 32,  opt.  433, 
impv.  434,  pt.  435,  impf. 
436;  pf.  485;  a-aor.  508; 

ps.  445,  pt.  447,  impf. 
448;  pp.  573;  gd.  591  a. 

]/ 1,  sidh-  ‘repel’,  pr.  422, 
impv.  426,  pt.  427,  impf. 
428;  pf.  485;  intv.  545,  I, 
Pt-  548;  gd.  591  a. 

1/2-  sidh -  ‘succeed’,  pr.  439. 
sTda-,  present  base  of  sad-  ‘sit’, 
p  57  note  8. 

ysTv-  ‘sew’,  pr.  impv.  44 1, 

pt.  442;  pp.  573  «;  gd. 
591  a. 

su  ‘well’,  adv.  particle,  as 
first  member  of  compounds, 
251,  658. 

\su-  ‘press’,  pr.  430,  470, 
sj.  471,  impv.  472,  pt. 

473;  pf-  485,  pt.  492,  493; 
root  aor.  impv.  505,  pt. 
506;  ps.  445,  inj.  446,  aor. 
501;  gdv.  581;  inf.  585,  4, 
587  b. 

sum  ad  ‘with’,  prep.  with,  inst., 

624. 

susvaya-  den.,  inj.  569  b. 
\sii-  ‘generate’,  pr.  430,  451, 
sj-  43b  inj-  452,  impv.  434, 
Pt-  435,  455-  impf.  43b, 
456;  pf.  482  b  I,  485;  red. 
aor.  514;  zk-aor.  529,  sj. 
530,  inj.  531;  ft.  537,  pt. 
538;  intv.  545,  I,  546; 
inf.  585,  4,  5. 

ysud-  ‘put  in  order’,  pf.  485, 
sj.  487;  red.  aor.  514, 
impv.  518;  cs.  554  a,  sj. 
559  b. 

\sr-  ‘flow’,  pr.  458,  impv. 
426,  460,  pt.  461;  pf.  485, 
pt.  492,  493;  a-aor.  508; 
J- aor.  sj.  523;  ft.  537,  539, 
pt.  538;  intv.  545,  2,  546, 
pt.  548;  cs.  557  c;  inf. 
585,  4,  5- 

\srj-  ‘emit’,  pr.  422,  430,  sj. 
431,  inj.  432,  opt.  433, 
impv.  434,  pt.  427,  435, 
impf.  436;  pf.  485,  opt. 
489,  Pt.  493;  plnp-  495  5 
root  aor.  500;  j-aor,  522, 
sj-  523,  inj-  524;  ps.  445>  I 


pt.  447,  aor.  501 ;  pp.  573; 
gd.  591  a. 

\srp-  ‘creep’,  pr.  422,  sj. 
423,  inj.  424,  impv.  426, 
pt.  427,  impf.  428;  a-aor. 
5°8,  inj.  510;  des.  542, 
Pt-  ,544;  gd.  591  a. 
sendrii -,  inflected,  376. 
ysev-  ‘attend  upon’,  pr.  422, 
impv.  426. 

\skand-  ‘leap’,  pr.  422,  sj. 
423,  impv.  426,  pt.  427, 
impf.  428;  pf.  485;  root 
aor.  499,  inj.  503;  intv. 

545,  3,  547,  impf.  549;  PP- 
576  a;  inf.  584  b,  587  a. 
yskabh-  or  skarnbh-  ‘prop’, 
pr.  476,  pt.  479;  pf.  482, 

485,  Pt-  493;  PP-  575  b; 
inf.  584  b;  gd.  590  a. 
skabhdya-  den.,  impf.  569  f. 
\sku-  ‘tear’,  pr.  470;  intv. 
545.  b  55t- 

\skr-  =  kr-  ‘make’,  p.  55 
note  io. 

]/stau-  ‘thunder’,  pr.  impv. 
426,  454;  root  aor.  inj. 
503  (or.  pr.  inj.  452);  is- 
aor.  529;  intv.  545,  2,  547  ; 
cs.  556. 

ystabh-  or  stambh-  ‘prop’,  pr. 
476,  impv.  478,  impf.  480; 
pf.  485,  pt.  492,  493;  plup. 

495  5  PP-  575  b;  gd.  590  b. 
ystu-  ‘praise’,  pr.  422,  451, 
sj.  423,  452,  inj.  424,  452, 
opt.  425,  453,  impv.  454, 
pt.  427,  455  5  impf.  456;  pf. 
4S5,  sj.  487,  pt.  492,  493; 
plup.  495;  j-aor.  522  (in¬ 
flected),  sj.  523,  inj.  524; 
ft.  537,  339;  ps-  445,  pt- 
447,  PP-  573;  gdv.  579  5 
inf.  585,  la,  4,  7;  gd. 
590  b,  591  b. 

ystubh-  ‘praise’,  pr.  422,  impv. 
426,  pt.  427. 

\str-  ‘strew’,  pr.  470,  476, 
sj.  47b  inj-  477,  impv. 
478,  pt.  479,  impf.  480;  pf. 
485,  pt.  493  ;  root  aor.  499, 
sj.  502,  inj.  503;  j--aor.  opt. 
525;  zk-aor.  529;  ps.  aor. 
501;  pp.  576  e;  inf.  584  a, 
585,  4,  588  c. 

ystha-  ‘stand’,  pr.  422,  sj. 
423,  inj.  424,  opt.  425,  impv. 
426,  pt.  427,  impf.  428; 
pf.  485,  pt.  492,  493;  root 
aor.  498  (inflected),  499, 
500,  sj.  502,  inj.  503,  opt. 
504,  impv.  505,  pt.  506; 
a-aor.  508;  red.  aor.  514, 
inj.  516;  j-acr.  inj.  524; 
ft.  539;  cs.  558,  aor.  560; 
PP-  574,  3;  gd-  591  a. 

2y 


450  I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar.  I.  Sanskrit  Index. 


\/sna-  ‘bathe’,  pr.  45 1,  impv. 
454,  pt.  455;  cs.  558;  gdv. 
581;  gd.  590  b. 

\'snih-  ‘be  moist’,  cs.  553. 
\snu-  ‘distil’,  pr.  impv.  454. 
\spas-  ‘see’,  pf.  485,  pt.  493; 

root  aor.  500;  os.  555. 
\spr-  ‘win’,  pr.  470,  sj.  471, 
impv.  472;  root  aor.  499, 
sj.  502,  inj.503,  impv.  505; 
•r  aor.  522;  inf.  585,  I ;  gd. 
590  b. 

\sprdh-  ‘contend’,  pr.  422, 
pt.  427;  pf.  485,  pt.  493; 
plup.  495;  root  aor.  500, 
pt.  506;  inf.  585,  1,  586  b; 
gd.  591  a. 

\'sprs-  ‘touch’,  pr.  430,  sj.  431, 
inj.  432,  impv.  434,  impf. 
436;  pf.  sj.  487;  red.  aor. 
SJ*  5X5,  inj.  5l6;  sa-a.or. 
536;  inf.  584  b. 

\spfh-  ‘be  eager’,  cs.  554, 
0Pt-  559  c,  gdv.  561  b, 
579- 

ysphur-  ‘jerk’,  pr.  430,  sj. 
431,  inj.  432,  impv.  434, 
pt.  435,  impf.  436. 

\sphurj-  ‘rumble’,  pr.  422; 
cs.  554  a. 

] /sphr-  ‘jerk’,  zir-aor.  inj. 

53 1- 

smad  ‘with’,  prep,  with  inst., 
625. 

\smi-  ‘smile’,  pr.  422,  inj. 

424,  pt.  427;  pf.  pt.  493- 
\'smy-  ‘remember’,  pr.  sj.  423, 

impv.  426. 

]/syand-  ‘move  on’,  pr.  422, 
impv.  426,  pt.  427 ;  pf. 
482  b  I,  485;  red.  aor.  514; 
j-aor.  522;  intv.  545,  3; 
cs.  556  a;  pp.  576  a;  inf. 
584  b,  585,  7. 

ysras-  ‘fall’,  root  aor.  66  c  2, 
499;  a- aor.  opt.  51 1;  red. 
aor.  514;  cs.  556  a;  gd. 
590  b. 

sras ,  2.  s.  j-aor.  ysrj-,  522. 
ysridh-  ‘blunder’,  pr.  422, 
impv.  426,  pt.  427,  impf. 
428;  a- aor.  inj.  510,  pt. 
512. 

ysrTv -  ‘fail’,  cs.  554  a  a. 

\sru-  ‘flow’,  pr.  422,  opt. 

425,  impv.  426,  pt.  427, 
impf.  428;  pf.  485;  red.  aor. 


514,  inj.  516;  cs.  557b; 
inf.  585,  4,  5. 

sva-  ‘own’  400,  I ;  ‘his’  etc. 
401  c. 

\svaj-  ‘embrace’,  pr.  422,  sj. 
423,  inj.  424,  impv.  426; 
pf.  485,  pt.  493;  plup.  495; 
inf.  584  b. 

svdtavas-,  44,  3,  dat.  pi.  p.  226 
note  2,  and  p.  233. 
ysvad-  and  svdd -  ‘sweeten’, 

pr.  422,  sj.  423,  impv.  426; 
red.  aor.  inj.  516;  cs.  556; 
PP-  573 

ysvati-  ‘sound’,  zV-aor.  529, 
inj-  53 1 ;  intv.  545, 3,  sj- 547 ; 
cs.  556;  cs.  pp.  575  c. 
ysvap-  ‘sleep’,  pr.  impv.  426, 

454,  Pt-  455  5  Pf-  482  b  1, 
485,  pt.  492,  493;  red.  aor. 

5 *4;  ft-  537,  539;  cs.  555; 
PP;  574;  gd.  59ob. 
svayam  ‘self  400,  2. 

\/svar-  ‘sound’,  pr.  422,  sj. 
423,  impv.  426,  impf.  428; 
pf.  inj.  488;  j-aor.  522;  cs. 
55d. 

ysvid-  ‘sweat’,  pf.  pt.  493 ; 
PP-  57d  a. 

yhan-  ‘strike’,  pr.  451,  sj.  452, 
inj.  452,  °Pt-  453,  impv. 
454,  Pt-  455  5  Pf-  485,  sj. 
487,  pt.  492;  ft.  537,  539, 
pt.  538;  des.  542,  sj.  544; 
intv.  545,  3,  546,  547,  Pt. 
548,  548  a;  ps.  445,  impv. 
446,  pt.  447,  impf.  456; 
PP-  574,2;  gdv.  581;  inf. 
585,  4,  5;  gd.  590  b,  c, 
591  b. 

yhar-  ‘be  gratified’,  pr.  439, 
sj.  440,  impv.  441,  pt.  442, 
impf.  443. 

hastin -,  inflected  333. 
y  1.  ha-  ‘leave’,  pr.  458,  sj. 
459,  opt.  459,  impv.  460, 
pt.  461,  impf.  462  ;  pf.  485; 
j-aor.  522,  inj.  524;  sis- aor. 

inj.  534;  ft-  537,  539;  cs. 
p.396  note  2;  ps.  445,  impv. 
446,  aor.  501;  pp-575  b  a, 
576  c;  gd.  590  a,  b,  c. 

]/ 2.  ha-  ‘go  forth’,  pr.  458, 
inj.  459,  impv.  460,  pt.461, 
impf.  462;  red.  aor.  inj. 
516;  j--aor.  522,  inj.  524; 


des.  542  c  I;  cs.  aor.  560; 
gd.  591  a. 

yhas-  ‘go  emulously’,  pr.  pt. 
427. 

y/zz- ‘impel’,  pr.  470,  inj.  471, 
impv.  472,  pt.  427,  473; 
root  aor.  499,  impv.  505 ; 
pt.  506;  a- aor.  508;  s-s or. 
522;  gdv.  581;  inf.  584  a. 
yhifns-  ‘injure’,  pr.  422,  464, 
impv.  466,  pt.  467;  pf.  485; 
plup.  495;  *>-a or.  inj.  531 ; 

ps.  pt.  447;  pp.  575  a  1; 
gdv.  581  a;  gd.  590  b. 

yhinv-  =  hi-  ‘impel’,  pr.  impv. 

426. 

yhid-  ‘be  hostile’,  pf.  4S2, 
485,  pt.  4935  red.  aor.  514; 
cs.  554a;  pp.  575  a  3. 
yhu-  ‘sacrifice’,  pr.  451,  45 8, 
sj-459,  opt.459,  impv.  460, 

pt.  461,  impf.  462;  ft.  537  ; 

ps.  aor.  501. 

yhii-  ‘call’,  pr.  422,  430,  451, 
458,  inj.  424,  432,  opt.  4 

33, 

pt.  427,  435,  impf.  436;  pf. 
485;  root  aor.  500,  inj.503; 
zz-aor.  50S;  j-aor.522;  intv. 
545,  4,  546,  547,  impf.  549; 

ps.  445,  pt.  447;  pp.  573; 
gdv.  578,  2;  inf.  585,  4,  7. 

yi.hr-  ‘take’,  422,  451,  sj. 
423,  opt.  425,  impv.  426, 

pt.  427,  impf.  428  ;  pf.  485  ; 
x-aor.  522;  des.  542;  inf. 

585, 1;  gd.  591  b. 

y 2.  hr-  ‘be  angry’,  pr.  476, 
inj.  477,  impv.  478,  pt. 
479- 

yhrs-  ‘be  excited’,  pr.  422, 
439,  impv.  426,  pt.  427; 
pf.  pt.  493  5  intv.  545,  2, 
547,  Pt-  548;  cs.  553  c;  pp. 
575  b- 

yhes-  ‘whinney’,  pr.  pt.  427. 
yhnu-  ‘hide’,  pr.  45 1;  gdv. 
579- 

yhn-  ‘be  ashamed’,  root  aor. 
pt:  5°6- 

yhva-  ‘call’,  pr.  439,  sj.  440, 
opt.  440,  impv.  441,  pt. 
442,  impf.  443. 
yhvy-  ‘be  or  make  crooked’, 
pr.  422,  476,  sj.  459,  inj. 

459;  pf-  485,  Pt;  493; 
red.  aor.  514,  inj.  516; 
j-aor.  inj.  524;  pp.  573  a. 


II.  GENERAL  INDEX 


Ablative:  sing.  masc.  formed 
in  two,  neuter  in  three 
ways  from  der.  //-stems  389. 

Accusative:  pi.  masc.  and 
fern,  formed  in  two  ways 
from  der.  z/-stems  389; 
appositional  642  b ;  cognate 
642  a;  of  direction  642  c; 
of  distance  and  time  642  d. 

Accentuation  83  —  HI;  aorist 
505  (root  aor.),  507  (a-aor.), 
535  (-rtf-aor.);  augment  96; 
causative  5152;  denomina¬ 
tive  562;  double  85  a,  91 
(p.  96),  105  a;  lack  of  85  b; 
irregular  monosyllabic  94, 
I  a,  368  n.  T4  (rad.  a-stems), 
362  n.  7  [ray-'),  364  c  ( dyav -, 
dyu-),  376,  p.  272  n.  10  *4 
[sirt-)',  normal  nominal 384b 
(der.  //-stems),  382  b  (radical 
/7-stems);  shift  of  22,  29 
38  d,  58  d,  107  (case-forms 
as  adverbs),  299,  319,  and 
389  (inst.  as  adv.),  31 1 
(participles  as  substantives), 
314  (nom.  neut.  of  parti¬ 
ciples  as  adv.),  374  (inst.  ad¬ 
verbs  p.264mid.),  p.  273  n.1 
(fern,  of  a-stems),  94,  2 — 4 
(oxytones),  377, 3  a  and  378 
(der.  /"-stems),  380  (der.  i- 
stemsl,  388c  (der.  z/-stems\ 
94,  I  (monosyllabic  stems), 
334  b  (dp-),  364  c  (div-), 

93  a  a  (cardinals);  systems 
of  84. 

Adjectives:  fern,  of  299  (ahc- 
stems),  3  26  a  n.  ^(rtTz-stems), 
330a  (z/zz/z-stems),  332  note9 
(///-stems),  345  (^a/z/j-stems), 
347  (z/azz/j-stems),  375  a, 
p.  270  (4/a-stems),  377,  I 
(various  stems),  388^  ( u - 
stems). 

Adverbs:  two  classes  626; 
formed  from  nouns  442  a, 
643  a,  643b,  from  pronouns 
642  d  /?,  643  c,  from  nume¬ 
rals  634;  multiplicative  638; 
miscellaneous  640;  of  man¬ 
ner  632;  of  time  639;  with 


the  case-ending  of  the  abl. 
644  b,  of  the  acc.  642, 
642  a,  642  d /?,  of  the  dat. 
644  a,  of  the  gen.  644  c, 
of  the  instr.  372  (p.  257), 
374  (p.  264),  374  (f.  pi. 

p.  2 67),  of  the  loc.  643, 
644  d,  of  the  nom.  641. 

Alternative  nominal  stems 

_  253,  318  a  4,  328  c,  332  a. 

Amredita  compounds  257,  6, 
258,  3L9  (P-  198  note  5); 
accentuation  of  88;  Sandhi 
in  57  b  y,  78,  1  c. 

Anudatta  accent  83,  84. 

Anunasika  for  final  n  77  1  b, 
77,  2  d. 

Anus  vara  for  ///  75>  2,  3,  for  n 
77,  2  a  b  c;  in  the  intensive 
reduplicative  syllable  60b. 

Aoristic  s :  added  to  present 
stem  521  a  2;  lost  520  a  4, 
529  a. 

Archaic  Sandhi  in  compounds 

81. 

Aspirates :  two  in  the  same 
syllable  avoided  32,  40  a. 

Assimilation:  of  j  53,  57,  78; 
of  final  consonants  74;  of 
final  /  to  /  and  palatals  76, 
I,  2;  of  final  media  to 
following  nasal  74  a;  final 
m  to  following  mutes  75,2, 
to  y  lv  75,  4. 

Attraction  with  the  dative  and 
ablative  infinitive  583,  587. 

Augment  413;  lengthened  I 
413;  dropped  413b;  irre¬ 
gular  Sandhi  of  413  a. 

Breathing /£:  represents  sonant 
aspirates,  guttural,  palatal, 
cerebral,  dental,  labial  58 ; 
when  final  becomes  k  or  t 
66  b  6  'b,  351  b. 

Case-endings,  normal  295  c. 

Case-forms:  as  adverbs  (treat¬ 
ed  in  the  order  of  the  cases) 
641 — 644;  strong  and  weak 
295  d,  297,  298,  301,  313, 
315,  323,  325,  326b,  328b, 


330  b,  334  a,  336  a,  338, 
339  a,  341  a,  343  a,  344 
(p.  230  note  6),  345,  347, 

349  a,  351a,  354  a,  356, 
363,  380  a. 

Causative  stem:  nominal  deri¬ 
vatives  in  -ana,  - tr ,  -a,  - alu , 
-isnu,  -Unit,  -u  561  e;  form¬ 
ed  with  suffix  -pay a  558, 
the  p  of  which  sometimes 
retained  in  the  reduplicated 

aorist  5 13  a  2. 

Cerebralization :  of//, inverbal 
forms  after  the  r  of  pre¬ 
positions  47  A  a;  after  r,  r, 
s,  in  the  second  member  of 
nominal  compounds  47  A  b, 
81,  2  e;  in  a  following  word 
47  Ac;  of  initial  t  78,2b. 

Cerebrals:  their  origin  42, 
unexplained  43  c,  47  B  c; 
Prakritic  42  b,  47  B;  re¬ 
presenting  old  palatals  43; 
/  for  final  s  66  b  6  /3,  /  and  d 
for  /  42  d;  s  for  palatal  / 

56' 

Compounds :  characteristic 

features  241,  consisting  of 
phrases  293, 3,  gender  241  a, 
Sandhi  81,  suffixes  256, 
tmesis  p.  143  (bottom),  260; 
first  member  consisting  of 
adverbs  247,  274  b,  278  c, 
289  b,  nouns  with  case- 
endings  242,  248,  275,  277, 
278  a,  280,  287,  355  (p.  242 
note  9),  368  (p.  252  notes 
2,  3>  13*  P-  253  note6),  par¬ 
ticles  251,  278  c,  284,  289  c, 
prepositions  249, 274a,  278d, 
283,  298a,  292,1,  alternative 
stems  244,  245,  present 
stems  292,  2  a,  b;  last 
member  consisting  of  alter¬ 
native  stems  253,  or  present 
stems  272. 

Conjugation:  irregularities^of 
the  //-class  421  a,  of  the 
a-class  429  a,  of  the  ya- 
class  438,  of  the  ya-c\a.ss 
(passive)  444  a,  of  the  root 
class  450  a,  of  the  redu- 

29* 


I.  Allgemeines  und  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar. 


452 


plicated  class  457  a,  of  the 
infixing  nasal  class  463*  L 
of  the  zzzz-class  469  a,  of 
the  zztf-class  47  s  a. 

Consonants  lost:  81,  2  a,  in 
final  group  66  c,  521  a; 
mute  between  nasal  and 
mute  62,  3  c;  t  between 
two  consonants  62,  3  b.  s 
between  two  mutes  355 
note  9,  520  a  4,  m  or  n  in 
the  inst.  oi-itian  stems  328  b. 

Contraction:  in  secondary 

Sandhi  70,  3 ;  in  the  per¬ 
fect  483  a  2;  in  declension 
344  (p.  229,  230,  232,^233), 
374  (gen.  pl«  of  kanya). 

Dative:  sing.  masc.  formed 
in  two,  neut.  in  three  ways, 
in  der.  u-  stems  389. 

Denominative :  with  causative 
accent  563;  formed  from 
stems  in  -a  563,  in  - a  564, 
in  -i  565,  in  -u  566,  in  • 0 
566  a,  in  consonants  567; 
formed  without  a  suffix 
568;  inflexion  569;  parti¬ 
ciples  569  e. 

Dentals:  cerebralized  42  a,  c, 
47  A;  replace  cerebral  and 
labial  44  a  3/?;  j  cerebra¬ 
lized  57,  palatalized  53  a  1, 
3,  54,  changed  to  t  44  a, 
522,  unchanged  before  r 
or  r  57,  la,  2  a  a,  un¬ 
changed  in  Amredita  com¬ 
pounds  57,  2by;  n  replaces 
m  46  d  /3,  66,  4  a;  n  before 
p  77,  2  a,  before  /  77,  2  e. 

Dissimilation  43  b  1,  b  2  p.  55 
note  8,  351  notes  5  and  6, 
469  a  1,  545,  2  a  (p.391  top). 

Dissyllabic  pronunciation 
363  a  (gtim  etc.),  364  a 
( dycim),  372  (gen.  pi.  of 
fl-stems). 

Doubling  of  final  n  77. 

Dravidian  influence  42. 

Dvandvas:  accentuation  262, 
267  note  7;  gender  264, 
266;  plural  265;  singular 
266. 

Elision:  of  final  a  before  e 
and  0  70,  2  a,  after  e  and 
0  72,  of  a  before  ending 
of  gen.  loc.  du.  372  (p. 
260  top);  of  final  vi  70, 
3  b,  75,  followed  by  con¬ 
traction  372  notes  2  and  4 
(p.  256):  of y  and  v  72,  I  b, 
73;  of  r  79,  1  b;  of  s  78,  I  b. 

Enclitics  85  b  1. 

Endings:  in  declension  295 c, 
abnormal  fern.  loc.  -jm, 


gen.  -as,  dat.  -ap  374,  385; 
in  conjugation,  -ana  2.  sing, 
impv.  475,  3,  -am  3.  sing, 
impv.  mid.  454,  -i  for  - ta 
3.  sing.  red.  aor.  p.  376 
(top),  -iran  494,  495,  529, 
-ur  3.  pi.  456,  494,  499, 
503,  -an  1.  3.  sing.  pf. 
484,  485,  -e  3.  sing.  mid. 
for  -te  422,  430,  451,  458, 
464,  476,  546,  -tana  2.  pi. 
impv.  426,  441,  454,  472, 
478,  505,  -tat  impv.  418  b, 
426,  434,  441,  454,  460, 
472,478,  5  l 8,547,559  d,  -iai 
523,  -dhi  2.  sing.  impv.  418  a, 
454,58,2  c!,  -dhva  2.  pi.  mid. 
426,  -rata  3.  pi.  mid.  425, 
-ratdm  and  -ram  3.  pi. 
impv.  454,  490,  -rate  3.  pi. 
pr.  mid.  45 1,  -rail  3.  pi. 
impf.  and  plup.  456,  494, 
■ra7ita  3.  pi.  plup.  495, 
•ram  3.  pi.  plup.  495,  root 
aor.  500,  -rire  3.  pi.  pf. 
mid.  484,  4  a,  485,  -re  3. 
pi.  mid.  pr.  451,  469  a  6, 
470,  pf.  484,  3,  4,  -hi  2. 
sing.  impv.  418  a,  454. 

Exclamations  659  a. 

Foreign  words  42,  45  b; 
47  B  c ;  52  b  g;  57,  1  ft  7. 

Future  participles  538. 

Genitive:  sing.  m.  formed  in 
two,  n.  in  three  ways,  in 
derivative  zz-stems  389. 

Gerund:  in  -ivT  590  a;  in  -tva 
590b;  in  -tvaya  590  c;  in 
-ya  and  -tya  59 1. 

Gerundive:  in  -ya  578;  in 
-dyya  579;  in  -enya  580; 
in  -tva  581,  in  -tavya  581  a; 
in  -anTya  581  b. 

Gradation  of  vowels  51;  in 
compounds  243,  255;  in 
dissyllabic  bases  27  b;  in 
suffixes  27  c. 

Guna  22;  in  z-stems  380;  in 
a-stems  388;  in  the  pr. 
stem.  421,  451,  457,  469; 
in  the  pf.  483;  in  the  root 
aor.  ps.  501  ;  in  the  a-aor. 
507  a;  in  the  j-aor.  520, 
5 23>  524;  in  the  is- aor. 
528;  in  the  cs.  553,  557; 
in  the  gdv.  578. 

Gutturals:  interchange  with 
palatals,  labials,  and  s  34; 
with  palatals  36  a,  37,  38, 
59,  41,  b  2,  43  a 4,  43  b2. 

Haplology  64,  499  (p.  367 
note  5). 

Hiatus  67,  69  a,  b,  c  (duals), 


70,  1  b,  c  ( d  -j-  i  or  r),  p.2512 
(N.  sing.  f.  d-stems),  372 
(N.  A.  n.  du.  and  L.  pi. 
a-stems),  374  a,  b  (N.  sing, 
and  L.  pi.  d-stems). 

Hybrid  form  348  (N.  pi.  pf. 
pt.). 

Imperative:  endings  of  the  2. 
3.  sing.  418. 

Infinitive:  acc.  from  roots 
586  a,  from  verbal  nouns 
in  -tn  586  b;  dat.  368,  in 
-dhyai  from  causatives  561  c, 
from  roots  584,  from  verbal 
nouns  in  -as,  - i ,  -ti,  -tu, 
- tava ,  -tya,  - dhya ,  -man, 
-van  585;  abl.  gen.,  from 
roots  587  a,  from  verbal 
nouns  in  -tu  587  b;  loc., 
from  roots  588  a,  from 
stem  in  -tar  588  b,  from 
stems  in  -san  588  c. 

Insertion  :  of  T  in  pr.  450  a  3, 
45  L  45G  in  plup.  495,  in 
j-aor.  521  a  I,  522,  in  intv. 
546,  in  reduplicative  syllable 
545;  of  y  between  vowels 
372;  of  sibilants  77,  2abc; 
of  t  77,  2  f. 

Instrumental:  sing.  m.  n. 
formed  in  two  ways  in  der. 
zz-stems  372  (also  pi.),  f.  in 
der.  fl-stems  374,  m.  n.  in 
der.  7/-stems  389,  m.  f.  in 
der.  z-stems  381. 

Interchange :  of  vowel  and 
consonant  50  b,  81  e,  469 
a  2,  542  b,  573  a;  of  r  and 
l  52  a. 

Interjections  659;  hih  com¬ 
pounded  with  \/ky-  653. 

JihvamulTya  for  final  ^  78,  2c. 

Labials  45:  b  often  in  words 
of  foreign  origin  45  b, 
interchanges  with  v  45  a  3, 
in  place  of  m  45  a  5’ 

Lengthening  of  vowels  81, 
1  d,  81,  2  f,  82  b,  224  a, 
255  b,  313*  3 1 5>  318  a  2, 
319  a,  329  (N.  A.  sing,  n.), 
344  (N.  sing.),  354  (N.sing.), 
360  (L.  sing.),  372  (I.  sing.), 
513  a  (red.  aor.),  520  a  2 
(j--aor.),  554  and  555  (cs.), 
563  a>  565  and  566  (den.). 

Locative:  sing.  m.  formed  in 
two  ways,  f.  in  four  ways, 
in  der.  z-stems  381,  m.  in 
two  ways,  n.  in  three  ways 
in  der.  zz-stems  389;  San¬ 
dhi  of  locatives  in  -i  and 
-u  71,  2  b. 

Loss  of  nasal  in  pf.  483  a  4; 


II.  General  Index. 


453 


in  zz-aor.  507;  in  s-  aor. 
520  a  3;  in  pp.  574,  2. 

Metathesis  50  b,  51c,  63;  in 
quantity  [ast/ias,  adat  etc.) 
507  a  4. 

n-  declension:  influence  on 
the  der.  2-declension  38od, 
ontheder.a-declension  371. 

Nasalization:  of  vowels  66,  1, 
7°,  I  b,  70,  2  b,  372  note  5 
(p.  256),  p.  258  note  3  and 
note  5;  of  semivowels  75, 
of  /  77,  2  e. 

Nominal  stems,  obsolete,  pre¬ 
served  in  adverbs  642  d  a. 

Nominative:  pi.  formed  in 
two  ways,  in  der.  a- de¬ 
clension  372,  in  der.  cz-de- 
clension,  374,  in  der.  z'-de- 
clension  381,  in  der.  zz-de- 
clension  389. 

Onomatopoetic  words  52  f, 
659  b;  in  compounds  251, 
5>  650. 

Palatals:  two  series  35;  new 
palatals  36,  37,  38;  old 
palatals  40  (ch\  41  (/); 
new  palatals  revert  to 
gutturals,  in  pf.  482  d  2, 
492,  495,  in  root  aor. 

500  note  '9  (p.  367),  indes. 
5420a;  cbecomesi  66b2; 
j  becomes  k  or  /  66  b  2; 
s  replaces  j-  54  a,  becomes 
k  before  s  54  b,  349  b,  be¬ 
comes  s  before  t  th  42  a, 
56  a,  becomes  d  before  bh 
349  b. 

Parallelism,  form  due  to, 
327  (p  206  note  3),  354  c, 
ndkta,  N.  A.  du.  372, 

Particles:  three  groups  645; 
a -,  sa-,  dus -,  sn-  as  first 
members  of  compounds 
655—658. 

Participial  forms  compounded 
with  substantives  used  ad¬ 
verbially  654. 

Passive:  present  system  444 
— 448;  aorist  501 ;  past 
participle  formed  with  -ta 
572  —  575.  with  -na  576. 

Perfect:  irregularities  in  the 
root  483  a;  subjunctive  487, 
injunctive  488,  optative 
489,  imperative  490. 

Pragrhya  vowels:  T,  u  69  c, 
7l>  2;  72,  2,  374  (du.  f. 

of  a-stems),  0  72,  3. 

Prakritic  words  42  b,  47  B. 

Precative  417,  489,  504,  5 II, 

5 1 7»  525. 


Prepositions:  two  classes 

592;  adverbial,  not  com¬ 
pounded  with  verbs  593. 
adnominal,  used  with  cases, 
594;  accentuation  102,  103, 
105,  1 10  (p.  107). 

Pronominal  declension:  in¬ 
fluence  on  nominal  371. 

Reduction  of  final  a  to  i  26, 

483  b,  484  a  I,  of  medial 

d  to  i  507  a  I,  574,  3,  576  c. 

Reduplicated  aorist  connected 

with  the  causative  513. 

Reduplication  37  e;  aorist 
513;  rhythmic  rule  515  a; 
intensive  60b,  545;  perfect 
62,  482,  vowel  lengthened 
482,  irregular  482  d,  sylla¬ 
ble  an-  482  c  a,  syllable 
lost  482  e,  rhythmic  rule 

484  a  4  note  T,  note  2. 

Rhotacism  51a,  52  a. 

Samprasarana  22,  23,  24, 

326  b,  482  b  I,  483  a  I,  (cs.) 

554;  (pp  )  574-  575- 

Sandhi  31,  2,  38  c,  46  d  a, 
47  A;  duplicate  forms 
67  b;  initial  n  cerebra- 
lized  47  A  c;  54  a  (i  for 
s),  57  Gy  Ior  s)i  58  and 
80  b  (h  aspirated),  59  and 
74  note  5  (  /  for  d),  62{av), 
62,  I  (final  group  of  con¬ 
sonants). 

Semivowels  y  and  v  pronoun¬ 
ced  as  iy  and  ttv  48  a, 
with  a  syllabic  value  48  b, 
lost  62;  y  inserted  be¬ 
tween  vowels  49  a,  inter¬ 
changes  with  v  49  c ;  v 
interchanges  with  b  and  y 
50  a;  final  r  66,  5,  indi¬ 
cated  in  the  Padapatha 
66  b  note  l0,  becomes  s  or 
s  79,  2  b,  c,  lost  62,  4;  / 
gradually  increases  at  the 
cost  of  r  52  a,  in  foreign 
words  52  g,  /  for  d  in  the 
later  Samhitas  52  d,  for  d 
52  e,  final  l  66  b  5  note  9. 

Shortening  of  vowels  81,  2  g 
{a,  t),  70,  1  b  and  p.  259 
note  7  (a  before  r\  327  ( a 
in  zz«-stems),  352  {-sah-\ 
360  (du.  of  -bar  stems), 
362  b  {ray-),  369  (radical 
a),  372  (dual  a),  378  (dual 
T),  p.  277  note  4  {nan-),  381 
(f  of  n.  pi.). 

Sibilant  lost:  initial  and  final/ 
and/62,  2,  78  e2, 3,  81,2a 
— c;  s  and  s  between  mutes 
62,3,  355  note  9;  s  before 


voiced  dental  62,  4  b,  ce- 
rebralized  before  loss  62, 
4  c;  palatal  spirant  (z) 
before  d,  dh  62,  4  d. 

Strong  forms:  in  declension 
295  d  ;  in  conjugation  449, 

483,  494.  498,  5OI>  520.  528. 

Subjunctive  414. 

Suffixes:  primary  nominal 

113  a  (list);  secondary  no¬ 
minal  190  (list);  adverbial 
627  —  640. 

Supplementary  stems  in  de¬ 
clension  315,  326c,  330  c, 
339  b,  343  b,  357,  362  a. 

Svarita  accent  83,  84;  in 
Sandhi  108. 

Syncope  25,  1 — 3,  324  (-han-), 
325-  327,  328b;  483*3 
(pf.),  513  a  4  (red.  aor.), 

542  c  2  (des.),  548  a  (intv.). 

Transfer  forms:  in  declension 
313  note  5,  315,  316  (p.  196 
note  4),  317  note  7,  note  ”, 
318  a  5,  326 d,  33od,  334  c, 
3 '9  c,  341  b,  343  c,  349  c, 

351  354b,  364b,  375  aa, 

378  (p.  275  notes  and  276 
bottom),  380  c,  381  (f.  D. 
Ab.  G.  L.  sing.\  384  c, 
388  d,  389  (G.  sing,  m., 
I.  du.);  in  conjugation: 

421  a  4,  429a  3,  4,  457  *  8, 
463,2,  469  a  7,  475  a4,  495, 
499  note”  (p.  367),  507  a4 
{a- aor.). 

Transfer  stems  in  compounds 
254- 

Udatta  accent  83,  84. 

Unreduplicated  perfect  forms 
482  e,  492  b. 

Upadhmanlya  for  final  ^78)^  c 

Visarjanlya  for  final  dental  s 
66,  6  a,  78.  I  c—  e ;  for  final 
r  79,  2  a,  d. 

Vocative:  accentuation  93,109; 
formed  with  -mas  and  -vas 
from  -mant,  -mams  and  -vant 
stems  315,  316,  340,  with 
-vas  from  -van  and  -vams 
stems  331,  348,  with  -yas 
from  -yarns  stems  346 ; 
final  vowel  gunated  in  i- 
stems38i,  and  zz-stems  3S9. 

Vowels:  e  for  original  as 
15  b  I,  62,  4  b;  lost  25, 
26  a,  563  c,  564  a. 

Vrddhi  22  a,  25  B,  483  (pf.), 
501  (ps.  aor.),  520  (r-aor.), 
524,  528,  557  (cs.),  578,  2 
(gdv.). 

Weak  forms  for  strong  348. 


CONTENTS. 


INTRODUCTION  ....  page  1—5 
General  scope  of  this  work  I.  —  Verbal 
Authenticity  of  the  Texts  2. 

I.  PHONOLOGY  ....  page  5—59 
Ancient  pronunciation  3.  —  The  sounds 
of  the  Vedic  Language  4.  —  I.  The  simple 
Vowels  6 — 14.  —  2.  The  Diphthongs  15  — 
16.  — Lengthening  of  Vowels  17.  —  Loss 
of  Vowels  18.  —  Contraction  19.  —  Hiatus 
20.  —  Vowel  Gradation  22 — 29.  —  The 
Consonants  30—47:  Doubling  of  Con¬ 
sonants  30.  —  Modes  of  Articulation  31.  — 
Loss  of  Aspiration  32.  —  Aspirates  in  con¬ 
tact  with  other  Mutes  33.  —  The  five 
Classes  of  Mutes  34 — 45  :  1.  Gutturals  34.  — 

2.  Palatals  35— 38.  —  Irregular  Palatalization 
39.  —  Old  Palatals  40 — 41.  —  3.  Cerebrals 
42 — 43.  —  4.  Dentals  44.  —  5.  Labials 
45.  —  Nasals  46.  —  Cerebral  n  47.  — 
Semivowels48 — 52.  —  Sibilants  53 — 57.  — 
The  Breathing  h  58.  —  Cerebral  L  59.  — 
Anusvara  and  Anunasika  60. — Voiceless 
Spirants  61.  —  Loss  of  Consonants  62.  — 
Metathesis  63.  —  Syllable  64. 

II.  EUPHONIC  COMBINATION  (SANDHI) 

page  59-76. 

Nature  of  Vedic  Sandhi  65.  —  Finals  in 
pausa  66.  —  Rules  of  Sandhi  67.  — 
Lengthening  of  Final  Vowels  68.  —  Con¬ 
traction  of  Similar  Vowels  69.  —  Con¬ 
traction  of  a  with  Dissimilar  Vowels  70.  — 
Final  1  and  u  before  Dissimilar  Vowels 
71.  —  Final  e  and  0  72.  —  The  Diphthongs 
ai  and  au  73.  —  Sandhi  of  Consonants 
74.  —  Sandhi  of  Final  m  75;  of  Final  t 
76;  of  Final  n  77;  of  Final  j-  78;  of  Final 
r  79.  • —  Initial  Aspiration  80.  —  Sandhi 
of  Compounds  81.  —  Extension  of  External 
to  Internal  Sandhi  82. 

III.  ACCENT . page  76  — 107 

General  Character  of  the  Vedic  Accent 

83.  —  Methods  of  Marking  the  Accent 

84.  —  Normal  Accent,  Double  Accent, 
Lack  of  Accent  85.  —  1.  Accentuation  of 
Nominal  Stems  86.  —  2.  Accentuation  of 
Compounds  87:  of  Iteratives  88;  of  Go¬ 
verning  Compounds  89;  of  Possessives  90' 
of  Determinatives  91 ;  of  Copulatives  92.  — 

3.  Accent  inDeclension  93 — 94.  — 4.  Verbal 
Accent  95 — 101.  —  5.  Accent  of  Nominal 
Verbforms  102 — 107.  —  6.  Accent  inSandhi 
108.  —  7.  Sentence  Accent  109 — III. 


IV.  NOMINAL  STEM  FORMATION 

page  107— 143. 
Primary  and  Secondary  Suffixes  112.  — 

1.  Primary  Nominal  Derivation:  Action 

Nouns  and  Agent  Nouns  113.  —  1.  Pri¬ 
mary  Nominal  Suffixes  1 14 — 189.  — 

2.  Secondary  Nominal  Derivation:  Form 
and  Meaning  190.  —  Secondary  Nominal 
Suffixes  191  —  240. 

V.  COMPOUNDS  .  .  .  page  143-178 

Form  of  Compounds  241.  —  A.  First  Mem¬ 
ber  of  Compounds  242 — 251.  —  B.  Last 
Member  of  Compounds  252 — 256.  —  Classi¬ 
fication  of  Compounds  257:  1.  Iteratives 
258.  —  2.  Copulatives  (Dvandvas)  259 — 
268.  — ■  3.  Determinatives  269 — 284.  — 

4.  Possessives  (Bahuvrlhis)  285 — 291.  — 

5.  Governing  Compounds  292.  —  6.  Syn¬ 
tactical  Compounds  293. 

VI.  DECLENSION.  .  .  page  178—312. 

General  Character  294.  —  I.  Nouns  295.  — 
A.  Consonant  Stems  296 — 365.  —  1.  Pala¬ 
tal  Stems  297 — 303.  —  2.  Cerebral  Stems 
304.  —  3.  Dental  Stems  305 — 333:  Stems 
in  -t  306 — 308.  —  Derivate  Stems  in  -vat, 
-tat,  -it,  -tit  and  secondary  -t  309 — 310.  — 
Participial  Stems  in  -at  and-<2«/3H — 314. — 
Stems  in  -inant  and  - vant  315 — 316.  — 
Stems  in  Radical  -ih  317.  —  Stems  in  -d 
318 — 320.  —  Stems  in  • dh  321 — 322.  — 
Stems  in  Radical  -n  323 — 324.  —  Deri¬ 
vative  Stems  in  -an,  -man,  -van  325 — 331.  — 
Stems  in  -in,  -min,  -vin  332 — 333.  — 
4.  Labial  Stems  334 — 338.  —  5.  Stems  in 
Sibilants  339 — 350:  in  Radical  -s  and  -s 
339 — 34°»  in  Derivative  -is  and  -us  341  — 
342,  in  Derivative  -as  343 — 344,  in  -yams 
345 — 346,  in  -z tarns  347 — 348,  in  Radical 
-s  349 — 350.  —  6.  Stems  in  Radical  h 
351 — 352.  —  7.  Stems  in  Semivowels 
353— 365:  in  Radical  -r  354— 355,  in  Deri¬ 
vative  -ar  and  -tar  356 — 360,  in  -y  (-ay)  and 
-v  (-av  and  -5^)361 — 365.  —  B.  Vowel  Stems 
366 — 389.  —  1  a.  Stems  in  Radical  -a  367 — 
368.  —  1  b.  Stemsin Radical  -a  369 — 370.  — 
2  a.  Stems  in  Derivative  -a  371 — 372.  — - 

2  b.  Stems  in  Derivative  -a  373 — 374.  — 

3  a.  Stems  in  Radical  -I  375 — 376.  — 

3  b.  Stems  in  Derivative  -7  377 — 378.  — 

4  a.  Stems  in  Radical  -i  379.  —  4  b.  Stems 
in  Derivative  -i  380 — 381.  —  5  a.  Radical 
-ti  stems  382 — 383.  —  5  b.  Derivative 


456  I.  Allgemeines  un d  Sprache.  4.  Vedic  Grammar.  Contents. 


-u  stems  384 — 385.  —  6  a.  Radical  -u 
stems  386 — 387.  —  6  b.  Derivative  -u 
stems  388 — 389. 

II.  Pronouns  390 — 403:  1.  Personal  391. — 

2.  Demonstrative  392 — 396.  —  3.  Inter¬ 

rogative  397.  —  4.  Relative  398.  —  5.  In¬ 
definite  399.  —  6.  Reflexive  400.  — 

7.  Possessive  401.  —  8.  Pronominal  Deri¬ 
vatives  and  Compounds  402.  —  9.  Pro¬ 
nominal  Adjectives  403. 

III.  Numerals  404—409.  —  A.  Cardinals 
405 — 407.  —  B.  Ordinals  408.  —  C.  Nu¬ 
meral  Derivatives  409. 

VII.  THE  VERB  .  .  .  page  312 — 414 

General  Characteristics  410.  —  A.  The 
Finite  Verb  411 — 570.  —  Personal  Endings 
412.  —  The  Augment  413.  —  Formation 
of  the  Moods:  Subjunctive  414,  Injunctive 
415,  Optative  416,  Precative  417,  Impera¬ 
tive  418. 

I.  The  Present  System  419—480.  — 
Characteristics  419.  —  a.  First  or  a-Con- 
jugation  420 — 448:  Characteristics  420.  — 

1.  The  Radically  accented  a-Class  ( bhdva -) 
421 — 428.  —  2.  The  Suffixally  accented 
fl-Class  {(icda-)  429 — 436.  —  3.  The  ya- 
Class  43 7:  A.  The  Radically  accented ya- 
Class  438—443.  —  B.  The  Suffixally 

accented  9/tf-Ciass  (Passive)  444 — 448. 
b.  The  Second  or  Graded  Conjugation 
449 — 480.  —  a  1.  The  Root  Class  450 — 
456.  —  a  2.  The  Reduplicating  Class  457  — 
462.  —  (J  1.  The  Infixing  Nasal  Class  463  — 
468.  —  2.  The  ?z«-Class  469 — 474.  — 

3.  The  «a-Class  475—480. 
il.  The  Perfect  System  481  —  496.  — 
Characteristics  481.  —  1.  The  Reduplica¬ 
tive  Syllable  482.  —  2.  The  Root  483.  — 

3.  The  Endings  484.  —  Perfect  Indicative 
485.  —  Moods  of  the  Perfect  486 — 490.  — 
Perfect  Participle  491—493. —  Pluperfect 
494—495.  —  Periphrastic  Perfect  496. 


III.  The  Aorist  System  497—536.  — 
Characteristics  497.  —  1.  Simple  Aorist: 

A.  Root  Aorist  498 — 506;  B.  a- Aorist  507  — 
512.  —  2.  Reduplicated  Aorist  513 — 518. — 

3.  Sigmatic  Aorist  519:  A.  1.  The  s- Aorist 
520 — 527.  —  A.  2.  The  A-Aorist  528 — 
533.  —  A.  3.  The  j-A-Aorist  534.  —  B.  The 
jtf-Aorist  535— 536. 

IV.  The  Future  System  537 — 540.  — 
Formation  of  the  Stem  537.  —  Subjunctive, 
Conditional,  Participles  538.  —  Indicative 
539.  —  Periphrastic  Future  540. 

V.  Secondary  Conjugation  541 — 570. — 
1.  Desiderative  542 — 544.  —  2.  Intensive 
545— 551-.—  3-  Causative  552—561.  — 

4.  Denominative  562  —  570. 

B.  Nominal  Verb  Forms  571  — 59 1  *  — 

Characteristics  571.  —  a.  Past  Passive 
Participles  572 — 576.  —  b.  Future  Passive 
Participles  (Gerundives)  577  —  581.  —  c.  In¬ 
finitive  582 — 588:  1.  Dative  Infinitive 

583 — 585.  —  2.  Accusative  Infinitive  586. — 

3.  Ablative-Genitive  Infinitive  5^7-  — 

4.  Locative  Infinitive  588.  —  d.  Gerund 
5s9  —  59i- 

VIII.  INDECLINABLES  .  page  414-432. 

1.  Prepositions  592 — 625 :  A.  Adverbial 
Prepositions  593  —  608.  —  B.  Adnominal 
Prepositions  609  —  625. 

2.  Adverbs  6 26 — 644:  A.  Adverbial  Suffixes 
(in  alphabetical  order)  627 — 640.  —  B.  Ad¬ 
verbial  Case-forms  (in  the  order  of  the 
cases)  641  —  644. 

3.  Particles  645 — 658:  emphatic  6j6,  con¬ 
junctional  647,  negative  648.  —  a.  Ad¬ 
verbial  Words  in  Compounds  649 — 658. 

4.  Interjections  659. 

Addenda  and  Corrigenda  .  .  page  433 

List  of  Abbreviations  ...  „  43^ 

Sanskrit  Index . ,>437 

General  Index . „  45 1 

Table  of  Contents  ....  »  455 


The  printing  was  commenced  in  May,  1907,  and 
afterwards  delayed  by  the  death  of  the  editor 
Prof.  Kielhorn. 


. 


* 


. 


* 


PS.  Macdonell,  Arthur  Anthony 

*35  Vedic  grammar 

M2 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 


UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


