i 


9 


THE  LIFE  AND  LETTERS 

OF 

THE  RIGHT  HONOURABLE 

FRIEDRICH  MAX  MULLER 


^•^CKHAf  ■•  ^CdCa   ^  ^,^u£.'ruj£/ia .  Uux<^^Ul, 


-««^<it^^i&«ii.  S5t.  elf.. 


THE  LIFE  AND  LETTERS 


OF 


THE   RIGHT   HONOURABLE 


FRIEDRICH  MAX  MULLER 


EDITED  BY  HIS  WIFE 


*  Blessed  is  he  who  has  found  his  work :  let  him  ask  no  other  blessedness' 

Cari.yle 

/ 

IN  TWO  VOLUMES:   VOL.  I 


WITH  PORTRAITS  AND  OTHER  ILLUSTRATIONS 


LONGMANS,    GREEN,   AND    CO. 

39  PATERNOSTER  ROW,  LONDON 

NEW  YORK  AND  BOMBAY 

1902 


All  rights  reserved 


1H02  - 

688058, 


DEDICATED 

TO    THE 

BELOVED   MEMORY 

OF    A 

GREAT  AND   GOOD   MAN 


PREFACE 

It  may  be  thought  that  the  publication  of  these 
volumes  is  superfluous  after  the  two  works  A^ild 
Lang  Syjte  and  the  Autobiography,  written  by  Max 
MuUer  himself.  But  it  seemed  that  something  more 
was  wanted  to  show  the  innermost  character  of  the 
real  man ;  for  AiUd  Lang  Syne  gave  recollections  of 
his  friends  only,  'a  small  portion  of  the  panorama  of 
life  that  passed  before '  his  eyes ;  and  the  Autobio- 
graphy is  but  a  fragment,  bringing  us  little  beyond  the 
threshold  of  his  career.  The  plan  pursued  throughout 
these  volumes  has  been  to  let  Max  Muller's  letters 
and  the  testimony  of  friends  to  his  mind  and  character 
speak  for  themselves,  whilst  the  whole  is  connected 
by  a  slight  thread  of  necessary  narrative.  The  selec- 
tion from  the  letters  has  been  made  with  a  view  to 
bring  the  man  rather  than  the  scholar  before  the 
world.  His  innumerable  works,  covering  a  period  of 
nearly  sixty  years,  have  made  known  the  scholar ;  the 
object  of  this  book  is  to  show  '  the  elevation  of  soul 
and  enlargement  of  mental  outlook  which  was  revealed 
more  and  more  as  his  life's  work  opened  up  before 
him  ^ ' — that  work  which  he  carried  on  to  within  ten 
days  of  his  death. 

It  is  a  matter  of  regret  that  much  valuable  corre- 
spondence has  been  destroyed.  In  America  no 
letters   have   been  preserved  to   Emerson  or  Oliver 

^  Funeral  Sermon. — Rev.  H.  J.  Bidder. 


viii  Preface 

Wendell  Holmes,  and  only  one  to  Lowell.  In  England 
the  letters  to  Carlyle,  Sellar,  Froude,  Sir  A.  Grant, 
and  other  intimate  friends  have  been  burnt.  In 
Germany  all  to  Humboldt  are  gone,  and  all  except 
a  few  trifling  notes  to  the  brothers  Curtius,  to  Carriere, 
Mommsen,  and  others.  Ill  France  none  have  been 
found  to  Stanislas  Julien,  to  Regnier,  or  Barthdlemy- 
St.-Hilaire.  From  Italy,  too,  no  letters  have  been 
recovered.  The  corresponding  letters  from  these 
distinguished  men  show  how  much  of  deep  interest 
to  the  public  has  been  lost. 

I  here  desire  to  express  my  grateful  thanks  to  many 
friends  and  relatives  who  have  helped  me  in  my  task, 
especially  to  Mrs.  Rowland  Corbet  and  Miss  Mabel 
Peach,  who  have  translated  and  copied  innumerable 
letters  for  me  ;  to  the  many  known  and  unknown  in 
all  quarters  of  the  globe  who  responded  to  my  petition 
for  letters ;  and  I  am  also  greatly  indebted  to  Messrs. 
Hills  and  Saunders  for  the  use  of  the  Photographs 
which  illustrate  the  work. 

If  at  times  I  have  found  the  labour  almost  beyond 
my  powers,  it  has  been  a  labour  of  love,  bringing 
strength  and  solace  to  many  lonely  hours.  As  Mr. 
Mozoomdar  writes  to  me,  '  The  most  heavenly  relation 
here  is  the  relation  between  the  living  and  the  dear 
dead.  We  cannot  draw  them  down  to  us,  but  they 
continually  draw  us  to  them.' 

GEORGINA  MAX  MULLER. 

Ightham  Mote, 

September,  1902. 


CONTENTS 

CHAPTER  I. 

1823-1841.  PAGES 

Parentage.  Father's  death.  Dessau.  Musical  training.  School. 
Poetical  tendencies.  Nicolai  School,  Leipzig.  Dr.  Carus.  Music. 
Letters  to  his  mother.     Examination  at  Zerbst    ....     1-15 

CHAPTER  IL 

1841-1844. 
University  life  at  Leipzig.    Studies.    Sanskrit.    Friends.    University 
life    at    Berlin.      Hensels.      Lectures.      Hagedom.      Humboldt, 
Bunsen 16-29 

CHAPTER  in. 

1845-1846. 
Paris.       Lonely,    struggling    life.      Gathy.       Burnouf.      Rig-veda. 
Rachel.    Dvarkanath  Tagore.    Boehtlingk       ....     30-47 

CHAPTER  IV. 
1846-1847. 
London.      W.  H.  Russell.      Bunsen.       Visit  to  Germany.      East 
India  Company  and  the  Rig-veda.    British  Association   .        .    48-69 

CHAPTER  V. 
1848. 
Visit  to  Paris.      Revolution.      Settles  at  Oxford.     Friends  there. 
Letters  to  Burnouf  and  Bunsen 70-86 

CHAPTER  VI. 
1849. 
Death  of  sister's  children.    Froude.     Visit  to  Lakes.     Prix  Volney. 
Publication    of   first    volume    of   Rig-veda.      Carus.      Visit    to 
Germany 87-105 

CHAPTER  Vn. 
1850-1851. 
Dinner  at  Potsdam.  Morier's  illness.  Return  to  Oxford.  Ranch. 
Waagen.  Appointed  to  lecture  at  Oxford.  Letters  from  Pro- 
fessors Cowell  and  Story-Maskelyne.  Visit  to  Froude.  Article 
in  Edinburgh  Review.  Made  Deputy  Professor  and  Honorary 
M.A 106-128 


X  Contents 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

1852-1853. 

PAGES 
Member  of  Bavarian  Academy.     Summer  in  Germany.     The  George 
Butlers.   Arrival  and  baptism  of  Dr.  Aufrecht.    Essay  on  Turanian 
Languages  for  Bunsen.     Visit  to   Scotland.     First  meeting  with 
future  wife.     Missionary  Alphabet 129-148 

CHAPTER  IX. 

1854-1855. 

Professor  of  Modern  Languages.  Second  volume  of /?z^-z/^<^a.  Death 
of  Burnouf.  Crimean  War.  Languages  of  the  Seat  of  War. 
Bunsen's  resignation.  Nehemiah  Goreh.  Visit  to  Germany. 
Froude.  Kingsley.  Macaulay.  Visit  to  Malvern.  Indian  Civil 
Service  Examinations.  Paris.  Dresden.  M.A.  by  decree. 
Renan 149-174 

CHAPTER  X. 

1856-1857. 

Comparative  Mythology.  Commemoration.  His  mother  in  England. 
Vol.  Ill  oi  Rig-veda.  Curator  of  Bodleian.  Christmas  at  Glasgow. 
Deutsche  Liebe,  Buddhist  Pilgrims.  Examination  at  Exeter. 
Visit  to  Froude.     Germany.     Manchester  Exhibition    .        .     175-203 

CHAPTER  XL 

1858-1859. 

Letters  of  Philindus.  Canterbury.  German  Classics.  Fellow  of 
All  Souls.  Jenny  Lind.  Birmingham  Festival.  Correspondent 
of  French  Institute.  Death  of  Manuel  Johnson.  Ancient  Sanskrit 
Literature.  Marriage.  Germany.  Life  at  Oxford.  Mother's 
illness.     Correspondent  of  Turin  Academy     ....     204-230 

CHAPTER  XII. 

1860-1861. 

Mother's  illness.  Death  of  Wilson.  Move  to  High  Street.  Sanskrit 
election.  Birth  of  first  child.  Wife's  illness.  Spring  at  Ray 
Lodge.  Lectures  on  the  '  Science  of  Language.'  Visit  from  his 
mother.     Death  of  Prince  Consort 231-257 


Contents  xi 

CHAPTER  XIII 

1862-1863.  PAGES 

Birth  of  second  child.  Exhibition.  Stay  in  London.  Ewald. 
Ranke.  Fourth  volume  of  Rig-veda.  Second  course  of  lectures  on 
'  Science  of  Language.'  Paris.  Germany.  North  Italy.  Lectures 
at  Edinburgh.     First  visit  to  Windsor 258-286 

CHAPTER  XIV. 
1864- 1865. 
Lectures  at  Osborne.    Schleswig-Holstein  war.     Birth  of  third  child. 
Member  of  Royal  Irish  Academy.    Weymouth.    Visit  of  his  mother. 
Lecture  at  Leeds.     Member  of  Turin  Academy.     Last  visit  to  Ray 
Lodge.     Sub-Librarianship  of  Bodleian 287-313 

CHAPTER  XV. 
1866-1867. 
Easter  in  Paris.  Sanskrit  Gramtnar.  War  between  Prussia  and 
Austria.  Cornwall.  '  My  Brother.'  Gold  medal  from  Duke  of 
Anhalt.  Illness.  Bournemouth.  Letter  on  Brahma  Somaj. 
Death  of  niece.  *  Parks  End '  bought.  Cure  at  Ems.  Chips, 
Vols.  I  and  II v        .        .        .     314-343 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

I 868-1 869. 

Death  of  sister.    Visit  of  mother.     Letter  to  Duke  of  Argyll.     LL.D. 

at  Cambridge.     Professorship  of  Comparative  Philology.     Visits 

to  Frogmore,  Fulham,  and  Gloucester.     Isle  of  Wight.    Tennyson. 

Illness  of  children.     Member  of  French  Institute.     Translations 

from  the  Vedic  Hymns,  No\.\.     Soden.     Kiel.     Denmark    .     344-371 

CHAPTER  XVII. 
1870. 
Lectures  on  the  '  Science  of  Religion.'  Keshub  Chunder  Sen. 
Franco-German  War.  LL.D.  at  Edinburgh.  Letters  to  Dean 
Stanley.  To  '  the  English  People.'  Work  for  sick  and  wounded. 
North  Wales.  Letters  to  Dr.  Abeken  and  Mr.  Gladstone.  Chips, 
Vol.  Ill 372-402 

CHAPTER  XVIIL 
1871. 
King  of  Burma.  Correspondence  with  Abeken  and  Gladstone. 
Taine's  Lectures.  Peace  Festival.  Letter  from  Crown  Prince. 
Death  of  father-in-law.  Ems.  Interviews  with  Emperor  and 
Crown  Prince.  Dr.  Stainer.  New  edition  of  Lectures  on  Lan- 
giiage 403-425 


xii  Contents 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

^^72.  PAGES 

Memorial  to  Bishop  Patteson.  Offer  of  Professorship  at  Strassburg. 
Rig-veda,  Vol.  V.  Death  of  sister-in-law.  Strassburg.  Baden. 
Munich.  Life  of  Stockmar.  Switzerland.  Dr.  Stanley  Select 
Preacher.     Freiligrath's  poem 426-443 

CHAPTER  XX. 
1873-1874. 

German  University  finances.  Strassburg  Professorship  declined. 
Schliemann.  Lectures  on  Darwin's  Philosophy  of  Language. 
Emerson.  Veddahs.  Cromer.  Lecture  in  Westminster  Abbey. 
Order  pour  le  Merite.  Member  of  Hungarian  Academy.  Prince 
and  Princess  of  Roumania.  Oriental  Congress.  Last  volume  of 
Rig-veda.    American  attack  on  Max  Miiller  ....    444-474 

CHAPTER  XXL 

1875. 
Death  of  Charles  Kingsley.    Visit  to  Italy.    Windsor.     Last  visit  of 
mother.      Chips,  Vol.  IV.      The  Mumbles.      Manchester.      Plans 
for  return  to  Germany.     Maximilian  Order.     Oxford  Girls'  High 
School      475-505 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS 

Portrait  of  F.  Max  Muller,  aged  40      .        .        .     Frontispiece 
{From  a  Photograph  by  Hills  &>»  Saunders,  Oxford) 

No.  7,  NORHAM  Gardens,  Oxford        .        .        .         To  face  p.  n^-^ 
{From  a  Photograph  by  Hills  <2r»  Saunders,  Oxford) 

F.  Max  Muller,  aged  50       .  ...  ,1      >,      453 

{From  a  Medallion  by  Bruce  Joy) 


CHAPTER  I 
1823-1841 

Parentage.  Father's  death.  Dessau.  Musical  training.  School. 
Poetical  tendencies.  Nicolai  School,  Leipzig.  Dr.  Carus.  Music. 
Letters  to  his  mother.     Examination  at  Zerbst. 

Friedrich  Max  Muller  was  born  at  Dessau,  the  capital 
of  the  Duchy  of  Anhalt  Dessau,  on  December  6,  1823.  ^^^ 
father  was  the  popular  lyric  poet,  Wilhelm  Muller,  Librarian 
to  the  Duke  of  Dessau,  and  master  at  the  Gymnasium  (chief 
school)  in  that  place ;  a  man  of  great  cultivation,  of  most 
genial  disposition,  a  general  favourite,  keenly  alive  to  the 
enjoyments  of  life,  in  every  way  of  noble  and  forcible  'y 
character. 

Max  Mailer's  mother  was  Adelheid,  elder  daughter  of 
President  von  Basedow,  Prime  Minister  of  the  Duchy  of 
Dessau.  She  was  very  small,  but  very  beautiful,  clever  and 
lively,  and  had  a  fine  contralto  voice ;  and  it  was  from  her 
that  Max  Miiller  inherited  his  intense  love  of  music.  Frau 
Hofrathin  Muller  was  a  highly  cultivated  woman,  under- 
standing English,  French,  and  Italian  perfectly.  She  was  a 
woman  of  an  eager,  even  passionate  temperament,  and  her 
children  evidently  suffered  early  from  this,  as  Wilhelm  MuUer's 
letters  are  full  of  warnings  to  her  not  to  punish  too  severely, 
and  not  to  expect  too  much  from  her  children  (babies  of  four 
and  five  when  their  father  died).  Her  father.  President  von 
Basedow,  was  himself  the  son  of  a  man  famous  in  Germany  in 
his  day,  the  pedagogue  Basedow,  the  forerunner  of  Pestalozzi 
and  Frobel. 

Friedrich  Max  was  named  after  his  mother's  elder  brother, 

I  B 


2  Wilhelm  Midler  [ch.  i 

who  later  on  succeeded  his  own  father  as  President  of  the 
Duchy,  and  after  Max  in  the  Freischiitz,  an  opera  which  had 
then  just  appeared  ;  Carl  Maria  von  Weber  being  an  intimate 
friend  of  his  parents  and  Max's  godfather.  Soon  after  he  finally- 
settled  in  England  he  used  Max  as  part  of  his  surname,  Miiller 
alone,  as  he  always  said,  being  as  distinctive  a  name  as  Smith 
without  any  prefix  in  England.  His  only  sister  was  nearly 
two  years  older  than  himself,  and  he  never  had  any  brother. 
Max  Miiller  had  but  a  vague  memory  of  his  first  home,  the 
Librarian's  house  in  Dessau,  with  its  pretty  garden — a  memory 
founded  more  on  visits  to  the  house  in  subsequent  years  than 
on  any  clear  remembrance  of  his  life  there.  His  recollections 
of  his  father,  too,  were  very  dim,  as  he  was  not  quite  four  at 
the  time  of  his  death.  Such  as  they  were  they  are  recorded 
in  the  Autobiography. 

'  Wilhelm  Miiller's  life  in  Dessau  was  a  very  happy  one,' 
wrote  his  friend,  the  poet  Gustav  Schwab  ;  '  he  was  valued  by 
his  Duke  and  Duchess  .  .  .  devotedly  loved  by  his  pupils,  and 
a  favourite  with  all  who  had  once  recognized  his  character 
and  nature ;  he  had  a  clever,  attractive  wife,  and  healthy, 
handsome  children,  to  whom  he  was  a  most  devoted  father, 
and  with  whom  he  would  play  for  hours  like  a  merry  child 
himself  Though  only  thirty-three  when  he  died,  he  had 
achieved  a  considerable  amount  of  work,  and  evidently 
possessed  the  power  of  working  rapidly,  a  power  inherited 
by  his  son.  The  end  to  this  happy  life  came  with  frightful 
suddenness.  Wilhelm  Miiller  had  been  to  Oranienbaum,  a 
park  near  Dessau,  to  see  the  Duke,  and  returned  late,  in  high 
spirits.  In  the  night  his  young  wife  woke  to  find  him  dead 
by  her  side !  The  awful  shock  is  supposed  to  have  brought 
on  the  deafness  from  which  she  soon  began  to  suffer,  and 
which  became  total  many  years  before  her  death.  Adelheid 
Miiller,  who  had  only  a  small  pension  as  the  widow  of  a  civil 
servant,  went  for  a  time  with  her  two  children  to  live  in  her 
father's  house,  the  house  she  had  left  but  a  few  years  before 
as  a  brilliant,  happy  bride. 

But  Wilhelm  Miiller's  widow  had  not  been  forgotten  by  his 
friend  and  patron,  and  shortly  after  his  death  she  received  the 
following  letter  from  the  Duke  of  Dessau  : — 


1827]  Early  Childhood  3 

Translation. 

'  Whilst  I  wish  again  to  express  my  sincere  sympathy  in  the 
great  loss  you  have  sustained,  I  am  anxious  in  some  degree  to  lessen 
the  cares  which  the  education  of  your  children  must  bring,  and 
I  therefore  grant  you,  as  long  as  you  remain  a  widow,  the  yearly 
sum  of  100  thalers^  till  your  son  has  completed  his  twenty-first  year, 
and  then  for  your  life  the  sum  of  fifty  thalers,  to  begin  from  the  first 
of  this  month.  I  beg  to  assure  you  of  the  continuance  of  my  true 
esteem.  Leopold. 

'Nov.  30,  1827.' 

Max  Miiller  tells  us  in  his  Autobiography  of  the  gloom 
cast  over  his  whole  childhood  by  his  father's  death.  Happily 
he  had  inherited  much  of  that  father's  joyous  temperament, 
so  that  the  almost  daily  visits  to  the  grave  '  where  the  young 
mother  stood  and  sobbed  and  cried '  whilst  her  two  children 
looked  on,  had  less  effect  on  him  than  might  be  expected  ; 
and  the  constant  intercourse  with  various  friends  and  relations 
brightened  what  would  otherwise  have  been  a  time  of  dark 
memory  for  his  whole  life.  The  few  left  who  remember  those 
early  days  agree  in  describing  Max  Miiller  as  brimful  of  fun 
and  mischief,  and  his  mother's  old  servant  Hanna,  who  lived 
to  a  great  age  and  was  never  tired  of  asking  for  news  of  her 
former  torment,  used  in  those  early  days  to  call  him  Dieser 
infanie  Jtmge,  '  this  terrible  boy.' 

After  some  years,  Hofrathin  Miiller  left  her  father's  home 
and  settled  herself  and  her  two  children  on  the  ground  floor 
of  a  very  small  house.  This  house,  though  altered  and  im- 
proved, is  still  standing,  a  type  of  the  old  style  of  Dessau 
houses,  consisting  of  a  ground  floor  and  one  story  above,  with 
a  loft  under  the  high-pitched  brown  roof.  The  house  looks 
into  the  churchyard  of  the  Johannis  Kirche,  the  church  men- 
tioned in  Deutsche  Liebe,  where  the  effect  of  the  Easter  hymn 
on  the  musical  child  is  so  vividly  described  : — 

Translation. 

'  On  this  Easter  Day  ...  the  old  church,  with  its  grey  slate  roof, 
and  the  high  windows,  and  the  tower  with  the  golden  cross,  shone 
with  marvellous  brightness.  Suddenly  the  light  which  streamed 
through  the  high  windows  began  to  wave  and  seem  alive.     But  it 

B  2 


4  Love  of  Music  [ch.  i 

was  far  too  bright  to  look  at ;  and  as  I  shut  my  eyes,  the  light 
still  came  into  my  soul,  and  everything  seemed  to  shine  and  be 
fragrant,  and  to  sing  and  sound.  I  felt  as  if  a  new  life  began  in 
me,  as  if  I  had  become  another  being — and  when  I  asked  my  mother 
what  it  was,  she  said  it  was  an  Easter  hymn,  which  they  were  singing 
in  the  church.  I  have  never  been  able  to  discover  what  was  the 
pure  holy  song  which  then  sank  into  my  soul,  ...  I  have  never  heard 
it  again.  But  now  when  I  hear  an  adagio  of  Beethoven,  or  a  psalm 
of  JMarcello,  or  a  chorus  of  Handel  ...  I  feel  as  if  the  lofty  church 
windows  were  again  sparkling,  as  if  the  organ  notes  rang  through 
my  soul  and  a  new  world  opened  to  me.' 

It  is  needless  to  repeat  all  that  Max  Miiller  has  told  us 
in  Aitld  Lang  Syne  and  the  Autobiography  of  the  life  at 
Dessau,  and  the  appearance  of  the  little  Resident- Stadt 
(capital)  at  that  time,  still  walled  in,  and  with  gates  shut 
every  night,  its  night  watchman,  and  the  oil  lamps  swinging 
across  the  streets.  The  night  watchman  and  the  oil  lamps 
existed  till  late  in  the  century.  And  yet  with  these  primitive 
arrangements  and  simple  life  the  little  town  was  a  centre  of 
intellectual  interest  and  cultivation.  Music,  such  as  one  hears 
now  only  in  a  great  capital ;  a  first-rate  theatre,  as  far  as  the 
acting  and  opera  were  concerned ;  real  intellectual  society, 
which  hardly  exists  in  our  hurried  modern  life — were  all  to  be 
found  at  Dessau,  and  enjoyed  at  so  modest  a  cost  that  they 
were  within  reach  of  all. 

Those  who  remember  Max  MUller's  pianoforte  playing 
when  he  first  came  to  England  will  not  be  surprised  to  hear 
that  his  musical  training  began  very  early,  and  before  he  went 
to  any  school.  A  young  musician  who  lived  next  door  taught 
him  to  play,  as  a  surprise  to  his  mother.  They  had  made 
friends  over  the  hedge  that  divided  their  gardens,  and  after 
the  musician  had  discovered  the  little  fellow's  genuine  love  of 
music  he  lifted  him  daily  over  the  hedge,  and  gave  him  his 
lesson.  For  months  the  child  kept  the  secret,  till  at  last  one 
day  he  sat  down  before  several  friends  and  played  his  first 
piece.  There  are  easy  sonatas  of  Beethoven  with  his  name 
on  them  and  the  date,  showing  that  he  was  only  six  years 
old  when  he  learnt  them.  At  fourteen  he  played  brilliantly, 
and  took  part  in  concerts  at  Dessau  and  Leipzig,  and  when  at 
home  for  the  holidays  was  often  sent  for  by  the  Duchess  of 


i83o]  Gathy  5 

Dessau,  who  was  herself  a  fine  musician,  to  play  duets  with 
her  on  the  piano.  Whilst  still  quite  a  child  he  was  invited  to 
any  good  music  that  was  given  in  Dessau.  One  note  written 
by  a  Dr.  Otta,  about  the  year  1831,  runs  thus : — 

Trayislatmi. 

'  In  the  hopes  of  giving  you  pleasure,  I  take  the  liberty  of  inviting 
you  to  hear  the  quintette  to  be  played  to-night  at  my  house.  I  trust 
your  mother  will  kindly  give  you  permission.' 

The  note  is  addressed  to — 

The  distinguished  Musician 

Master  Max  Miiller. 

When  Max  was  only  six  years  old  Mendelssohn  visited 
Dessau,  and  taking  the  child  into  the  large  church  set  him 
on  his  lap  at  the  organ  and  made  him  play  the  keys,  whilst 
he  himself  managed  the  pedals,  which  the  little  boy  could 
not  reach. 

Many  of  Wilhelm  Miiller's  old  friends  took  an  interest  in 
his  lively  attractive  boy. 

There  is  a  charming  letter  dated  Saturday,  July  31,  1830, 
from  M.  Gathy,  to  whose  friendship  Max  Miiller  owed  a  good 
deal  in  later  years  in  Paris : — 

Transla/w?t. 

'As  I  could  not,  my  good  Max,  have  you,  as  I  wished,  last 
Sunday  for  a  long  visit,  I  keep  you  to  your  promise  and  invite  you 
and  your  dear  little  sister  to  have  breakfast  with  me  to-morrow  at 
half-past  eight,  hoping  that  you  will  both  receive  permission  to  do  so. 
If  you  paid  me  a  visit  in  Hamburg,  I  could  show  you  many  beautiful 
things — toys  of  every  sort,  and  particularly  the  most  beautiful 
coloured  tin  soldiers,  which  would  delight  you.  But  I  have  left 
them  all  at  home,  and  the  hobby-horse  and  dolls  and  toys  I  have 
here  would  not  amuse  you.  Toys  are  delightful — are  they  not,  Max  ? — 
when  one  receives  them  from  one's  loved  parents;  but  other  things^ 
that  one  must  be  busy  with,  for  other  reasons,  when  one  is  older, 
are  not  nearly  so  pretty,  or  so  nice  to  play  with.  Besides  my  brave 
tin  soldiers,  I  had  three  beautiful  collections  of  pictures,  and  flowers 
and  butterflies.  But  one  cannot  always  keep,  my  good  Max,  what 
one  has,  and,  alas !  everything  does  not  last  as  one  would  wish. 
Everything  is  perishable,  everything  changes,  and  that  is  a  great 
pity.  Now,  I  still  have  all  the  pictures.  I  carry  them  about  with  me, 
yet  I  cannot  show  them  to  you ;  but  the  flowers  are  all  withered,  and 


6  First  School  [ch.  i 

mostly  turned  to  dust,  and  my  lovely  coloured  butterflies  turn  at  last  into 
crickets  ^,  which  do  not  look  so  pretty  or  so  pleasant.  So  it  is  with 
my  toys,  my  good  Max.  But  it  does  not  matter ;  I  will  be  like  my 
little  soldiers,  which  were  always  my  greatest  delight.  They  stood 
up  firmly,  without  knowing  why,  and  let  themselves  be  seized  and 
pushed  about  on  every  side,  and  fought  bravely  and  never  com- 
plained. And  when  evening  came  they  were  gathered  together 
and  placed  quietly  in  the  dark  cupboard,  and  there  was  peace.  But 
don't  be  frightened,  Max :  come  here  and  bring  your  fine  sword  with 
you;  we  will  play  and  talk  with  each  other,  and  from  the  window 
nod  to  your  dear  mother,  as  I  always  like  to  do,  as  she  goes  by  to 
church,  to  pray  the  good  God  that  you  may  always  be  a  courteous, 
kind,  good  boy,  and  learn  diligently  and  thrive  to  your  own  good, 
and  her  pleasure.  Adieu,  dear  Max ;  you  are  expected  then  by  your 
friend  Gathy.' 

It  is  doubtful  whether,  inborn  poet  as  he  was,  Max  M tiller 
could  at  six  and  a  half  have  understood  the  beauty  and  pathos 
of  this  letter  from  the  little  deformed  Jew. 

Max  entered  the  Gymnasium  or  High  School  at  Dessau  at 
six  years  old,  and  remained  there  till  he  was  past  twelve. 
His  school  reports  were  not  remarkable,  and  certainly  at  that 
time  he  gave  little  evidence  of  the  power  that  was  in  him. 
'Writing  bad'  was  the  almost  invariable  report,  and  in  later 
years  he  often  lamented  the  small  pains  taken  by  the  writing- 
master  to  improve  it.  An  old  schoolfellow,  still  living  at 
Dessau,  writes  that  all  the  other  boys  considered  him  a 
clever  boy.  '  He  was  full  of  life  and  much  loved  by  all  his 
schoolfellows.' 

To  our  ideas  the  life  led  by  the  little  Max  was  one  of 
considerable  hardship.  Thinly  clad  and  poorly  fed,  not  from 
want  of  care  and  love,  but  from  sheer  poverty,  his  breath 
in  winter  frozen  into  a  sheet  of  ice  on  his  bed  from  the 
absence  of  fire,  suffering  from  constant  headaches,  which  may 
have  originated  from  want  of  full  nourishment  such  as  a 
growing  child  needs,  and  yet  nothing  seems  to  have  clouded 
his  naturally  sunny,  joyous  temperament.  He  tells  us  :  'As 
a  little  boy,  when  I  could  not  have  the  same  toys  which  other 
boys  possessed  I  could  fully  enjoy  what  they  enjoyed,  as  if 
they  had  been  my  own.  It  was  not  the  result  of  teaching, 
^  A  play  on  the  word  Grillen,  which  means  crickets,  and  worries. 


1835]  Frugal  Training  7 

still    less   of  reasoning — it  was   a  sentiment  given  me,  and 
which  certainly  did  not  leave  me  till  much  later  in  life.' 

He  remembered  how  constantly  he  was  enjoined  to  take 
care  of  his  clothes  and  make  them  last :  and  when  he  and  his 
sister  returned  from  school  the  boots  that  cost  so  much  were 
put  away  and  replaced  by  shoes  made  for  them  by  the  careful 
mother.  It  was  this  frugal  training,  this  life  of  constant  self- 
denial  and  careful  thought  for  every  trifle,  that  gave  Max  Miiller 
in  after  life  the  feeling  of  thankfulness,  and  the  power  of 
rejoicing  in  every  little  luxury  and  pleasure  which  he  could 
afford  himself.  To  the  very  last  '  the  child's  pure  delight  in 
little  things '  gave  a  constant  zest  to  his  life,  and  made  it  easy 
for  others  to  give  him  pleasure.  Through  his  whole  life  he 
took  every  good  thing,  every  honour  that  he  received,  as  a  gift 
he  had  not  deserved.  Some  of  his  critics,  who  never  knew 
him  personally,  speak  of  his  vanity,  because  he  dwelt  with 
pleasure  and  gratitude  on  the  honours  and  successes  that 
came  to  him  in  later  life.  Any  really  vain  man  would  have 
shrunk  from  showing  his  enjoyment  of  the  good  things  that 
fell  to  him,  for  fear  of  being  thought  vain.  One  who  knew 
him  well  mentions  his  entire  freedom  from  vanity  as  a 
prominent  point  in  his  character.  There  is  a  mock  humility 
more  akin  to  vanity  than  the  grateful  rejoicing  in  all  blessings 
(his  own  talents  included)  which  was  a  characteristic  of  Max 
Miiller's  whole  life.  It  is  true  that  he  greatly  valued  and 
even  desired  the  love  and  approbation  so  largely  accorded 
him,  but  this  arose  from  his  loving  nature,  which  craved  for 
sympathy,  and  not  from  vanity. 

One  more  glimpse  is  given  us  of  the  early  life  in  a  letter 
from  his  von  Basedow  grandmother.  His  mother  had  gone  in 
the  early  summer  of  1835  with  some  friends  to  Heligoland; 
and  she  took  her  daughter  with  her,  leaving  Max  at  his  grand- 
father's to  go  to  his  school.  The  Frau  Prasident  writes  to  her 
absent  daughter : — 

Translation. 

'  6  a.m.  My  dear  Adelheid, — The  father  is  out  riding,  Max  is 
having  his  music  lesson,  Julie  is  still  asleep,  and  I  am  sitting  in  the 
garden,  in  the  summer-house,  where  we  breakfast  every  morning. 
I  think  that  I  cannot  employ  my  time  better  than  in  writing  to  you, 


8  God's  Acre,  Dessau  [ch.  i 

to  give  you  an  account  of  us  all,  for  Max  now  belongs  to  us.  We 
are  all,  down  to  the  youngest,  quite  well,  thank  God.  Max  is  very 
good  and  diligent,  and  has  given  no  occasion  for  punishment.  He 
bathes  regularly,  either  with  Fritz  or  our  servant,  but  never  alone. 
I  am  much  too  nervous  to  allow  that.  Just  now  he  goes  with  Julie,  who 
bathes  every  other  day  in  the  Mulde.  We  shall  miss  him  very  much 
when  he  leaves  us,  he  has  become  quite  one  of  us.  You  would  be 
amused  if  you  saw  him  smoking  a  pipe  with  his  grandfather.  He  can 
also  take  a  pinch  of  snuff,  and  he  does  not  refuse  a  taste  of  liqueur. 
The  father  has  a  very  quiet  horse  on  which  he  can  ride  alone,  so  you 
will  find  him  quite  a  grown-up  man  in  all  the  finer  arts.  His  trousers 
indeed  have  a  very  variegated  appearance  from  cherries,  bilberries,  and 
ink,  but  a  young  man  does  not  think  much  of  that.' 

We  have  spoken  of  Max  MUller  as  an  inborn  poet,  and 
in  later  life  he  told  a  friend  he  had  all  his  life  tried  not  to 
be  a  poet.  From  the  early  age  of  nine  he  began  to  write 
verses,  all  of  which  were  carefully  kept  by  his  devoted  mother. 
They  are  verses  written  for  Christmas,  or  family  birthdays, 
but  one  on  the  beautiful  God's  Acre  at  Dessau  attempts 
a  higher  flight. 

'  It  is  a  beautiful  and  restful  place,'  he  says  in  the  Auto- 
biography, '  covered  with  old  acacia  trees.'  It  was  probably 
this  association  that  gave  Max  Miiller  a  peculiar  love  for 
acacia  trees,  and  it  was  a  real  grief  to  him  when  one  that 
stood  in  the  Parks  close  to  his  house  in  Norham  Gardens 
withered  and  died.  He  tells  us  that  the  inscription  over 
the  gateway  of  the  God's  Acre  was  a  puzzle  to  his  young 
mind  :  '  Death  is  not  death,  'tis  but  the  ennobling  of  man's 
nature.'  It  may  have  been  the  echo  of  these  words  in  his 
mind  that  made  him  in  1884,  in  writing  to  one  of  his 
Buddhist  pupils,  speak  of  '  looking  forward  to  a  better  life — 
I  mean  a  life  in  which  we  shall  be  better.'  When  at  school 
at  Leipzig  he  constantly  wrote  poems  in  the  letters  he  sent 
his  mother,  and  there  were  three  occasions  at  his  school 
at  Leipzig  where  he  had  to  recite  publicly  verses  of  his  own 
writing.  There  is  a  whole  book  full  of  manuscript  sonnets  and 
poems  written  during  his  University  career,  some  of  which 
were  published  at  the  time  in  journals  and  papers,  and  brought 
in  a  little  money,  most  acceptable  to  the  poor  student. 
During  the  hard  battle  with  life  in  Paris  and  London,  the 


1836]  Nicolai  School  9 

muse  seems  to  have  been  silent.  A  few  beautiful  sonnets 
exist,  written  later  under  the  pressure  of  great  sorrow,  but 
his  life  was  too  full  of  other  work,  to  which  he  was  pledged 
to  devote  his  time,  for  him  to  indulge  in  poetry,  and  except 
two  sonnets  to  the  Emperor  Frederick  (1871  and  1888),  and 
an  ode  on  the  death  of  the  Duke  of  Albany,  nothing  exists 
written  in  later  years  but  a  ^q^  birthday  couplets.  Max 
Miiller  never  published  any  of  his  poems,  except  in  his 
University  days. 

After  his  grandfather's  death  Max  was  sent,  at  Easter,  1836, 
to  the  famous  Nicolai  School  at  Leipzig.  He  lived  in  the 
house  of  Dr.  Carus,  an  old  family  friend,  whose  only  son, 
Victor,  was  of  the  same  age.  *  Max  was  taken  as  a  friend,' 
writes  Professor  Victor  Carus,  '  and  was  treated  entirely  as 
a  son  of  the  family.  Aunt  Muller,  as  his  mother  was  called 
by  all  of  us,  never  paid  anything,  as  my  parents  were  intimate 
friends  of  hers.  We  went  together  to  the  Nicolai  School, 
we  slept  in  the  same  room,  worked  together,  and  had,  in  fact, 
everything  in  common.'  Max  was  placed  in  Quarta,  which 
answers  to  Remove  at  Eton.  The  education  was  almost 
entirely  classical,  and  before  he  left  the  school,  five  years 
later,  he  could  speak  Latin  with  perfect  ease.  He  was  able 
to  hear  a  great  deal  of  good  music  at  Leipzig,  Frau  Carus 
herself  being  very  musical,  with  a  fine  voice,  and  she  and 
Dr.  Carus  delighted  in  collecting  the  best  musicians  at  their 
house.  Victor  Carus  was  a  good  violinist,  and  when  the  two 
young  friends,  Victor  and  Max,  were  about  fifteen  years  old, 
they  astonished  Dr.  Carus  on  his  birthday  by  playing  the 
whole  Kreutzer  Sonata  by  heart. 

There  had  long  been  an  intimate  friendship  between  the 
Mendelssohns  and  Max  Muller's  parents,  therefore  he  naturally 
saw  much  of  Felix  Mendelssohn,  who  was  conductor  of  the 
Gewandhaus  Concerts  at  Leipzig  from  1835  to  1843.  He 
thus  describes  his  first  musical  evening  to  his  mother : — 

Translation. 

'  I  went  on  Friday  to  Mendelssohn's,  and  already  on  the  staircase 
heard  the  lovely  music.     I  went  in  bravely  ^,  and  was  received  in  the 

^  He  was  little  over  thirteen. 


lo  Music  at  Leipzig  [ch.  i 

most  friendly  manner.  I  found  Felix,  David,  Dreischock,  and 
Mendelssohn's  sister  Fanny.  Hensel  was  very  kind,  so  was  she ;  both 
spoke  of  you.  and  Hensel  of  my  father  too,  whom  he  admired 
immensely.  Mendelssohn  stood  close  to  the  piano,  and  I  sat  where 
I  could  watch  Dreischock  with  great  comfort.  He  is  still  the  first  of 
pianists,  and  quite  a  young  man.  He  played  here  last  winter  and 
was  taken  for  Thalberg.  He  played  really  marvellously,  so  that 
Mendelssohn  wondered  at  his  skill,  though  he  (Felix)  immediately 
afterwards  played  an  imitation  of  his  composition.  I  must  say,  I  much 
prefer  Mendelssohn,  even  if  the  other  has  more  skill,  particularly  in 
octave  playing,  in  which  he  is  decidedly  the  first  of  artists.  Then 
Hensel  told  me  a  delightful  story.  They  had  already  last  Wednesday 
sent  here  for  me,  but  Sophie  did  not  understand  the  maid,  and  sent 
her  to  Dr.  Miiller,  who  lives  behind  this  in  the  Garden  house.  And 
so  he  went  in  the  evening,  beautifully  got  up,  and  nobody  knew  him, 
or  what  to  say  to  him.     That  was  funny.' 

Later,  he  writes  thus  of  Thalberg : — 

Translation. 

'Now  I  have  seen  and  heard  Thalberg.  It  was  yesterday  even- 
ing. It  is  indescribable.  I  am  still  perfectly  enchanted  by  it ;  there 
can  be  nothing  else  like  it.  He  is  quite  young,  handsome,  and  very 
distinguished  looking,  beautiful  hands  and  such  skill,  execution,  and 
power.' 

From  the  time  he  went  to  Leipzig,  Max  Miiller  began  the 
correspondence  with  his  passionately  loved  mother,  which 
continued  till  the  year  of  her  death,  1883.  Almost  every 
letter  has  been  kept,  and  the  whole  forms  a  complete  journal 
of  his  doings  when  not  with  her.  With  his  ardent  affection 
for  her,  he  felt  the  separation  keenly,  and  writes  on  the  first 
birthday  on  which  he  was  not  with  her,  as  follows : — 

Translatioft.  Oct.  10,  1836. 

'  My  dear  good  Mother, — To-day,  for  the  first  time,  I  have  to  be 
far  away  from  you  on  your  birthday,  and  you  can  fancy  how  sorry 
I  am.  I  think  it  grieves  5'ou  too,  little  mother,  for  I  know  your  love 
for  me.  Oh,  how  I  long  to  be  with  you,  only  for  a  moment,  only  to 
press  you  in  my  arms,  only  to  tell  you  how  I  love  you  :  but  it  can't  be. 
Your  birthday  is  always  doubly  dear  to  me,  first  because  it  is  your 
birthday,  and  then  because  it  was  the  first  day  that  you  roused  yourself 
again  from  your  sorrow  ^,  to  which  just  in  these  weeks  of  the  year  you 

'  W.  Miiller  died  Oct.  I  ;  her  birthday  was  Oct.  12. 


1839]  Letters  to  his  Mother  11 

gave  way  more  than  usually.  You  were  right  to  grieve,  and  it  would 
not  have  been  proper  to  try  to  console  and  amuse  you.  You  must 
have  sorrowed  this  year  more  than  usual,  as  the  birthday  of  our  good 
grandfather  was  this  week.  But  I  will  not  write  more  about  this  ;  it 
will  but  renew  your  sorrow.  I  will  only  say  that  God  has  replaced 
something  of  what  you  have  lost,  in  giving  you  two  beings  who 
love  you  as  no  others  do.     You  best  know  whom  I  mean. 

'Your  Max.' 

These  early  letters  to  his  mother  show  a  maturity  of 
thought  and  earnestness  of  purpose  that  are  very  unusual  in 
so  young  a  boy ;  and  as  life  went  on  the  relations  of  mother 
and  son  seem  changed,  and  it  is  the  son  who  takes  the  guiding 
and  protecting  tone  towards  the  mother. 

In  March,  1839,  Dr.  Carus  lost  his  wife,  who  had  watched 
over  Max  with  the  same  motherly  care  she  gave  to  her  own 
boy.  His  grief  at  the  time,  and  his  later  letters,  prove  how 
sorely  he  missed  her.  In  one  letter  he  gives  his  mother  an 
account  of  his  day,  which  would  probably  have  been  laid  out 
more  wisely  had  the  kind  Tmite  (aunt)  been  still  there  to 
watch  over  him. 

Translation. 

'  You  will  be  surprised  to  hear  that  I  have  arranged  everything  for 
certain  fixed  hours,  but  I  am  very  glad  to  have  settled  it  so  that  I  am 
not  interrupted.  I  get  up  at  five,  or  even  earlier,  and  work  till  seven, 
go  to  school,  play  the  violoncello  at  eleven,  the  piano  at  twelve,  then 
dinner,  then  school  again,  then  coffee  and  gymnastic  exercises,  then 
work  again  till  I  can  get  fresh  air  in  the  garden,  which  is  impossible 
in  this  heat,  during  the  day.  I  seem  quite  changed  to  myself,  and  you 
know  that  such  punctual  arrangements  were  not  at  all  in  my  line. 
I  eat  only  a  roll  from  five  in  the  morning  till  one  o'clock,  and  drink 
no  coffee  early,  and  I  often  feel  rather  faint.  Then  for  the  last  week 
I  have  had  constant  headaches,  but  I  am  getting  quite  accustomed  to 
them,  and  I  lead  a  very  happy  life.' 

In  the  last  years  of  his  school  life  he  seems  to  have  read 
a  good  deal  for  himself,  and  discusses  the  books  he  reads 
with  his  mother. 

7  rans  la/ton. 

'  I  had  already  said  to  myself  that  you  would  not  be  pleased  that 
I  had  read  Wilhelm  Meisier,  and  in  some  respects  you  are  quite  right ; 
not  that  it  can  exactly  hurt  me,  but  that  it  might  occupy  my  thoughts 


12 


Dresden  [ch.  i 


too  much.  On  the  evil  influence  of  reading  or  other  temptations, 
I  could  not  point  out  any  better  passage  than  the  Latin  verse  in  Faust 
which  Mephistopheles  repeats  to  the  student,  that  God  is  holy  and 
good  just  because  He  knows  what  evil  is.  This  is  very  true  if  only 
further  explained,  i.  e.  because  He  knows  evil,  but  never  commits  it. 
If  we  could  imagine  that  God  did  not  know  what  sin  and  temptation 
are,  we  could  not  call  Him  God,  for  we  should  have  an  imperfect  God. 
.  .  .  The  more  dangerous  things  I  read,  the  stronger  I  become,  if  I  am 
not  mistaken,  to  wage  war  with  them.  And  yet  again  what  you  say  is 
true,  for  how  foolhardy  it  would  be  to  throw  oneself  into  temptations 
without  thoroughly  knowing  oneself,  and  how  far  one  could  stand 
firm.     So  a  desire  for  dangerous  reading  is  in  itself  a  crime.' 

And  again — 

Translation. 

'  I  have  had  a  great  deal  of  pleasure  from  Bettina  von  Arnim's 
letters  and  diary.  It  is  full  of  beautiful  feeling  and  well  expressed, 
though  towards  the  end  it  is  weaker,  for  there  it  becomes  laboured ;  at 
first  it  just  bubbles  up  of  its  own  accord.' 

Though  Max  Miiller  tells  us  he  had  little  chance  of 
travelling  during  his  school  days,  there  is  a  journal  of  three 
days  spent  at  Dresden  and  in  a  walking  tour  through  Saxon 
Switzerland  at  Whitsuntide,  1839,  when  he  was  fifteen  and 
a  half  years  old.  This  visit  gave  him  his  first  sight  of 
really  great  works  of  art,  for  though  there  are  some  choice 
pieces  of  sculpture  and  a  few  good  pictures  at  Dessau,  the 
little  capital  naturally  possesses  nothing  quite  of  the  first 
rank.  '  It  was  perfect  enchantment,'  he  says,  '  to  step  into 
the  Raphael  room^  where  the  great  Madonna  standing  on  the 
globe  shines  down  upon  us,  a  picture  that  far  exceeds  all 
one's  imagination,  and  stands  there,  the  crown  of  all  pictures.' 
The  same  feeling  animated  him  in  1857,  when  he  wrote  in 
Deutsche  Liebe ;  'To  stand  before  the  Madonna  di  San  Sisto 
in  Dresden,  and  to  allow  all  the  thoughts  to  wake  in  us, 
which  year  after  year  the  unfathomable  look  of  the  child 
has  created  in  us.' 

From  reasons  of  economy  he  was  not  always  able  to  spend 
his  holidays  at  Dessau  with  his  mother  and  sister,  as  we 
see  from  the  following  little  note  dated  '  Silvester  Evening,' 
that  is  December  31,  probably  1839  : — 


1841 J  Examination  13 

Translation. 

*  How  often  I  wish  that  I  were  so  far  advanced  that  I  could  myself 
earn  something  to  make  your  life  easier — you  who  deprive  yourself 
of  everything  and  spare  everything  to  make  us  happy.  But  I  will 
try  to  be  more  and  more  diligent,  and  better,  that,  as  far  as  I  can, 
I  may  give  you  pleasure,  which  is  the  only  possible  return  for  all  your 
love  and  care.' 

Max  Miiller  had  to  pass  his  abiturienten  examination  in 
the  early  spring  of  1841  at  Zerbst,  in  order  to  gain  a  Dessau 
scholarship  for  the  University.  This  examination  was  more 
scientific  than  classical,  but  he  passed  easily,  taking  a  first 
class,  and  gained  his  scholarship,  such  as  it  was — £6 — a  mere 
trifle  to  English  ideas,  but  an  important  help  to  him.  Before 
the  examination,  Dr.  Nobbe,  the  head  master  of  the  Nicolai 
School,  wrote  thus  of  him  to  his  mother  : — 

Translation. 

'  I  rejoice  that  I  can  see  him  leave  this  school  with  testimonials  of 
moral  excellence  not  often  found  in  one  of  his  years,  possessed  of 
knowledge  first  rate  in  more  than  one  subject,  and  with  intellectual 
capacities  excellent  throughout.  May  this  young  mind  develop  more 
and  more,  and  may  the  fruits  of  his  labours  be  hereafter  a  comfort  to 
his  mother  for  the  sorrows  and  cares  of  the  past.' 

For  months  before  leaving  school,  though  only  seventeen, 
the  thought  of  the  future  weighed  heavily  on  him,  and  he 
seems,  almost  to  the  time  of  entering  the  University,  to  have 
felt  uncertain  as  to  the  special  line  of  life  he  should  adopt. 
Poor  and  without  influence,  it  was  necessary  that  he  should 
be  in  a  position  to  keep  himself  as  soon  as  he  left  the 
University.  The  following  letter  shows  how  carefully  he 
weighed  and  considered  the  question  : — 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation. 

'  I  recognized  blindly  that  a  free,  unfettered  life  is  the  best,  but  did 
not  reflect  sufficiently  on  the  results  that  might  arise.  .  .  . 

'  It  would  be  indeed  delightful,  and  my  greatest  wish,  to  be  engaged 
actively  as  a  philologist,  and  make  a  career  at  the  University.  But 
who  can  be  certain  that  I  shall  distinguish  myself?  and  where  there 
is  only  mediocrity,  this  life  as  a  philologist  is  miserable.  Many  struggle 
on  their  whole  lives  here  as  tutors  (Privatdocent)  and  never  arrive 
at  being  full  Professors.     Such  a  life  costs  a  great  deal,  and  how 


14  Leaving  School  [ch.  i 

miserable  I  should  feel,  for  there  is  something  so  uncertain  in  it,  and 
one's  success  depends  on  how  one  pleases  others  by  one's  writings  and 
lectures,  and  a  risk  of  this  kind  in  my  circumstances  seems  too  great. 
It  is  quite  certain  that  I  must  have  an  assured  support.  On  the 
grounds  of  prudence  I  consider  philology  alone  as  too  uncertain 
a  foundation,  but  that  I  wish  to  work  in  philology  and  philosophy  is 
true.  Remember  ihe  many  works  on  these  subjects  by  theologians 
and  doctors.  Think  of  distinguished  philologists  who  have  studied 
law.  This  influences  me  to  look  round  for  a  certain  position,  that 
I  may  not  attempt  to  erect  an  airy  building,  on  a  yet  more  airy 
foundation.  Medicine  is  disagreeable  to  me;  I  am  physically  unfit 
for  it.  I  like  theology,  but  it  is  too  unsettled  and  occupies  too  much 
time.  There  remains  the  law,  which  is  certainly  very  dry  and 
pedantic  ;  but  it  may  lead  to  more  hvely  studies,  and  it  also  leaves  time 
for  other  intellectual  employments.  One  must  begin  everywhere 
in  a  small  way.  If  other  subjects  of  culture  are  added  to  the  know- 
ledge of  law,  that  helps  not  a  little — so  one  can  lay  the  foundations  of 
a  satisfying  life,  for  on  good  fortune  or  rather  on  God's  will  most 
things  depend.  If  we  do  not  forsake  Him,  He  guides  us  at  last  to 
where  we  should  be,  however  we  may  choose  paths  where  we  should 
like  to  walk.  I  have  so  far  settled  to  choose  my  way,  but  if  another 
road  must  be  followed  I  shall  not  make  myself  unhappy.  So  do  not  be 
anxious  about  this.' 

At  Easter,  1841,  Dr.  Nobbe,  in  his  farewell  address  to  the 
boys  who  were  leaving  the  Nicolai  School,  thus  parted  with 

Max  MuUer:— 

Translation. 

'  I  must  also  mention  F.  Max  Miiller  from  Dessau,  a  highly 
talented  youth,  who  has  just  passed  the  final  examination  in  his 
own  Duchy,  and  who,  with  far  from  common  endowments,  joins 
the  University,  where  he  will  study  philology.' 

On  November  26,  1900,  at  the  gathering  always  held  in 
memory  of  the  old  members  of  the  Nicolai  School  who  have 
passed  away  in  the  year,  the  Director  thus  ended  his  mention 
of  Max  Miiller, '  He  was  without  any  doubt,  next  to  Leibniz, 
one  of  the  greatest  of  our  pupils.' 

Before  leaving  the  house  of  Dr.  Carus,  Max  writes  to  his 
mother : — 

Translation. 

'When  I  remember  the  time  that  I  first  sent  you  my  birthday 
greetings  from  Leipzig,  and  now  see  that  this  period  of  life  is  nearly 


1841]  Leaving  School  15 

over^  I  must  gratefully  acknowledge  how  good  God  has  been  to  us 
in  various  ways,  and  has  given  us  many  compensations.  But  above 
all,  how  grateful  we  should  be  that  God  has  preserved  you,  our  dear 
mother,  to  us,  to  sweeten  for  us  all  that  is  bitter,  to  reward  all  effort. 
How  I  rejoice  over  next  year,  in  which  a  new  existence  opens  for  me, 
a  higher  aim  in  life  floats  before  me,  and  I  shall  have  you  both  *  with 
me.  I  cannot  tell  you  how  I  rejoice  at  the  thought  of  this  time, 
when  I  must  take  another  step  forwards,  and  shall  again,  at  all  events 
for  a  time,  be  with  my  own  people.' 

Max  Miiller's  old  friend,  Victor  Carus,  thus  sums  up  his 
recollections  of  these  school  days  : — 

'  Our  chief  recreations  were  pretty  regular  walks  on  Sundays 
during  the  summer,  and  skating  in  winter.  There  was  no  fencing 
during  our  school  life,  it  was  not  allowed.  It  began  at  the  University  ; 
if  I  remember,  Max  went  to  the  "  Fechtboden,"  the  official  fencing- 
lessons  of  the  University.  On  the  whole  there  was  not  much  free 
time  left  to  us,  and  we  were  happy  when  my  parents  had  some  music 
in  the  evening,  or  when  we  might  amuse  ourselves  with  my  father's 
pensionnaires.  Max  was  a  handsome  boy,  but  not  so  strikingly  so 
as  in  later  years.  He  was  rather  thin,  and  gave  the  impression  of 
a  delicate  boy,  but  he  was  strong,  and  not  once  seriously  ill.' 

^  His  mother  and  sister. 


CHAPTER  II 

1841-1844 

University  life  at  Leipzig.     Studies.      Sanskrit.     Friends.     University 
life  at  Berlin.    Friends.    Lectures.    Hagedorn.    Humboldt.    Bunsen. 

Max  MiJLLER  joined  the  University  of  Leipzig  in  the 
Summer  Term,  1841  ;  his  mother  and  sister  left  Dessau  and 
moved  to  Leipzig  to  make  a  home  for  him  and  lessen 
expenses.  They  occupied  an  apartment  on  the  third  floor 
of  a  house  in  Reichel's  Garden,  then  on  the  very  outskirts 
of  the  town,  now  entirely  surrounded  with  houses.  The 
arrangement  was  a  very  happy  one ;  his  clever,  agreeable 
mother  and  pretty  sister  made  his  home  bright  and  pleasant 
to  his  many  student  friends,  whilst  the  mother  wisely  did  not 
attempt  to  interfere  with  his  perfect  liberty.  Of  his  studies 
and  the  immense  variety  of  lectures  he  attended  during  his 
first  term,  Max  Miiller  has  given  a  full  account  in  the 
Autobiography.  He  attended  twelve  separate  courses  of 
lectures,  of  which  the  subjects,  except  Greek  and  Latin, 
were  totally  new  to  him,  yet  he  really  worked  hard  at  all 
these  various  subjects,  took  copious  notes,  some  of  which 
still  exist,  and  read  the  books  the  Professors  advised.  He 
had  no  one  to  direct  his  studies,  no  father  or  older  friend 
on  whose  advice  he  could  rely.  Later  on,  when  he  was 
elected  to  Hermann's  Seininary  and  Haupt's  Latin  Society, 
these  Professors  gave  him  valuable  help  and  guidance  in  his 
classical  studies,  and  he  did  some  work  for  them.  It  was 
probably  the  keen  personal  interest  taken  in  him  by 
Brockhaus,  that  led  him  eventually  to  turn  his  attention 
exclusively  to  Sanskrit.  He  entered  the  University  as  a 
philologist,  and  in  the  Winter  Term  of  1841-2  he  began  to 
study  Sanskrit  under  the  then  newly  appointed  Professor, 
partly  compelled,  he  says,  by  the  charm  of  studying  some- 


1841]  Friends  at  Leipzig  17 

thing  which  his  friends  and  fellow  students  did  not  know. 
It  was  only  in  his  last  term  at  Leipzig  that  he  first  approached 
the  subject  he  was  to  make  so  peculiarly  his  own,  the  Hymns 
of  the  Rig-veda. 

During  his  time  at  the  University,  Max  saw  but  little  of 
his  old  friend  Victor  Carus.  Dr.  Carus  had  married  again, 
and  his  house  was  in  a  part  of  Leipzig  distant  from  that 
where  Max  Miiller  lived,  and  as  the  friends  were  studying 
totally  different  subjects  they  never  met  in  the  lecture-rooms. 
Professor  Carus  writes  :  '  I  cannot  tell  you  anything  of  Max's 
life  as  a  student ;  the  difference  of  our  studies  led  us  to 
different  occupations,  friendships,  and  ways.'  Max  M tiller's 
chief  friends  were  Theodore  Fontane,  so  well  known  later  as 
a  novel  writer,  and  Prowe,  afterwards  a  master  at  the  chief 
school  at  Thorn,  with  whom  he  formed  an  intimate  friend- 
ship. Fontane  gives  an  interesting  account  of  a  literary 
society  which  they  frequented  ;  it  was  a  society  of  Leipzig 
poets,  and  to  it  belonged,  among  others,  Fontane  himself, 
Prowe,  Wolfssohn,  and  Max  Miiller. 

Translation. 

'  All  made  themselves  a  name  in  the  small  or  great  world.  In  the 
really  great  world,  indeed,  only  one,  the  last  named.  Wolfssohn  on 
certain  points  gave  the  tone  to  our  society.  We  others  were  all  young 
people  of  average  attainments;  Wolfssohn,  on  the  contrary,  was 
a  refined  man  of  the  world.  But  the  great  feature  of  our  club,  of 
course  from  what  he  became  afterwards,  was  Max  Miiller.  He 
could  have  rivalled  Wolfssohn  on  his  own  ground,  that  of  social 
distinction,  perhaps  even  beaten  him,  had  he  not  been  too  young,  only 
seventeen  years  of  age.  Feeling  this,  he  kept  himself  in  the  background, 
and  confined  himself  chiefly  to  following  with  the  shrewd  bright  face 
of  a  squirrel  our  rodomontades  on  freedom,  relative  to  our  plans  "  pour 
culbuter  toute  I'Europe."  Only  now  and  then  he  himself  shot  off 
a  small  arrow.  When  the  Journal  for  the  Elegant  World,  which  we 
always  called  for  short  "  The  Elegant,"  changed  its  editor,  and 
appointed  Heinrich  Laube  in  the  place  of  Gustav  Kiihne,  Miiller  said, 
good-humouredly, 

Was  sich  Kiihne  nicht  erkiihnt, 
Wird  sich  Laube  nicht  erlauben  ^ 

'  On  the  whole  he  went  his  own  way,  both  in  small  and  great 
matters.     He  was  very  much  loved  and  respected  in  our  circle,  and 

^  Impossible  to  translate,  from  the  play  on  the  names. 
I  C 


i8  Early  Writings  [ch.  ii 

that  not  only  because,  as  we  all  knew,  he  had  been  a  pattern  scholar 
at  school,  but  more  especially  as  the  son  of  his  distinguished  father. 
That  he  would  in  the  eyes  of  the  world  far  surpass  his  father,  we 
naturally  never  dreamt  in  those  days.' 

Fontane  seems  to  have  left  Leipzig  for  Dresden  in  1842, 
and  a  few  of  Max  Mialler's  letters  to  him  are  still  extant. 

Translation. 

'As  dumb  as  a  fish,  dear  Fontane.  To  what  purpose  does  the 
Leipzig  Railway  go  daily,  when  you  won't  even  take  the  trouble  to  send 
me  a  few  lines,  especially  as  lately  you  have  had  so  much  that  you 
might  have  imparted  to  me  ?  For  some  time  it  has  not  been  wise  to 
mention  your  name  to  me,  and  yet  there  was  so  much  in  my  heart 
that  I  wanted  to  say  to  you.  I  hope  you  have  not  been  idle,  but  will 
soon  give  us  something  good  and  new.  How  would  it  be  if  we  wrote 
a  novel  together  ?  There  are  many  such.  The  other  partner  must 
alter  nothing,  and  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  carry  on  the 
mutual  thoughts  adroitly.  I  have  written  a  great  deal  lately,  but  only 
prose.  My  new  name  is  Max  Dessauer,  under  which  name  you  will 
find  several  things  in  The  Planet,  i,  e.  several  very  poor  things,  for 
I  must  not  give  much  of  my  time  to  them.' 

Max  MiAller  speaks  here  of  '  writing  a  great  deal.'  Various 
small  papers  of  the  day  published  in  Leipzig,  The  Comet, 
The  Planet,  The  Shooting  Star,  &c.,  contain  small  tales  by 
Max  Dessauer,  decidedly  sentimental,  and  giving  little  promise 
of  his  future  power  of  description  and  clearness  of  expression. 
There  is,  however,  one  set  of  papers  written  in  1843,  Camera 
Obscnra  from  Berlin,  which  are  far  in  advance  of  the  tales, 
and  are  full  of  clever,  sarcastic  remarks  on  Berlin  ways  and 
manners,  and  the  frivolous  life  of  the  Berlin  people  of  that 
time,  always  amusing  themselves  and  always  full  of  chatter 
and  gossip. 

In  the  Ajitohiography  Max  Muller  tells  us  of  three  duels  he 
fought  during  his  three  years  at  the  University  of  Leipzig, 
and  justifies  these  affairs  as  the  only  means  of  keeping  the 
rougher  elements  found  in  every  German  University  in  order. 
He  was  greatly  surprised  in  after  years,  when  he  first  visited 
Oxford,  to  hear  that  duels  were  as  unknown  there  as  they 
were  unnecessary. 

On  September  i,  1843,  Max  Miiller  passed  his  examination 


1843]  Degree  of  Phil.  Doc.  19 

for  the  degree  of  Phil.  Doc.  He  did  not  teli  his  mother  that 
he  meant  to  offer  himself  for  examination  so  soon,  for  fear  of 
disappointing  her  by  failure.  Too  poor  to  buy  the  necessary 
dress  coat  for  the  occasion,  he  borrowed  one.  He  passed 
with  ease,  and  his  mother  must  have  felt  rewarded  for  all  her 
efforts  and  cares,  when  her  son,  still  three  months  under 
twenty,  laid  his  card,  Dr.  Max  Miillcr,  in  her  lap.  Among 
her  papers  after  her  death  the  following  was  found  copied 
from  some  English  book :  '  The  tie  of  mother  and  son,  of 
widowed  mother  and  only  son,  the  tie  unlike  all  others  in  the 
world,  not  only  in  its  blessedness,  but  in  its  divine  compensa- 
tion.' It  would  seem  from  the  following  letters  written  just 
afterwards  that  he  had  been  far  from  well  all  the  summer, 
probably  overworked : — 

Translation.  September,  1843. 

'  Dear  Fontane, — I  can  well  imagine  that  you  have  often  cursed  me 
not  a  little  as  I  gave  no  sign  of  life  for  such  a  long  time ;  but  Morbus 
excusat  hominejti,  and  I  will  add,  Nisi  homo  excusat  morbum  I  I  hope 
you  have  carried  on  your  Latin  studies  so  far  as  to  comprehend  the 
deep  meaning  of  these  words  ;  and  if  a  human  heart  still  beats  in  your 
breast,  you  must  pity  me,  poor  wretch,  for  having  spent  nearly  the 
whole  vacation  in  a  nervous  fever,  so  that  I  must  stay  almost  the 
whole  of  next  term  here  in  Leipzig.  It  is  ill-luck,  you  will  agree. 
Well,  one  could  almost  despair,  but  where's  the  good  of  it  ?  I  have 
quietly  unpacked  my  books  and  things  again,  and  sit  in  Reichel's 
Garden,  up  three  flights,  up  which  I  have  to  climb  with  many  gasps. 
I  am  in  Leipzig  incognito,  for  I  had  already  paid  my  farewell  visits 
everywhere,  and  altogether  feel  no  inclination  for  society.' 

To  THE  Same. 
Translation.  January  4,  1844. 

'  Just  lately  I  have  been  busy  with  a  new  edition  of  the  Griechenlieder'^ , 

and  I  wrote  a  preface  to  it,  as  I  have  included  the  hitherto  unpublished 

poems  and  the  hymn  to  Raphael  Riego.     I  was  very  much  annoyed 

that  the  preface  could  not  be  printed,  as  what  I  thought  of  most  in  the 

new  edition  was  to  excite  a  feeling  of  contempt  for  those  who  by  their 

policy  of  friendship  brought  the  struggles  of  a  whole  people  for  liberty 

to  an  end  :  or  at  least  to  invite  sympathy  for  a  betrayed  country.    But 

if  the  reader  welcomes  the  poems,  as  belonging  to  the  past,  no  reference 

to  the  present  would  find  favour  in  his  eyes,  and  I  must  satisfy  myself 

^  The  first  edition  of  his  father's  poems  in  which  he  was  personally 
concerned. 

C  2 


20 


Hitopadesa  [ch.  n 


with  giving  a  simple  literary  notice.  You  see  there  is  nothing  left  but 
to  avoid  all  living  subjective  topics,  and  take  refuge  in  the  objective 
past.  So  I  have  picked  out  a  v^^ork  from  hoary  antiquity  and  my  first 
Opus  will  soon  appear,  a  German  translation  of  the  oldest  Indian 
collection  of  fables.  You  will  find  many  acquaintances  of  childhood's 
days,  from  Gellert,  La  Fontaine,  &c.,  and  the  interesting  thing  is  that 
one  can  follow  the  wanderings  of  these  fables,  through  twenty  different 
languages,  from  the  oldest  to  the  most  recent  times,  a  work  which 
I  am  reserving  for  another  time.  Wolfssohn  has  quite  disappeared, 
and  of  Schauenburg  I  know  little  except  that  he  is  closely  watched 
in  Berlin.' 

The  translation  of  the  Hitopadesa  was  brought  out  in 
March,  1844;  the  book  is  dedicated  to  Brockhaus.  Towards 
the  end  of  his  University  career  at  Leipzig,  Prince  Wilhelm  of 
Dessau,  who  had  in  1840  married  Emilie,  his  mother's  cousin, 
expressed  a  wish  to  adopt  Max  Miiller,  and  put  him  into  the 
Austrian  Diplomatic  Service.  '  I  at  once  said  no,'  he  tells  us 
in  the  Autobiography ;  '  it  seemed  to  interfere  with  my  freedom, 
with  my  studies,  with  my  ideal  of  a  career  in  life.' 

Max  had  long  felt  an  ardent  wish  to  go  for  a  year  to  Berlin 
to  study  Sanskrit  under  Bopp,  but  more  especially  Philosophy 
under  Schelling.  He  wanted  also  to  examine  the  collection 
of  Sanskrit  MSS.  which  the  King  of  Prussia  had  just  bought 
in  England  from  the  executors  of  Robert  Chambers.  His 
sister  had  been  married  in  February  of  this  year  to  a  young 
physician,  Dr.  Krug,  and  had  removed  to  Chemnitz ;  and  it 
was  settled  that  the  mother  should  live  there  with  the  young 
couple,  rather  than  with  her  son  at  Berlin.  Max  Miiller  had 
his  scholarship  for  one  year  more,  but  it  was  only  forty  thalers 
(;^6),  and  in  this  year  (December,  1844)  he  would  come  of  age, 
and  the  pension  of  a  hundred  thalers  (;^i5),  granted  to  his 
mother  at  the  time  of  his  father's  death,  would  be  reduced  to 
half.  How  Max  Miiller,  when  away  from  his  mother,  was 
able  to  live,  is  certainly  a  puzzle,  but  living  then  in  Germany 
was  extraordinarily  cheap  ;  during  a  hard  winter  the  firing  for 
the  family  cost  about  twopence  a  day,  and  everything  else  was 
in  proportion.  So  in  March,  1844,  the  little  home  in  Reichel's 
Garden  was  broken  up,  and  the  mother  started  for  Chemnitz. 
On  his  last  evening  at  Leipzig,  which  had  been  his  home,  more 
or  less,  since  1 836,  Max  Miiller  writes  to  his  mother : — 


1844]  Leaves  Leipzig  21 

Translation.  Leipzig,  March,  1844. 

'  My  dear  little  Mother, — I  had  meant  to  write  to  you  first  from 
Berlin,  when  I  had  settled  myself  there,  but  I  know  you  will  be  glad 
to  get  a  letter  from  me  sooner.  How  often  we  two  [M,  M.  and  Prowe] 
thought  of  and  pitied  you !  I  am  sure  it  was  an  uncomfortable 
journey.  We  were  very  tired,  but  yet  went  late  to  bed.  From  the 
post-house  we  went  to  Reichel's  Garden.  We  went  up  into  the  old 
rooms,  where  we  had  passed  many  happy  hours  all  together.  It  looked 
very  desolate,  and  we  went  home,  where  we  had  tea,  and  were  much 
better  for  it,  and  talked  till  past  eleven.  I  was  glad  when  I  woke  early 
to  think  of  you  three  happy  and  comfortable  together  in  Chemnitz. 
I  am  full  of  delight  at  the  thought  of  Berlin,  and  there  I  shall  find 
a  letter  from  my  dear  mother.  Take  good  care  of  yourself,  and  do 
not  do  too  much,  Prowe  sends  many  affectionate  messages.  Write 
soon  to  '  Your  Max.' 

The  following  letter  was  written  soon  after  he  arrived  in 

Berlin : — 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  Berlin,  April  15,  1844. 

'  You  have  no  doubt  been  expecting  a  letter  from  me  sooner,  and 
will  have  thought  I  was  long  ago  setded  in  Berlin.  But  you  know 
how  it  is  in  Dessau,  how  one  is  kept  day  after  day,  and  so  I  only  got 
here  a  few  days  ago,  and  have  as  yet  done  nothing  but  hunt  for 
lodgings.  Everything  was  very  pleasant  at  Dessau,  but  it  took  some 
time  before  I  found  the  various  people  at  home.  I  went  first  to  the 
Chamberlain,  from  whom  I  hoped  to  hear  something  definite  as  to 
the  Leopold  Stipendium  ^  Unfortunately  he  gave  me  no  hope,  nor 
did  Bernhorst  or  Morgenstern.  They  were  all  very  kind,  and 
accepted  the  Hitopadesa.  Bernhorst  had  told  the  Duke  I  was 
in  Dessau,  and  came  himself  to  tell  me  the  Duke  would  see  me. 
So  on  Wednesday  early  I  went  to  the  Pater  Patriae,  who  talked 
to  me  a  long  time,  but  of  the  Stipendium  or  of  other  arrange- 
ments not  a  syllable.  Then  I  went  to  Fraulein  Rath,  who  told 
me  I  was  to  see  the  Duchess  the  next  day.  She  too  was  most  gracious 
and  kind,  asked  me  why  I  did  not  go  to  England,  and  I  told  her 
everything  most  openly,  but  it  produced  no  result.  When  I  went 
to  Advocate  Richter,  I  could  not  but  tell  him  my  position  after  the 
next,  that  is  the  last,  payment  of  my  scholarship.  You  see,  dear 
mother,  I  have  spared  no  pains.  I  must  see  now  how  I  can  help 
myself.     I  drew  fifty  thalers  from  my  savings  bank.     I  left  Dessau  at 

^  A  Stipendium  founded  by  the  Duke  for  poor  scholars,  and  which  Max 
Miiller  hoped  he  might  have  when  his  scholarship  ceased. 


22  Friends  at  Berlin  [ch.  ii 

two  o'clock,  and  arrived  in  Berlin  about  seven.  Uncle  and  Aunt  - 
Hake  said  at  once  I  was  to  stay  with  them  as  long  as  I  liked,  whilst 
I  looked  for  a  really  nice  room.  I  have  done  that  most  conscientiously, 
for  to-day  and  yesterday  I  have  seen  at  least  forty.  I  am  very  tired 
with  all  this  running  about,  and  long  for  a  quiet,  settled  life.  I  shall 
not  pay  any  visits  till  I  am  settled,  but  when  will  that  be  ? ' 

Tra7islation.  April  17. 

'  I  have  found  a  room,  a  few  yards  from  Unter  den  Linden.  The 
house  is  clean  and  light,  and  I  like  my  room  very  much.  I  give  for  it 
and  service  and  cleaning  boots,  six  thalers  (iSj.)  a  month.  It  is  nicely 
furnished,  and  the  people  of  the  house  are  clean  and  respectable. 

'Your  INIax.' 

It  is  evident  from  his  letters  to  his  mother  and  his  Diary 
that  the  early  part  of  his  time  at  Berlin  was  most  agreeable. 
He  went  into  society  more  than  he  had  done  at  Leipzig,  and 
was  fortunate  in  having  the  entree  of  several  very  pleasant 
houses,  chief  among  which  was  the  house  of  Hensel  the  artist, 
married  to  Mendelssohn's  favourite  sister  Fanny.  The  Kriigers, 
connexions  of  his  own  (he  was  also  an  artist),  were  very  kind 
to  the  young  student,  and  he  dined  there  every  Sunday,  unless 
he  had  any  other  invitation.  His  aunt,  Julie  Hake,  also  had 
him  to  dinner  every  week.  At  Berlin,  Max  Miiller  began 
keeping  a  journal,  and  continued  it  fairly  regularly  till  August. 
He  seems  to  have  dined,  when  not  asked  out,  at  a  restaurant, 
where  he  paid  sixpence  for  his  dinner,  which  he  reports  as 
good.  He  matriculated  as  a  theologian !  Soon  after,  he 
writes:  'Worked  early,  but  could  not  concentrate  myself; 
and  adds  the  same  evening,  *  Dreaming,  and  a  little  poetry,  and 
a  very  little  work.  I  must  work  more  in  future.'  A  few  days 
later  he  paid  his  first  visit  to  the  Library  in  search  of  Sanskrit 
MSS.,  which  he  seems  to  have  been  unable  to  see  owing  to 
the  absence  of  the  head  librarian. 

Towards  the  end  of  April  he  met  Fontane  as  an  Imperial 
Grenadier  at  Kosch's,  where  he  dined.  '  He  came  to  me  at 
five,  and  we  talked  of  many  things,  and  finally  of  the  Divine 
and  Human.  He  is  a  fine  fellow,  and  has  to  submit  to  a  good 
deal.'     Fontane  writes  of  these  times  : — 

T7-anslalion, 

'  I  had  a  strong  affection  for  Miiller  from  the  first  at  Leipzig,  but  we 
only  became  really  intimate  three  years  later,  when  we  were  both  for 


1844]  Sc  helling  23 

a  time  in  Berlin,  he  at  his  Sanskrit  studies,  I  as  a  Kaiser  Franz 
Grenadier.  He  lived  then  on  the  third  floor  of  a  corner  house,  close 
to  the  Werder'sche  Kirche,  where  he,  greatly  to  his  own  satisfaction, 
lodged  with  a  shoemaker.  If  only  the  workshop  had  not  been  next  his 
room !  The  beating  of  leather  went  on  the  whole  day  long,  and 
Miiller  would  have  lost  all  patience,  but  for  the  wonderful  view.  The 
whole  town  lay  like  a  panorama  before  him,  especially  the  royal  palace 
with  its  beautiful  gardens.  To  look  at  this  was  a  real  solace,  and  he 
held  out  against  the  noise.  He  already  gave  promise  of  becoming 
some  one,  and  rejoiced  in  being  in  especial  favour  with  Friedrich 
Riickert,  who  in  these  years,  yielding  to  the  King's  wish,  gave  lectures 
at  the  University.  Max  Miiller  was  then  translating,  among  other 
works,  Kalidasa's  Cloud  Messettger.  If  I  owe  all  I  know  of  Russian 
Literature  to  Wolfssohn,  I  owe  to  Miiller  what  little  I  learnt  about 
Sanskrit  poetry.  He  still  showed  the  same,  not  ironical,  but  kindly, 
mischievous  temperament  which  he  already  possessed  in  Leipzig.' 

Max  Miiller  had  expected  great  things  from  Schelling,  and 
in  a  letter  to  his  mother  thus  describes  his  first  visit  to  the 
great  philosopher: — 

Translatmi. 

'  I  went  to  announce  myself.  He  receives  people  at  four  o'clock. 
I  had  not  expected  much,  for  I  had  heard  how  he  had  dismissed 
Jellinick,  but  I  was  more  fortunate.  I  asked  him  if  he  would  continue 
to  lecture  next  term  on  the  Philosophy  of  Revelation,  He  said  he 
could  not  decide  yet,  therefore  probably  only  a  private  lecture  again. 
Then  I  spoke  to  him  of  my  time  in  Leipzig,  of  Weiss  and  Brockhaus, 
and  then  we  came  round  to  Indian  Philosophy.  Here  he  allowed  me 
to  tell  him  a  good  deal.  I  especially  dwelt  on  the  hkeness  between 
Sankhya  and  his  own  system,  and  remarked  how  an  inclination  to  the 
Vedanta  showed  itself.  He  asked  what  we  must  understand  by 
Vedanta,  how  the  existence  of  God  was  proved,  how  God  created  the 
world,  whether  it  had  reality.  He  has  been  much  occupied  with  Cole- 
brooke's  Assays,  and  he  seemed  to  wish  to  learn  more,  as  he  asked  me 
if  I  could  explain  a  text.  Then  he  asked  where  I  was  living,  knew  my 
father  as  Greek  poet  and  a  worker  on  Homer,  and  at  last  dismissed  me 
with  "  Come  again  soon,"  offering  to  do  anything  he  could  for  me.' 

The  following  letters  give  his  mother  a  pleasant  account  of 
his  life : — 

Translation.  May,  1844. 

'  Hensel's  house  is  a  delightful  resort  to  me,  and  she  is  especially 
friendly.     I  go  there  oftener  than  I  can  really  spare  the  time;  they 


24  Society  at  Berlin  [ch.  ii 

are  always  sending  me  invitations.  I  was  there  last  Saturday,  and 
they  asked  me  to  dinner  the  next  day.  I  went  at  twelve,  for  a  large 
musical  matinee;  they  sang  the  choruses  of  the  Antigone.  Then 
I  stayed  in  the  garden  with  the  tutor,  and  we  played  with  Hensel 
a  sort  of  ninepins ;  then  came  dinner,  and  they  asked  me  to  return  in 
the  evening,  as  Oehlenschlager,  the  German  poet,  was  coming  to  them, 
so  I  spent  nearly  the  whole  day  there.  I  have  not  played  there  yet, 
as  she  has  not  asked  me  to  do  so,  but  when  I  told  her  I  wanted  to 
hire  a  piano,  cheap  but  not  bad,  she  offered  to  lend  me  an  English 
one,  on  which  she  used  to  play.  He  too  is  most  friendly,  and  has 
given  himself  a  great  deal  of  trouble  to  get  leave  from  the  Minister  for 
me  to  have  the  MSS.  to  use  in  my  own  room,  which  I  hope  will  soon 
be  granted.  The  Hakes  too  are  very  kind,  and  I  can  always  dine 
there,  Mondays  and  Thursdays.  I  have  called  besides  on  Bopp; 
Professor  Hofer,  who  will  review  my  Hitopadesa ;  Dr.  Kuhn,  another 
Sanskritist,  to  whom  Brockhaus  recommended  me ;  Professor  Peter- 
mann,  whose  lectures  on  the  history  of  Oriental  Literature  I  attend ; 
Professor  Schott,  with  whom  I  learn  Persian  ;  and  I  think  everything 
will  go  well.  I  am  also  going  to  Schelling,  from  which  my  purse 
suffers.  I  have  not  had  time  to  call  again  on  "  Bettina."  As  friends 
I  have  Vogel  and  Fontane,  whom  I  seldom  see  except  at  dinner.  At 
home  I  only  have  bread  and  butter.  I  drink  coffee  without  milk  or 
sugar.  I  have  just  received  ten  copies  of  the  Griechenlieder ;  they 
are  very  well  printed.  So  you  see  I  do  very  well  here,  and  nothing  is 
wanting  but  my  dear  little  mother.  Now  write  soon,  but  don't  say 
again  you  do  not  like  Chemnitz ;  a  contented  spirit  is  happy  any- 
where. In  the  Hitopadesa  it  says,  "  To  the  man  who  has  leather  shoes 
on,  the  whole  world  is  covered  with  leather." ' 

Translation.  May  22. 

'  Four  days  in  the  week  I  have  lectures  at  eight ;  the  woman  cleans 
my  room,  then  I  stay  at  home  till  1.30,  and  then  dine  close  here. 
Then  some  days  I  have  a  lecture  at  four  o'clock,  and  I  am  very  glad 
to  be  living  so  close  to  the  University,  and  shall  be  more  so  when  the 
real  Berlin  heat  begins.' 

Translatioji.  May  28. 

'  I  have  just  come  from  Hensel's.  As  you  see,  I  am  a  pretty  con- 
stant guest.  They  are  really  so  good  to  me,  and  it  is  the  only  house 
where  I  feel  "  you  would  like  to  go  there " ;  generally  one  feels 
"  you  must  go  there."  You  say,  you  are  glad  that  I  don't  work  so 
hard;  I  can't  quite  understand  that,  for  I  often  don't  know  what 
I  should  begin  first,  when  I  think  of  the  future  and  on  so  much 
which  I  still  have  to  do  before  I  can  take  any  rest.  ...  I  do  not 


1844]  Doubts  and  Difficulties  25 

often  see  any  papers,  as  the  public  reading-rooms  are  so  dear;  in 
this  respect  you  are  better  off  in  Chemnitz.' 

Max  Miiller  seems  soon  to  have  found  out  the  expense 
of  the  life  at  Berlin,  and  the  old  doubts  whether  he  could 
afford  the  life  of  a  scholar  revived.  On  June  26  he  writes  to 
his  mother : — 

Translation. 

'  I  must  make  the  most  of  my  time  in  Berlin,  as  I  cannot  stay 
here  more  than  a  year,  unless  I  can  find  some  chance  of  lessening 
my  expenses.  Where  I  am  to  go  next  Easter  is  not  at  all  certain. 
I  hesitate  between  Paris,  Vienna,  and  Bonn.  I  am  attracted  to 
Vienna  by  the  thought  of  studying  Persian  and  Turkish,  for  which 
there  are  better  means  than  in  Paris,  and  they  are  certainly  necessary 
should  I  ever  have  the  chance  of  employment  in  the  East.  You  can 
fancy  that  these  plans  often  disturb  me,  as  for  the  nearest  future 
I  have  no  certain  prospect ;  and  the  University  course  is  so  expensive 
and  wearisome,  that  I  cannot  reckon  on  it,  as  generally  for  the  first 
three  years,  that  is  six  years  after  leaving  school,  one  is  not  admitted 
to  anything.  Well,  one  must  console  oneself  with  the  lilies  of  the 
field ! ' 

Two  days  later  he  writes  in  his  Diary :  '  I  cannot  give  up 
Sanskrit,  though  it  holds  out  no  prospect  for  me.'  Over 
and  over  again  come  the  entries  in  his  Diary:  'All  day  at 
home'— 'no  dinner'' — 'dinner  of  stirred  eggs'  (which  he  pre- 
pared himself) — '  work  till  3  a.m.' 

At  this  time  he  began  Bengali,  'which  may  perhaps  be 
useful  to  me  later,  and  is  now  for  comparison  with  the  low 
Indian  dialects.  I  attend  Schelling's  course  more  diligently 
and  with  great  interest ;  his  philosophy  has  something  Oriental 
about  it.  I  am  translating  the  KatJidka  Upanishad  for  him 
with  great  diligence.' 

The  term  at  Berlin  which  had  begun  so  cheerily  was  now 
drawing  to  an  end.  Max  Miiller  had  not  found  pupils  or 
sufficient  employment  in  copying  Sanskrit  MSS.  to  eke  out 
his  small  stipend,  and  just  before  returning  to  Chemnitz  he 
wrote  almost  despairingly  to  his  mother : — • 

Translation.  Aug.  19. 

'  I  am  longing  to  be  away  from  Berlin,  to  get  a  thorough  change 
of  thought,  as  I  really  think  I  had  every  chance  here  of  becoming 


26  Chemnitz  [ch.  n 

a  confirmed  hypochondriac.  This  is  no  mere  transitory  feeling,  but 
it  is  founded  on  my  circumstances,  which  have  cost  me  many  sad 
thoughts  latterly,  I  acknowledge  that  the  plan  of  life  I  had  formed 
is  not  to  be  reaUzed ;  that  it  is  difficult  for  me  to  part  with  all  these 
favourite  ideas  you  can  well  imagine.  And  yet  I  see  that  it  would  be 
folly  in  my  circumstances  to  attempt  a  University  career.  You  tell 
me  that  I  still  have  800  thalers  ^  (£120),  but  this  would  only  just 
last  till  I  had  settled  where  to  live,  and  that  I  should  then  have  the 
prospect  of  living  for  five  years  as  a  tutor  (Privatdocent)  without 
any  stipend  from  Government.  I  should  therefore  in  this  way  study 
on  to  starve,  just  in  order  not  to  give  up  an  idea  which  I  had  taken 
up  for  my  own  pleasure,  and  to  which  I  had  sacrificed  much  money 
and  time.  Had  I  more  courage  or  only  anywhere  a  firm  point  to  cling 
to,  I  could  perhaps  still  try  my  chance,  but  as  it  is,  nothing  remains 
for  me  but  to  become  a  sensible  schoolmaster,  which  at  all  events 
gives  one  bread  and  butter.  You  will  feel  that  a  certain  amount  of 
resignation  is  needed  for  such  a  decision,  and  therefore  I  rejoice  all 
the  more  at  the  thought  of  the  next  few  weeks,  which  will  repay  me 
for  many  sad  hours.' 

He  spent  the  vacation  at  Chemnitz,  where  the  society  of 
his  mother  and  sister  cheered  and  encouraged  him.  It  is 
not  clear  how  he  found  funds  to  finish  his  course  at  Berlin, 
but  he  probably  used  part  of  the  small  patrimony  already 
alluded  to. 

He  returned  to  Berlin  early  in  October,  and  soon  after  his 
return  received  the  pleasant  news  that,  in  answer  to  an  appeal 
from  his  mother  for  a  prolongation  of  the  full  pension  for 
a  time,  the  Duke  had  granted  it  for  another  five  years.  The 
Duke's  letter  was  an  encouragement  to  the  young  scholar  to 
persevere  in  his  chosen  path  : — 
'    Translation. 

'According  to  your  petition  of  the  twenty-eighth  of  last  month 
I  have  ordered  that  the  pension  granted  you  of  a  hundred  thalers 
shall  be  continued  in  full  for  the  next  five  years,  till  1849  inclusive. 
I  hope  that  your  promising  son  may  continue  to  give  you  as  much 
cause  for  joy  as  hitherto,  and  I  gladly  take  this  opportunity  to  assure 
you  of  my  special  good  wishes.'  Leopold. 

'Dessau,  Oct.  10,  1844.' 

He  writes  to  his  mother  again  on  October  24  : — 

^  Some  money  left  by  W.  Miiller,  and  religiously  guarded  by  his  mother 
to  start  him  in  life. 


1844]  Hagedorn  27 

Translaiioji.  Berlin. 

'  I  hope  you  make  yourself  as  happy  in  the  backstream  of  Hfe  as 
I  do.  As  I  sit  here  in  my  garret  and  for  days  together  see  no  one 
I  know,  I  fancy  myself  as  a  bird  alone  in  its  nest  on  a  tall  tree,  and 
Leipzig,  Chemnitz,  and  Dessau  appear  perfect  Eldorados.  But  I  am 
quite  happy  and  amuse  myself,  by  myself,  as  far  as  possible.  But 
I  must  tell  you  how  I  kept  your  birthday.  I  thought  the  Hakes  would 
have  invited  me  that  we  might  drink  your  health  together;  but  as 
they  did  not,  I  invited  Fontane  for  the  evening,  who  brought  a  friend, 
and  we  brewed  punch,  set  your  picture  on  the  table,  and  drank  your 
health  right  joyously.  I  have  heard  from  Dessau  that  I  cannot  have 
the  scholarship  for  a  seventh  term.  Well,  I  have  enough  for  the 
present,  and  I  think  of  the  birds  in  the  sky ;  they  have  no  fire,  yet 
they  don't  freeze,  but  I  do  freeze.' 

This  term  Max  Miiller  does  not  seem  to  have  attended 
many  lectures,  but  worked  in  his  room  on  Pali  and  Hindustani 
and  on  translations  from  the  Sanskrit.  He  finished  his  transla- 
tion of  the  Meghadi'ita,  and  submitted  it  both  to  Riickert  and 
Brockhaus.  His  MS.,  with  Riickert's  notes  in  pencil,  still 
exists  ;  and  Brockhaus  wrote  to  him  as  follows  : — 

Translation, 

'  I  have  read  your  translation  with  the  greatest  delight.  You  have 
conquered  a  great  difficulty,  and  reproduced  this  peculiar  artificial 
poetry  in  intelligible,  and  at  the  same  time  poetic,  language.  You 
have  wisely  omitted  many  isolated  traits  in  order  to  preserve  the 
principal  picture,  and  to  give  the  reader  not  accustomed  to  such  pictures 
a  clear  idea  of  the  whole.  Your  idea  appears  to  me  almost  every- 
where the  right  one.  In  a  few  places,  I  should  take  a  different  view, 
but  you  have  been  able  to  use  explanatory  materials  with  which  I  am 
not  acquainted,  and  which,  no  doubt,  justify  you  in  many  points.' 

Towards  the  end  of  November  the  old  family  friend,  Baron 
Hagedorn,  suddenly  appeared  in  Berlin,  and  invited  Max 
Mliller  to  stay  with  him  in  Paris,  to  carry  on  his  Sanskrit 
work.  Baron  Hagedorn  was  born  near  Dessau  in  the  house 
of  a  forester,  where  his  mother  left  him  and  never  returned. 
It  was  evident  that  his  parents  were  wealthy,  as  a  large  sum 
was  yearly  paid  by  a  banker  in  Frankfort  for  his  maintenance. 
As  a  schoolboy  he  had  been  boarded  with  Frau  Klausnitzer, 
the   mother   of  the   Cousin   Emilie   so   often   mentioned   in 


28  Humboldt  [ch.  h 

Max  Miiller's  letters,  and  thus  became  the  intimate  friend  of 
the  family. 

Max  writes  on  his  twenty-first  birthday  to  tell  his  mother 
of  his  unexpected  happiness  : — 

Translation,  Dec.  6. 

'My  dearly  loved  Mother, — As  I  am  sitting  here  quite  alone 
on  my  birthday  (the  twenty-first)  I  must  give  myself  at  least  the  delight 
of  writing  to  those  who  love  me  so,  and  whom  I  dearly  love.  And 
first  of  all  comes  my  darling  little  mother.  My  best  thanks  for  your 
love  and  goodness,  which  in  many  things  are  far  too  great.  I  wrote 
to  Frau  Rath  to  ask  for  a  letter  of  introduction  from  the  Duchess 
to  Alexander  von  Humboldt.  Very  soon  after,  Frau  Rath  wrote 
in  the  most  friendly  way,  sending  me  the  Duchess's  letter.  I  left  this 
with  my  card  for  Humboldt.  The  other  day  I  passed  half  an  hour 
with  him,  and  a  few  days  later  came  a  letter  from  him  saying  I  should 
have  the  Sanskrit  MSS.  at  home,  which  ever  since  Easter  I  had 
begged  for  in  vain  from  the  Minister.  As  to  my  Meghaduta,  it  has 
been  a  long  time  with  Professor  Brockhaus  in  Leipzig,  who  at  last 
returned  it.  I  then  gave  it  to  Riickert,  with  whom  I  am  learning 
Persian,  and  who  remembers  my  father  with  great  affection.  He 
has  given  me  many  valuable  hints  with  regard  to  versification,  and 
even  improved  several  of  the  verses  himself  I  shall  send  it  in  a  few 
days  to  Mayer  Wigand,  as  I  should  like  to  see  it  printed  before  I  leave 
for  Paris.  I  wish  I  could  see  you,  darling  mother,  and  talk  over  all 
the  unexpected  and  undeserved  kindness  that  has  been  shown  me. 
I  went  Thursday  early  to  Hagedorn,  and  we  talked  over  everything ; 
and  the  result  is  he  has  asked  me  to  go  to  Paris  with  him,  to  live  with 
him  there  and  work.  So  in  about  four  weeks  from  to-day  I  shall  be 
in  Paris.  Hagedorn  will  tell  you  all  this  himself  more  fully.  The 
only  thing  to  settle  is,  shall  I  come  for  a  few  days  to  Chemnitz  before 
I  start?  As  you  can  fancy,  I  should  like  to  do  so  very  much,  only 
I  am  afraid  it  would  give  us  more  pain  than  pleasure.' 

During  the  short  time  Max  Miiller  still  passed  in  Berlin 
after  receiving  the  letter  of  introduction  from  the  Duchess  of 
Dessau,  he  must  have  seen  Humboldt  often  enough  to 
impress  the  great  man  most  favourably ;  for  on  November  27, 
1844,  Chevalier  Bunsen,  then  Prussian  Minister  in  London, 
wrote  to  his  friend  Archdeacon  Hare : — 

'  I  have  received  from  a  highly  respected  quarter  ^  a  very  strong 

'  i.  e.  Humboldt,  and  also  Baroness  Stolzenberg,  who  herself  wrote  to 
Bunsen  about  her  young  cousin. 


1844]  Baron  Bunsen  29 

recommendation  of  a  young  man  of  twenty-two  {sic)  years  of  age, 
much  thought  of  by  Schelling.  He  has  made  himself  known  by 
a  new  edition  of  the  Hitopadesa  from  the  Sanskrit,  and  is  a  general 
scholar  altogether  distinguished.  He  desires  to  live  some  years  in 
England.  He  is  the  son  of  the  celebrated  poet  and  philologer  Wilhelm 
Miiller  (author  of  the  Griechenlieder  and  Romische  Ritornellen),  of  high 
moral  character,  and  as  far  as  1  know  of  serious  convictions.' 

In  quoting  this  letter  in  the  Life  of  her  distinguished 
husband,  Baroness  Bunsen  adds : — 

'  This  is  the  first  indication  of  an  important  event  in  the  life  of 
Bunsen,  the  acquaintance  which  at  once  became  warm  friendship 
with  Dr.  Max  Miiller,  now  Professor  at  Oxford ;  and  his  approach  is 
hailed  as  the  rising  of  a  beneficent  luminary  on  the  horizon.  The 
kindred  mind,  their  sympathy  of  heart,  the  unity  in  highest  aspirations, 
a  congeniality  in  principle,  a  fellowship  in  the  pursuit  of  favourite 
objects  which  attracted  and  bound  Bunsen  to  his  young  friend, 
rendered  this  connexion  one  of  the  happiest  of  his  life.' 

But  nearly  two  years  were  to  pass  before  Max  Miiller  met 
this  friend,  patron,  and  benefactor ;  whose  kindly  influence 
was  to  alter  the  course  of  his  whole  life. 


CHAPTER  III 

1845-1846 

Paris.     Lonely,  struggling  life.     Gathy,     Burnouf.     Rig-veda. 
Rachel.     Dvarkanath  Tagore.     Boehtlingk. 

Archdeacon  Hare  lost  no  time  in  responding  to  the 
letter  of  November  27  from  Chevalier  Bunsen,  for  we  find 
a  note  from  Max  Miiller  to  the  Chevalier  dated  'Chemnitz, 
January  i,  1845,'  which  implies  that  one,  if  not  more  letters 
had  already  passed  between  them  as  to  a  tutorship  in  an 
English  family,  suggested  by  the  Archdeacon.  But  we  will 
leave  Max  to  tell  his  own  further  story  in  his  Diary. 

Translation.  Bonn,  March  6,  1845. 

'  Once  more  a  new  change  in  my  life,  and  once  more  an  attempt  at 
something  definite.  My  stay  in  Berlin  is  over;  I  have  made  many 
and  influential  friends  there — Schelling,  Riickert,  Humboldt,  Bopp, 
Jacobi,  Mendelssohn.  IMy  views  of  life  become  clearer  and  more 
sensible,  my  inner  life  more  active  and  more  independent  of  outward 
circumstances.  There  was  not  much  to  be  gained  in  knowledge  in 
Berlin ;  the  learned  men  are  too  learned,  too  reserved,  and  do  not 
attempt  to  gain  any  influence ;  and  even  the  treasures  of  the  Library 
were  long  closed  to  me,  till  a  word  from  Humboldt  put  an  end  to  the 
constant  refusals  of  the  librarian  Pertz  and  the  Minister.  In  December 
Hagedorn  came  to  Berlin  and  asked  me  to  stay  with  him  in  Paris, 
and  just  then  I  received  an  offer  to  go  as  a  tutor  to  London.  Great 
indecision.  At  length  decided  on  Paris  and  its  pleasant  independence, 
though  at  the  same  time  I  did  not  refuse  all  other  possible  offers. 
I  had  a  longing  for  Paris,  and  I  soon  went  to  Chemnitz,  saw  Hage- 
dorn in  Dessau,  where  he  M'as  dawdling.  I  was  some  time  in 
Chemnitz  and  had  a  good  deal  of  society,  balls,  sledge-parties,  &c., 
but  not  a  word  from  Hagedorn.  So  I  started  at  last  for  Dessau,  not 
feeling  much  confidence  in  Hagedorn.     When  we  met  we  got  on 


1845]  Ar-rival  in  Parts  31 

very  well  and  settled  everything.  On  February  26  I  started  for  Paris. 
In  Cothen  the  train  was  stopped  by  the  snow,  and  we  returned  by 
extra  post  to  Dessau.  Here  Hagedorn  found  business  letters  which 
kept  him.  At  last,  March  3,  I  started  alone  for  Hanover.  The  4th 
to  Elberfeld ;  at  night  by  post  to  Deutz,  arriving  early  in  Cologne ; 
railway  to  Bonn.  Table  d'hote  in  Hotel  de  Treves ;  two  English 
families,  whom  I  could  not  understand  ;  very  cross.  Afternoon  to 
Lassen,  not  very  interesting  talk ;  five  o'clock,  lecture  by  Dahlmann 
on  Publicity,  Coming  of  Age,  Jury,  &c. ;  very  remarkable,  quiet,  no 
gesticulations,  irrefutable,  convincing,  a  skilful  man.  In  Bonn  the  old 
topics  still  going  on — Catholicism,  the  Holy  Coat,  and  Protestantism. 

Paris,  March  15. 
'  My  journey  is  happily  over.  I  left  Bonn  on  the  6th  for  Cologne, 
and  started  on  the  8th  for  Brussels ;  here  I  found  myself  already  in 
the  midst  of  French,  which  I  found  very  troublesome.  I  stayed  the 
night.  On  the  9th  I  started  at  three  o'clock  by  train.  On  the  way 
difficulties  with  the  douane  and  my  passport;  the  loth  at  three 
o'clock  I  arrived  in  Paris.' 

Max  MUlIer  has  himself  given  us  an  amusing  account  of 
his  difficulties  on  his  arrival  in  Paris,  owning  to  Hagedorn 
having  failed  either  to  write  or  appear  ;  and  though  he  stayed 
in  Paris  till  June,  1846,  as  Hagedorn  never  came  he  lived  at 
his  ow^n  expense  in  Hagedorn's  rooms,  instead  of  being  his 
friend's  guest  as  was  at  first  arranged.  If  he  found  economy- 
necessary  in  Berlin,  it  was  far  more  so  in  Paris,  where  soon 
after  his  arrival  he  says,  '  I  am  spending  a  lot  of  money ' ; 
though  in  his  carefully  kept  accounts  there  are  very  few 
entries  but  for  dinner — for  which,  unless  he  went  'hors  la 
barriere,'  he  had  to  pay  two  francs — and  copying  paper,  the 
amount  of  which  shows  how  hard  he  was  working.  His  life 
was  very  lonely ;  he  at  first  knew  hardly  any  one  but  some 
of  the  employes  at  the  Library,  and  he  says,  March  17, '  I  feel 
very  lonely  and  forsaken,  and  of  Paris  I  see  nothing ' ;  and 
again,  '  Great  inertia  and  fatigue,  and  out  of  spirits,  no 
inclination  for  work '  ;  and  yet  he  writes  cheerily  to  his  mother 
not  to  distress  her : — 

Translation.  Paris,  April  10,  1845. 

'  Of  course  I  have  heard  nothing  from  Hagedorn,  and  therefore  do 
not  expect  to  see  him  very  soon.  But  it  is  well  I  did  not  further 
postpone   my  journey,  for  Humboldt   being   here  has   been  of  the 


32 


Hard  Work  in  Paris  [ch.  m 


greatest  use  to  me,  and  he  goes  away  now  very  soon.     He  is  kindness 
itself,  and  is  even  thought  more  of  in  Paris  than  in  Berlin.     It  is  very 
difficult  to  get  leave   here  to  take  out  MSS.  to  work  at  at  home, 
and  the  Prussian  Minister,  under  whose  protection  I  am  here — for  in 
Paris  no  one  has  heard  of  such  a  land  as  Anhalt  Dessau — is  so  stupid 
that  he  has  never  given  his  guarantee  for  such  a  purpose,  whilst  all 
other   Ambassadors,    even    the   Turkish,   are   constantly   doing    so. 
Humboldt  knew  this,  but  told  me  he  thought  I  should  find  his  own 
guarantee  considered  quite  satisfactory ;  and  it  is  quite  true.     I  soon 
had  the  MSS.  in  my  hands,  and  was  treated  in  so  friendly  a  way  by 
all  the  employes,  that  I  was  quite  astonished,  till  at  last  I  was  told, 
"  Vous  8tes  si  vivement  recommandd  par  M.  Humboldt,  il  n'y  a  pas 
une  meilleure  recommandation."     As  to  the  printed  books,  I  have  not 
yet  got  the  permit,  but  hope  soon  to  do  so,  though  this  is  more 
difficult ;  leave  is  seldom  given,  and  all  Paris,  learned  and  unlearned, 
sit  in  the  reading-room,  packed  like  herrings,  and  read  there.     I  have 
been  now  for  some  time  in  full  swing  of  work,  and  only  wish  there 
were  more  strength  in  the  machine,   for  there  is  endless  work   to 
be  done  here.    You  will  wish  for  a  description  of  my  life ;  that  is  soon 
given.     I  get   up  early,   have  breakfast,   i.  e.  bread   and   butter,   no 
coffee.     I  stay  at  home  and  work  till  seven,  go  out  and  have  dinner, 
come  back  in  an  hour,  and  stay  at  home  and  work  till  I  go  to  bed. 
So  you  see  I  know  nothing  of  Paris  but  from  my  appetite,  which  has 
got  over  its  first  astonishment  at  the  excellence  of  everything,  and 
now  rather  wonders  that  the  Paris  restaurants  are  so  renowned.     But 
one  thing  I  have  seen,  that  is,  that  everything  in  Paris   is  terribly 
expensive.     With  12,000  francs  a  year  one  could  live  here  nicely; 
I  am  afraid  I  shall  hardly  work  my  income  up  to  that.     I  am  on  the 
whole  well,  though  I  must  live  most  economically  and  avoid  every 
expense  not  actually  necessary.     The  free  lodging  is   an  immense 
help,  for  unless  one  lives  in  a  perfect  hole,  one  must  pay  50  or  60 
francs  a  month  and  10  francs  for  service,  60  francs  dinner,  30  francs 
breakfast;   this  makes  160  francs  a  month  without  light  and  fire,  or 
washing  and  clothes,  nearly  2,000  francs  a  year.    Theatres,  caf^s,  &c., 
are  very  dear,   particularly  for  foreigners,   who  don't  know  how  to 
manage ;  so  I  have  not  been  to  any  theatre,  except  one  evening,  when 
I  had  to  pay  2  francs  for  a  cup  of  chocolate.     I  thought,  "  Never 
again."     But  don't  think  I  have  nothing  to  amuse  me.     I  can  only 
say,  one  walk  on  the  Boulevards  is  far  better  than  two  evenings  at  the 
Chemnitz  theatre.     It  is  a  strange  feeling  to  be  so  entirely  strange 
among  the  thousands  of  faces  that  pass  by  one,  and  for  interesting 
observation  there  is  no  place  like  this.     How  often  I  say  to  myself, 
"  Oh,  if  mother  were  only  here."     Yesterday  and  to-day  are  called  in 


1845]  ^if^  ^^^  Paris  33 

the  serious  world  Holy  Thursday  and  Good  Friday;  here  they  are 
called  Longchamps,  and  all  Paris  is  driving  out  through  the  Champs 
!filysdes  in  their  finest  clothes,  but  looking  miserable  in  this  cold. 
The  hero  of  the  day  is  General  Tom  Thumb  ;  the  Rue  Richelieu  is 
blocked  the  days  he  receives ;  the  aristocracy  vie  with  each  other  in 
running  after  him,  and  of  course  Louis  Philippe  at  their  head.  I  have 
seen  both  heroes  without  paying — Tom  Thumb  in  his  carriage,  which 
is  about  as  big  as  a  child's  go-cart,  and  the  King  to-day  for  the  first 
time  when  I  crossed  the  Place  du  Carrousel  just  as  they  were  on 
parade,  and  the  old  King  was  riding  round  bare-headed  with  all  his 
suite.  I  was  only  twenty  paces  from  him ;  he  has  a  very  characteristic 
face,  full,  with  thick  grey  curly  hair,  but  in  spite  of  his  dignity  some- 
thing cunning  and  crafty  in  his  eyes.  I  see  his  likeness  but  too  often, 
that  is  whenever  I  have  to  pay  away  a  five-franc  piece,  which,  alas  ! 
happens  frequently.  By-the-by  I  have  just  paid  50  francs  for  books ; 
what  do  you  say  to  that  ?  Gathy  ^  sent  me  one  day  a  ticket  for  a  con- 
cert, where  I  saw  the  beau  nionde  of  Paris ;  he  is  most  friendly  to  me. 
Twice  a  week  I  go  to  lectures  at  the  College  de  France.  It  is  some 
way  off;  but  they  are  very  good,  and  I  pay  nothing  and  I  hear  French 
spoken,  for  which  otherwise  I  have  hardly  any  opportunity.  But  enough 
of  my  fife  here,  which,  if  on  the  whole  very  simple,  keeps  me  in  good 
spirits  as  you  see,  and  at  all  events  does  not  as  yet  interfere  with  my 
work.  But  you  can  fancy  that  in  this  utterly  strange  land  I  sometimes 
feel  lonely  and  forsaken,  and  would  gladly  find  myself  for  a  few  hours 
in  Chemnitz  v/ith  you  all.  But  the  best  cure  for  such  thoughts 
is  continuous  work,  and  that  I  have.  And  then  when  I  think  of  you 
all  I  feel  I  am  not  so  far  from  you ;  I  know  all  you  would  say  to  me  if 
I  were  sitting  with  you,  and  all  that  you  are  often  in  your  thoughts  saying 
to  me.  Separation  loses  its  bitterness  when  we  have  faith  in  each 
other  and  in  Godsl  Faith  in  each  other  keeps  us  close  together  in  life, 
and  faith  in  God  keeps  us  together  in  eternity.'/  But  I  see  I  am 
talking  Sanskrit  philosophy  instead  of  simply  teUing  you  not  to  be 
unhappy,  not  to  make  yourself  and  others  uneasy,  but  try  to  enjoy  life 
in  this  lovely  spring  weather,  whether  in  Chemnitz  or  Dresden.  How 
gladly  I  would  have  put  something  in  the  letter  for  Auguste's  birthday 
from  the  Paris  shops,  for  the  sight  of  the  splendid  and  tastefully 
arranged  windows  is  most  tempting.  But,  alas !  my  purse  suffers 
from  chronic  consumption;  you  know  this  family  complaint,  which 
has  followed  me  to  Paris.' 

Max  Miiller's  first  visit  to  Burnouf  was  paid  on  March  20, 
and  was  the  beginning  of  a  friendship  to  which  he  looked 

^  His  childhood's  friend.     See  p.  5. 
I  D 


34  Burnouf — Humboldt  [ch.  m 

back    with    affectionate   gratitude   to    the  last  year   of  his 

life. 

Diary. 

Translation. 

'  Went  to  Burnouf.  Spiritual,  amiable,  thoroughly  French.  He  re- 
ceived me  in  the  most  friendly  way,  talked  a  great  deal,  and  all  he 
said  valuable,  not  on  ordinary  topics  but  on  special.  I  managed 
better  in  French  than  I  expected.  "I  am  a  Brahman,  a  Buddhist, 
a  Zoroastrian ;  I  hate  the  Jesuits " — that  is  the  sort  of  man.  I  am 
looking  forward  to  his  lectures.' 

Max  Mliller  describes  his  teacher  as 

'  Small,  his  face  decidedly  German,  only  lighted  up  with  a  constant 
sparkle  which  is  distinctively  French.  I  must  have  seemed  very  stupid 
to  him  when  I  tried  to  explain  what  I  really  wanted  to  do  in  Paris.  He 
told  me  afterwards  that  he  could  not  make  me  out  at  first.  His  lectures 
were  on  the  Rig-veda,  and  opened  a  new  world  to  me.  He  explained  to 
us  his  own  researches,  he  showed  us  new  MSS.  which  he  had  received 
from  India,  in  fact  he  did  ail  he  could  to  make  us  fellow  workers.' 

In  Burnouf's  select  class  Max  Miiller  met  men  who,  many 
of  them,  remained  his  firm  friends  through  life,  as  Barthelemy- 
St.-Hilaire,  the  Abbe  Bardelli,  Thomas  Goldstiicker,  and  a 
few  others.  Max  Miiller  survived  them  all.  When  he  was  in 
Paris  for  the  Centenary  of  the  Institute  in  1895  he  paid  a  long 
visit  to  Barthelemy-St.-Hilaire,  finding  him,  as  had  been  his 
custom  for  years,  sitting  by  lamplight  with  the  daylight  care- 
fully excluded.  The  old  man,  then  ninety  years  of  age,  died 
soon  after,  and  his  friend  wrote  an  eloquent  and  appreciative 
account  of  his  life  and  work  in  the  Times  of  November  29, 1 895. 

Max  Miiller  recalls  also  a  visit  to  Humboldt,  whom  he 
found  at  the  College  de  France :  '  His  friendliness  and  true 
kindness  make  me  feel  quite  shy;  I  hardly  know  what  to  say. 
"  If  you  were  only  a  little  more  practical  in  your  views,"  he 
said,  which  startled  me.  He  then  wrote  a  long  letter  to 
Reinaud  and  gave  me  his  Cosmos  to  read,  and  left  me  with 
reiterated  assurances  of  his  wish  to  help  me.' 

Max  seems  to  have  gone  through  a  good  deal  of  drudgery 
in  mastering  French,  and  often  took  refuge  with  Gathy,  '  to 
make  up  by  talking  German  the  tortures  I  suffer  in  talking 
French.'  Another  day  he  says,  '  I  did  hardly  anything  but 
study  this   abominable   language ;   how  much   time   I    have 


1845]  Rig-veda  35 

wasted  on  it !  yet  it  is  necessary  that  I  should  get  some 
fluency  in  expressing  myself/  Gathy  occasionally  gave  him 
a  concert  ticket,  and  he  speaks  of  amusing  himself  by  making 
walks  of  discovery  about  Paris :  '  and  people  look  at  me,  and 
I  know  no  one  ;  it  seems  as  if  I  hardly  belong  to  the  genus  of 
animaux  sociables' 

He  appears  to  have  found  it  difficult  at  first  to  decide  on 
the  distinctive  work  he  should  take  up  ;  '  the  same  life,  which 
has  almost  become  unbearable ;  I  long  for  work  to  occupy 
my  mind.'  He  read  a  good  deal  of  French.  Balzac:  'all 
his  works  that  I  know  treat  of  the  analysis,  the  anatomy  of 
love,  before  and  after  marriage ;  he  knows  married  life  and 
dissects  it  with  artistic  skill.'  Paul  de  Kock :  *  colourless 
babyish  reading,  often  droll,  some  characters  well  conceived.' 
It  was  the  influence  of  Burnouf  that  decided  him  to  take  up 
the  Hymns  of  the  Rig-veda^  with  the  great  native  commentary 
of  Sayana,  as  his  distinctive  work.  '  Either  study  Indian 
philosophy  or  study  Indian  religion  and  copy  the  Hymns 
and  Sayana,'  said  Burnouf.  To  the  youth  of  only  twenty- 
one,  knowing  hardly  half  a  dozen  people,  living  alone  up  five 
flights  of  stairs,  often  not  speaking  to  a  soul  for  twenty-four 
hours  round,  life  may  well  have  seemed  dreary ;  and  yet  he 
never  for  one  moment  really  regretted  the  choice  he  had 
made,  and  his  old  master.  Professor  Brockhaus,  gave  him 
constant  encouragement.     Brockhaus  writes  from  Leipzig  : — 

Translation.  June  4,  1845. 

'  You  have  delighted  me  very  much  by  the  few  lines  you  have  sent 
me  from  Paris,  from  which  I  see  with  what  active  interest  you  pursue 
your  study  of  Sanskrit.  It  is  very  natural  that  you  should  turn  to  the 
Vedas  with  decided  preference ;  one  becomes  more  and  more  attached 
to  these  old  monuments  the  more  one  studies  them,  and  when  once 
one  can  survey  them  as  a  whole,  they  make  a  much  more  powerful 
impression  than  one  would  expect  from  isolated  fragments.' 

He  never  allowed  his  letters  to  his  mother  to  show  the 
fierce  struggle  it  was  to  live. 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  Paris,  Afqy  5. 

'  One's  money  runs  away  here,  one  does  not  know  how,  and  though 

of  course  it  costs  one  more  in  the  beginning,  the  daily  wants  do  not 

D  2, 


36  Work  in  Parts  [ch.  m 

lessen.  That  I  am  as  saving  as  possible  you  may  be  sure,  for  it  is 
my  greatest  wish  to  stay  here  as  long  as  possible,  where  I  have  found 
so  much  necessary  to  my  studies.  On  amusements  I  have  really 
spent  nothing,  and  have  not  yet  been  to  Versailles,  or  other  places 
round,  though  I  am  often  tempted  when  I  see  the  great  placards  on 
the  walls ;  but  that  is  easily  set  aside  if  I  can  attain  my  other  object. 
I  shall  not  order  any  summer  things,  for  I  need  not  make  myself 
smart,  that  is  one  advantage  of  being  unknown.' 

To  THE  Same. 

Translation.  Vkkis,  June  11,  1845. 

'  Have  I  already  told  you  that  I  am  collecdng  here  the  materials  for 
an  edition  of  the  oldest  Veda,  and  gather  together  everything  I  can 
find  ?  This  is  the  oldest  and  most  important  book  in  India,  perhaps 
the  oldest  book  that  exists.  The  Commentary  written  in  Sanskrit  fills 
four  folios,  each  of  a  thousand  pages,  which  must  all  be  copied  out  and 
compared  with  other  MSS.,  and  this  is  the  most  important  and  necessary 
work.  Now  I  must  see  what  I  can  do — only  health  and  money, 
that  is  the  question.  I  have  lately  met  a  Sanskrit  scholar  here  who 
has  been  three  years  in  Paris,  and  has  just  come  back  from  London. 
We  have  worked  a  great  deal  together,  and  I  have  for  some  weeks 
been  with  him  day  and  night,  which  my  portier  takes  very  ill,  and  I 
certainly  could  not  make  him  understand  that  I  had  been  doing  nothing 
but  work ;  altogether  there  are  odd  rumours  about  Monsieur  Max,  as 
I  am  called,  who  drinks  no  coffee  early,  eats  till  evening  only  two  dry 
rolls  (the  butter  is  knocked  off),  and  writes  Hebrew  the  whole  day.' 

When  copying  MSS.  for  others  his  plan  was  to  work  the 
whole  night  through,  and  the  second  night  only  sleep  two 
hours  on  his  bed  without  undressing,  the  third  night  to  go  to 
bed  and  then  begin  again.  He  had  told  his  mother  nothing 
of  what  he  calls  in  his  Diary  an  abominable  time  from  April  26 
to  May  4,  when  he  suffered  frightfully  and  without  inter- 
mission from  toothache.  '  I  could  do  nothing,  neither  write, 
nor  eat,  nor  go  out.  I  felt  abandoned  by  every  one,  no  one 
to  pity  me  or  take  care  of  me.'  At  length  he  crawled  to 
Gathy,  who  sent  him  to  a  dentist.  '  I  went  home  quite 
exhausted ;  the  portier  and  his  daughter  took  endless  care  of 
me  when  they  saw  how  weak  and  suffering  I  was,  and  brought 
me  broth  and  chocolate.     It  was  a  black  week.' 

All  this  time  no  news  came  from  his  uncertain  friend 
Hagedorn,  and  his  want  of  money  soon  began  to  cause  him 


1845]  Hard  Struggles  37 

great  anxiety.  '  It  was  indeed  a  hard  struggle,  far  harder 
than  those  who  have  known  me  in  later  life  would  believe. 
It  was  a  hard  fight,  and  cannot  have  been  very  good  for  me 
physically,  but  I  do  not  regret  it  now ;  often  did  I  go  without 
my  dinner,  being  quite  satisfied  with  boiled  eggs  and  bread 
and  butter.'  He  had  chosen  his  own  line,  and  instead  of 
settling  down  in  Germany  as  a  teacher  in  some  school  with 
a  fixed  salary,  as  most  of  his  friends  wished,  or  going  as  tutor 
to  England,  he  had  taken  the  tiny  patrimony  still  left  him 
after  the  expenses  of  the  University,  and  had  determined  to 
carry  on  his  beloved  Sanskrit  studies.  '  It  was  in  my  own 
hands  whether  I  should  sink  or  swim.'  There  is  a  passage  in 
an  American  novel,  The  Increasing  Purpose^  by  J.  A.  Allen, 
which  exactly  applies  to  Max  Miiller's  struggles  in  Paris  and 
London,  and  the  effect  on  his  whole  character  for  life.  One 
could  almost  fancy  Mr.  Allen  had  known  him.  Speaking  of 
a  man  choosing  his  work  in  life,  Allen  says  :— 

'  Yet  happy  ye,  whether  the  waiting  be  for  short  time  or  long  time, 
if  only  it  bring  on  meanwhile  the  struggle.  One  sure  reward  you 
have  then,  though  there  may  be  none  other,  just  the  struggle,  and  the 
marshalling  to  the  front  of  rightful  forces,  with  effort,  endurance, 
devotion,  the  putting  resolutely  back  of  forces  wrongful,  the  hardening 
of  all  that  is  soft  within,  the  softening  of  all  that  is  hard ;  until  out  of 
the  hardening  and  the  softening  resuk  the  better  tempering  of  the 
soul's  metal,  and  higher  development  of  those  two  qualities  which  are 
best  in  man,  and  best  in  his  ideal  of  his  Maker,  strength  and  kindness, 
power  and  mercy.  Real  struggling  is  itself  real  living,  and  no  en- 
nobling thing  of  this  earth  is  ever  to  be  had  by  man  on  any  other 
terms ;  .  .  .  a  divine  end  is  to  be  reached,  through  divine  means,  a 
great  work  requires  a  great  preparation.' 

The  four  years  Max  Midler  spent  after  leaving  his  mother 
at  Leipzig  were  this  time  of  preparation,  by  means  of  a  great 
struggle,  for  the  brilliant  success  of  his  after- life. 

It  is  pleasant  to  read  of  a  little  variety  in  a  life  of  such 
incessant  work,  when  in  October,  1845,  a  friend  took  him  one 
night  to  the  Theatre  Fran9ais,  where  he  saw  Rachel  in  Plicdre. 

To    HIS    JMOTHER. 

Translation. 

'  She  is  a  wonderful  actress  in  her  own  style,  but  the  part  of  Phbdre 


38  Dvarkanath  Tagore  [ch.  m 

is  so  horrible,  that  though  one  must  admire  the  perfection  of  repre- 
sentation, one  has  no  real  enjoyment  from  it.  Then  from  the  begin- 
ning to  the  end  Rachel  was  nothing  but  a  pale  shadow  whose  only 
life  is  passion  and  despair,  but  passion  which  fails  in  all  tragic  effect 
because  it  has  no  influence  on  one's  own  feelings.  It  is  a  crude  and 
painful  passion  with  which  she  is  possessed,  and  in  which  there  is 
nothing  to  awake  our  sympathy.  It  is  a  tragedy  which,  on  the  Greek 
stage  only,  could  represent  men  in  their  struggle  with  fate,  with  blind 
unalterable  fate,  which  avenges  the  sin  of  the  father  in  the  sex  of 
Ph^dre  ;  if  this  one  moral  motive  is  wanting,  as  on  the  French  stage, 
the  whole  loses  its  deep  meaning,  and  nothing  remains  but  the  sensual 
longing,  which  is  neither  great  nor  elevating.  Then  Rachel  stood 
alone ;  the  other  actors  were  but  foils  to  her.  After  that — so  charac- 
teristic of  the  French,  who  like  to  see  everything  without  feeling  any- 
thing— came  a  comedy  of  Molibre,  Le  M^decin  malgre  lui,  which  was 
very  well  played.' 

One  most  interesting  acquaintance  Max  Miiller  made  in 
Paris,  Dvarkanath  Tagore,  a  rich  Hindoo,  who,  though  no 
student  of  ancient  Sanskrit  himself,  took  a  lively  interest  in 
the  young  scholar  presented  to  him  by  Burnouf  at  the 
Institut  de  France.  He  invited  Max  Miiller  to  his  house, 
and  they  spent  many  an  hour  together  talking  or  enjoying 
music,  for  the  Hindoo  was  a  good  musician,  had  a  fine  voice, 
and  had  been  fairly  well  taught.  He  liked  Max  Miiller  to 
accompany  him  when  singing  either  Italian  or  French  music. 
After  a  time  he  was  persuaded  to  sing  Persian  and  real 
Indian  music,  and  when  his  hearer  confessed  that  he  saw  no 
beauty  in  it,  neither  melody,  rhythm,  nor  harmony,  his  Indian 
friend  lectured  him  on  the  prejudices  of  Western  nations, 
who  turn  away  from  all  that  is  strange  and  unpleasing  to 
them.  Max  pacified  him  by  assuring  him  that  he  knew  that 
India  possessed  a  remarkable  science  of  music  founded  on 
mathematics.  He  was  present  at  the  great  party  given  by 
Dvarkanath  Tagore  to  Louis  Philippe,  when  the  room  was 
hung  with  Indian  shawls,  afterwards  distributed  among  the 
most  distinguished  guests.  It  was  at  this  time  also  that 
Max  Miiller  saw  a  good  deal  of  Baron  d'Eckstein,  who  em- 
ployed him  frequently  in  copying  MSS.  for  him. 

All  this  while  Max  Miiller  was  working  hard  in  preparing 
a  correct  text  of  the  Hymns  of  the  Rig-vcda,  together  with 


1845]  Rig-veda  39 

a  perfect  text  of  Sayana's  Commentary,  and  the  work  was  so 
far  advanced  that  the  question  of  a  publisher  had  to  be  con- 
sidered. It  required  a  large  capital  to  print  and  publish 
a  work  of  six  thousand  pages  quarto,  and  at  the  same  time 
pay  the  editor  enough  to  live  on.  The  idea  of  publication  by 
a  publisher  at  Konigsberg,  with  the  help  of  subscriptions, 
which  is  mentioned  in  the  letters  to  his  mother,  and  for  which 
a  prospectus  was  actually  printed  and  circulated  from  London, 
was  abandoned,  when  in  the  spring  of  1847  the  East  India 
Company  undertook  the  task.  The  following  letter  to  his 
mother  gives  an  account  of  his  plans  and  prospects  to  the 
close  of  1845  '• — 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  Paris,  Dec.  23,  1845. 

'  You  know  on  the  whole  a  great  deal  about  my  work,  but  less  on 
the  plans  that  depend  on  it.     As  the  printing  of  the  Veda  could  not 
be  undertaken  by  any  publisher  on  account  of  the  cost  and  length  of 
the  work,  I  was  obliged,  though  there  is  no  chance  of  printing  for 
the  next  two  or  three  years,  to  apply  to  several  Governments  and 
Academies,  to  find  out  how  such  a  work  could  best  be  carried  out. 
I  therefore  made  inquiries  through  friends  in  London  and  St.  Peters- 
burg, and  received  tolerably  reassuring  answers  from  both  places. 
In  London,  Wilson,  the  father  of  Sanskrit  literature,  declared  himself 
ready  to  get  the  work  undertaken  by  the  University  of  Oxford ;  but 
only  on  condition  that  he  should  publish  the  text  of  the  Rig-veda,  and 
I,  in  conjunction  with  other  young  Sanskrit  students,  the  text  of  the 
Commentary,  which  is  really  the  most  important  work,  and  fills  about 
eight  thousand  pages.     This,  as  far  as  it  went,  was  very  well  and 
a  great  honour ;  but  as  the  two  other  students  were  leaving  London, 
one  for  Petersburg,  the  other  for  Tubingen,  it  was  necessary  I  should 
settle  in  London,  and  for  that  I  have  no  money.     At  the  same  time 
Herr  Boehtlingk  wrote  from  Petersburg  that  he  could  persuade  the 
Academy  to  print  the  work,  but  with  a  condition  that  I  worked  with 
him,  and  gave  up  the  publication  of  the  text  to  him.     As  the  publica- 
tion of  the  text  is,  as  I  said,  of  litde  scientific  importance,  only  for  the 
credit  of  being  the  first  to  publish  the  full  text  of  the  Veda,  I  wrote 
that  I  was  ready  to  accept  the  offer  if  a  sum  of  money  were  promised 
me,  to  recoup  me  for  the  expense  of  copying  this  enormous  Com- 
mentary, and  other  books  necessary  for  reference,  or  that  a  place 
should  be  found  for  me  in  Petersburg,  where  I  should  have  to  live, 
which  would  enable  me  in  a  few  years  to  put  by  enough  to  repay 


40  Baron  von  Cetto  [ch.  m 

myself.  To  this  I  have  had  no  answer.  At  the  same  time  I  thought 
of  Berhn,  and  wrote  to  Humboldt  and  Bopp,  and  sent  them  a  detailed 
prospectus  of  my  work,  and  asked  if  any  of  the  rich  funds  there  could 
be  applied  to  printing  the  Commentary.  Humboldt  soon  sent  me 
a  very  kind  letter,  in  which  indeed  he  gave  no  definite  results,  but  said 
he  thought  it  was  impossible  in  Prussia,  and  urged  me  emphatically 
to  accept  the  invitation  from  London  or  from  Petersburg.  This  was 
the  state  of  things,  when  within  the  last  few  days  I  received  from 
Hase,  one  of  the  sub-librarians  of  the  Bibliothbque  Royale,  a  sugges- 
tion to  go  as  tutor  with  the  Bavarian  Minister,  Baron  von  Cetto,  to 
London.  Unexpected  as  the  idea  was,  I  at  once  resolved  to  do 
everything  I  could  to  obtain  the  post,  and  for  the  last  few  days  have 
been  in  communication  with  the  Baron,  who  is  in  Paris.  Everything 
seemed  arranged,  when  this  morning,  at  the  last  visit,  I  discovered  that 
the  post  was  impossible  for  me,  as  he  required  me  to  promise,  in 
writing,  that  I  would  never  be  away  from  the  children  for  an  hour, 
never  go  anywhere  without  them ;  in  fact  I  should  have  led  a  monastic 
life.  Strongly  as  I  felt  it  was  my  duty  to  do  all  that  was  in  my  power 
to  secure  a  post  in  which  I  could  gain  my  own  living,  and  deeply  as 
the  feeling  has  weighed  on  me,  more  especially  of  late,  of  being  a 
burden  to  others,  and  well  as  I  knew  that  to  many  of  my  relations 
such  a  post  would  appear  most  advantageous,  such  regulations  seemed 
to  me  so  degrading  and  foolish  that  I  told  his  Excellency  so,  and  took 
my  leave.  I  was  quite  ready,  though  I  dislike  teaching,  to  take  the 
post.  It  was  a  good  one,  all  expenses  paid  and  3,000  francs ;  and  then 
I  should  be  in  London,  which  however  necessary  for  my  work  seemed 
unattainable  in  any  other  way,  and  before  everything  else  it  was  a  certain 
substantial  position,  which  would  free  me  from  many  disagreeables, 
and  in  which,  instead  of  taking  money  from  you,  my  dearest  mother, 
I  could  have  given  you  some  little  pleasure.  But  it  was  impossible, 
unless  I  sacrificed  my  whole  future,  and  wasted  the  little  I  have 
already  done  ;  and  I  hope  that  as  I  feel  I  have  little  to  reproach  myself 
with,  I  shall  not  be  blamed  by  others.  I  shall  work  on  till  I  hear 
something  definite  from  London  or  Petersburg ;  if  neither  negotiation 
leads  to  definite  results,  I  must  return  next  spring  to  Germany,  and 
settle  down  in  Berlin,  or  more  probably  in  Konigsberg.  That  I  have 
not  thought  much  of  myself  in  all  this  you  will  see,  as  I  was  ready  to 
go  into  exile  for  four  or  five  years,  without  any  chance  of  seeing  you, 
my  dearest  mother,  or  seeing  or  speaking  to  any  creature  belonging 
to  me.  They  have  been  trying  days  through  which  I  have  lately  lived, 
and  trying  nights  too,  in  which  I  struggled  to  subdue  my  heart  and 
intellect,  with  all  my  inclinations  and  ambitions,  that  I  might  do  what 
really  seemed  my  duty;  and  even  now,  when  I  can  breathe  freely, 


1845]  Humboldt  \\ 

I  feel  the  pressure,  for  I  have  learnt  that  life  is  difficult,  and  why  ? 
because  of  that  cursed  money,  which  so  many  throw  away,  which 
makes  thousands  miserable,  and  very  few  happy  ;  yes,  there  must  be 
a  curse  on  money  that  is  not  won  by  honest  toil.  But  enough  of 
these  lamentations,  which  are  of  no  use,  least  of  all  in  Paris.  Melan- 
choly and  frivolity  are  the  two  scales  in  which  men  here  go  up  and 
down ;  happy  he  who  sits  in  the  middle  quiet  and  observant  as  an 
Indian  Muni.  Now  for  Paris.  In  the  first  place,  I  have  moved  now 
and  lost  my  beautiful  view  and  look  into  the  court.  The  rooms  are 
good,  fifth  floor;  changing  was  very  tiresome  and  very  dear,  and 
I  have  had  many  difficulties,  caused  by  Hagedorn's  silence,  and  had 
to  arrange  about  his  furniture  and  everything.  As  he  never  writes, 
I  have  again  had  to  get  200  francs  from  Lederhose,  and  with  the 
money  you  have  just  sent  shall  manage  till  January  or  February. 
I  have  sent  away  my  piano,  for  it  cost  too  much.  I  can  well 
fancy  that  you  think  life  here  very  expensive.  I  have  been  told  it  is 
dearer  in  Berlin,  but  in  Berlin  one  can  manage  economies  better  than 
here ;  it  is  the  actual  necessaries  of  life  that  cost  so  much  in  Paris. 
My  birthday  went  by  very  quietly.  Gathy  came  early  to  see  me,  and 
I  fetched  some  cakes  and  a  bottle  of  wine  which  was  in  Hagedorn's 
cellar,  which,  bon  g?-/,  mal  gre,  he  had  to  contribute  as  a  birthday 
present,  and  we  drank  my  health.  My  Christmas  will  be  very  quiet  and 
lonely,  for  it  is  not  o.  festa  here.  I  think  I  shall  go  to  bed  at  six 
o'clock  and  dream.  This  old  year  has  gone  faster  than  any  before, 
and  I  was  really  amazed  when  I  said  to  myself,  I  am  twenty-two  years 
old.     My  wish  for  the  New  Year  is  a  speedy  joyful  meeting.' 

The  letter  from  Humboldt  mentioned  above  runs  thus  : — 

Translation.  Berlin,  December  8,  1845. 

I  hasten — though  only  in  a  few  lines,  for  I  am  harassed  by  many 
duties — to  thank  you,  dear  doctor,  for  your  kind  keepsake  ^  I 
seriously  advise  you  to  accept  the  offer  made  to  you  from  England 
or  Russia.  After  all  my  inquiries,  and  knowing  what  I  do  about 
the  amount  of  contribution  which  may  be  expected  from  the  Govern- 
ment here,  it  does  not  seem  to  me  in  the  least  likely  that  even 
Bopp  and  Lassen,  Professors  of  different  Universities  and  personally 
devoted  to  this  special  work,  could  send  you  means  to  print  a  thousand 
pages  of  the  Veda.  Life  here  is  so  much  more  prosaic,  and  it  is 
inadvisable  to  raise  misgivings  or  qualms  .  .  .  and  your  well-considered 
and  well-written  prospectus  contains  hints  of  spoliation.  Here  one 
is  so  cosmopolitan  that  one  does  not  care  where  the  Veda  may 
appear,  whether  in  Germany,  Oxford,  Paris,  or  St.  Petersburg, 
*  M.  M.'s  translation  of  the  HUopadha. 


42  Future  Plans  [ch.  m 

I  know  many  of  your  promising  writings,  and  as  I  am  proud  of 
possessing  warm  German  national  feelings,  I  am  sorry  that  I  cannot 
send  you  a  more  satisfactory  answer  to  your  request.  With  kind 
regards,  yours  A.  v.  Humboldt. 

Just  after  the  last  letter  to  his  mother,  Max  MUller  was 
taken  ill  with  influenza  and  rheumatism,  and  for  a  whole 
month  was  unable  to  work  or  do  anything.  He  explains  his 
further  plans  to  his  mother  in  the  following  letter : — 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  February  17,  1846. 

'  I  have  been  quite  ill.  I  got  a  bad  chill  early  in  January  (chiefly 
by  being  up  in  the  cold  nights  hunting  fleas),  and  the  whole  month 
had  so  much  rheumatism  in  my  head  and  back  that  I  had  at  last 
to  go  to  bed,  and  there  for  several  days  I  was  very  feverish.  The 
worst  is  that  I  have  lost  a  whole  month's  work,  for  I  got  so  weak 
I  could  not  hold  a  pen.  And  imagine  all  that  time,  the  swarms  of 
fleas  which  would  have  driven  a  strong  man  almost  mad.  As  soon 
as  I  was  a  little  better,  I  sent  for  the  landlord,  and  told  him  I  would 
give  up  the  rooms  at  once,  if  the  whole  were  not  properly  cleaned 
out.  This  has  been  done,  the  wooden  panels  taken  down  and  the 
walls  behind  washed  with  aqua  fortis,  every  room  fresh  papered  and 
varnished ;  the  worst  was  I  had  to  go  to  an  hotel,  for  the  smell  was 
so  strong.  It  is  still  like  autumn  here,  no  snow,  no  frost,  but  sitting 
still  at  work  I  use  a  good  deal  of  wood.  I  have  put  up  a  stove, 
for  the  open  fire  is  only  for  ornament.  The  season  is  nearly  at 
an  end,  I  have  been  out  a  good  deal,  as  I  have  made  many  acquain- 
tances; one  goes  at  nine  and  is  home  by  eleven,  unless  there  is 
dancing,  when  one  is  home  at  one  o'clock.  It  is  not  very  amusing, 
and  there  is  nothing  to  eat,  only  tea  and  cake  and  a  little  coloured 
water,  and  it  does  not  pay  for  one's  gloves.  I  did  not  have  a  doctor 
when  I  was  ill,  or  any  servant,  though  many  days  I  was  almost 
starved,  for  if  I  wanted  anything  I  had  to  go  out  and  fetch  it  myself. 
I  have  lately  made  friends  with  an  Indian  here,  with  whom  I  practise 
talking  English  and  Bengali.  I  had  already  studied  the  latter,  and 
have  prepared  a  Bengali  Grammar  in  French,  but  as  yet  I  have  not 
found  a  publisher.  As  to  my  plans,  they  are  pretty  nearly  settled. 
For  London  and  Berlin  I  have  not  money  enough,  and  I  had 
a  most  friendly  letter  from  Bopp,  in  which  he  openly  said  that  all 
he  might  be  able  to  do  for  me  in  Berlin  was  to  find  money  enough 
to  publish  extracts  from  the  great  Commentary.  Then  came  a  letter 
from  Boehtlingk  from  Petersburg,  requiring  a  definite  answer  to  lay 


1846]  St.  Petersburg  43 

before  the  Academy.  I  should  find  there  the  means  to  print  with 
Boehtlingk  the  text  and  Commentary,  He  writes  that  if  I  first  took 
a  post  as  private  tutor,  which  he  had  found  a  good  plan,  some  place 
under  Government  might  be  found  for  me.  The  Academy  had  sent 
for  MSS.  from  India  for  the  work;  in  fact  everything,  with  one  or 
two  exceptions,  seems  so  promising  that  I  have  decided  to  go  there. 
I  shall  find  six  Sanskritists  in  Petersburg,  of  whom  I  know  two,  who 
write  to  me  that  they  lead  a  very  pleasant  and  busy  life  there. 
I  have  asked  (for  Russians  are  not  to  be  trusted)  for  a  written  transcript 
of  the  decree  of  the  Academy,  and  shall  not  start  until  I  have  received 
it.  I  don't  know  how  much  longer  I  shall  be  in  Paris.  But  I  must 
know  how  my  money  matters  stand ;  I  don't  know  how  much  money 
I  have  left.  If  the  Petersburg  plan  succeeds  I  need  trouble  no  one, 
but  if  I  return  to  Berlin,  which  Bopp  advised,  I  must  borrow  some 
money  and  start  as  a  tutor  (Privatdocent).  I  cannot  say  how  I  long  to 
go  to  London,  but  I  cannot  manage  it.  When  the  Petersburg  plan 
is  settled  I  will  write  to  the  Duchess^  for  introductions,  for  they 
are  of  great  use  in  Russia.  I  went  to  the  Theatre  the  other  night 
and  saw  an  operetta,  the  Domino  Noir ;  then,  on  Emilie's  recommenda- 
tion, I  went  to  the  Masked  Ball  at  the  Opera  House ;  it  was  odious, 
vulgar  people,  wretched  dresses,  noise,  tumult,  and  horrible  atmo- 
sphere, and  at  the  end  every  one  was  drunk.  I  shall  never  go  again. 
The  music  was  excellent.  I  am  busy  learning  Italian  with  my 
Italian  Sanskritist,  an  Abbd,  who  is  longing  to  convert  me.  Burnouf 
I  see  often,  and  he  is  very  good  to  me.  I  wonder  where  I  shall  pitch 
my  tent.' 

To  THE  Same. 

Translation.  Paris,  Easier,  1846. 

'  Now  I  must  tell  you  about  Petersburg.  I  received  another  letter 
(they  each  cost  five  francs),  to  say  that  the  cost  of  printing  was  pro- 
vided for,  and  enclosing  a  copy  of  the  proch-verbal  of  the  Meeting 
of  the  Academy.  It  ran  thus:  "  IMonsieur  Boehtlingk,  Member  of  the 
Academy,  will  publish  conjointly  with  Monsieur  Miiller  of  Paris  the 
Veda,''  &c.  At  the  same  time  I  was  asked  if  I  would  take  a  place  in 
the  Museum  of  the  Academy,  rooms  and  firing,  and  1,200  francs 
a  year  pay ;  of  course  I  had  to  decide  at  once,  and  had  many  points 
to  consider.  First,  I  did  not  approve  of  conjointly,  and  I  was  afraid 
from  what  I  was  told  of  St.  Petersburg,  that  if  I  was  once  there 
conjointly  would  turn  out  to  be  something  very  different.  Boehtlingk 
has  again  quarrelled  with  Bopp,  and  does  not  seem  dependable,  so 
that  Burnouf  and  all  other  Sanskritists  advised  me  to  give  it  up.     As 

^  Of  Anhalt  Dessau. 


44  St.  Petersburg  [ch.  hi 

to  the  place  at  the  Museum,  Boehtlingk  had  already  written  to  me 
that  I  could  not  live  on  the  pay,  and  must  give  private  lessons,  so 
that  a  great  deal  of  time  must  be  sacrificed  to  earning  my  bread. 
And  after  all  one  goes  to  Russia  if  one  ?7iust,  but  then  one  must  sell 
oneself  as  dear  as  possible,  and  I  could  see  that  a  long  stay  there 
would  in  itself  cut  me  off  from  a  return  to  Germany,  If  one  has  the 
good  luck  to  be  born  in  Germany,  or  any  other  civilized  country, 
one  ought  not  lightly  to  throw  away  this  blessing,  and  the  satisfying 
quiet  life  of  a  German  Professor  outweighs  with  me  a  Russian  Privy 
Councillorship,  with  all  its  orders  and  titles.  So  I  wrote  I  could  not 
take  such  a  post,  and  that  as  far  as  printing  the  Veda  was  concerned, 
I  kept  to  my  earlier  written  conditions,  the  acceptance  of  which  the 
Academy  must  send  direct  to  me  in  writing,  using  my  own  words. 
I  am  pretty  certain  this  will  not  be  done,  but  that  is  no  matter,  for 
I  h.diVe  just  had  a  letter  from  a  bookseller,  Samter  in  Konigsberg,  who 
has  set  up  a  Sanskrit  printing  office,  and  who  will  print  my  whole 
work,  and  if  possible  pay  me  something  for  it.  This  must  depend 
upon  subscriptions,  which  he  would  open,  so  that  I  should  gain  my 
point  in  Germany.  And  now  I  will  honestly  confess  I  long  for  quiet 
and  for  home ;  and  a  life  in  Russia,  so  forsaken  of  God  and  man,  would 
be  a  terrible  sacrifice  on  my  part,  which  one  must  be  ready  to  make 
for  science  and  personal  usefulness,  but  which  one  need  not  exactly 
seek  out.' 

It  was  necessary  to  give  these  letters  in  extenso,  as  in  1891 
Boehtlingk  attacked  Max  Miiller  and  accused  him  of  having 
behaved  at  this  time  discourteously  towards  [d' avoir  brusque) 
the  Academy  of  St.  Petersburg.  From  the  first,  Burnouf  and 
GoldstUcker  warned  Max  Miiller  against  accepting  any  offer 
from  Boehtlingk,  but,  despairing  of  other  means  of  getting 
the  Veda  printed,  he  was  ready  to  close  with  the  offer  on 
condition  that  some  provision  was  secured  for  him  whilst  he 
was  working  with  Boehtlingk,  The  latter  seems  to  have 
first  proposed  to  the  Academy  that  they  should  buy  the 
MSS.  and  materials  which  Max  Miiller  had  collected  for  his 
Vedic  work,  after  they  had  been  sent  to  St.  Petersburg  for  in- 
spection, and  that  the  post  of  Assistant  Keeper  of  the  St.  Peters- 
burg Museum  should  be  given  him  ;  but  Boehtlingk  says  his 
colleagues  demurred,  and  kindly  adds  the  reason,  'because  so 
young  and  unknown  a  person  could  not  be  safely  trusted 
with    the    custody  of  the   treasures  of  the    Museum.'     One 


1846]  Boehtlingk  45 

cannot  but  wonder  with  what  sort  of  men  they  had  Hved  ! 
All  the  correspondence  carried  on  was  with  Boehtlingk,  not 
with  the  Academy,  which  never  made  Max  Miiller  a  definite 
offer.  How  then  could  he  have  been  discourteous  to  the 
Academy  ?  The  conditions  he  made  were  that  the  Academy 
should  give  him  in  writing  an  undertaking  to  complete  the 
work  of  bringing  out  the  Rig-veda.  No  doubt  this  con- 
dition was  suggested  by  the  distrust  which  Burnouf  and 
others  felt  about  the  whole  matter.  The  Academy  would 
not  accept  this  condition,  and  there  the  matter  broke  off. 
One  fails  to  see  why  Boehtlingk  was  so  angry  with  Max 
Miiller  for  not  telling  him  he  had  received  an  offer  from  a 
German  bookseller  to  publish  the  Rig-veda  by  subscription, 
after  he  had  stated  to  the  Academy  the  conditions  on  which 
he  could  join  Boehtlingk,  and  which  the  Academy  rejected. 
As  in  his  sAJ^i'^^to^^vit  dXtTiO)^  {Max Midler  als  My tJien-Dichter), 
Boehtlingk  is  most  anxious  to  prove  that  '  under  the  Peters- 
burg Academy  only  the  representative  of  Sanskrit  in  the 
Academy  could  be  meant';  one  could  understand  his  feeling 
personally  disappointed,  but  one  fails  again  to  see  any  insult 
to  the  Academy  in  proposing  the  conditions  named  above. 
Is  it  not  rather  the  other  way?  The  Academy,  according 
to  Boehtlingk,  refused  to  place  in  the  Museum  a  man  trusted 
and  admired  by  Humboldt,  Bopp,  Brockhaus,  and  Burnouf. 
If  '  the  Academy '  meant  '  only  the  representative  of  Sanskrit 
in  that  body,'  Max  Miiller,  after  this  curious  refusal,  was  right 
to  follow  the  advice  of  Burnouf  and  Goldstiicker,  and  have 
nothing  more  to  do  with  him.  '  Burnouf  repeatedly  warned 
me  against  Boehtlingk,  and  promised  if  I  would  only  stay  in 
Paris  to  give  me  his  support  with  Guizot,'  says  the  Anto- 
hiograpJiy.  Boehtlingk  boasts  in  his  attack  on  Max  Miiller 
that  he  had  prevented  his  ever  being  made  a  Correspondent 
of  the  Academy  of  St.  Petersburg,  and  it  has  the  distinction 
of  being  the  only  Society  of  real  note  throughout  Europe 
where  his  name  does  not  appear.  When  Boehtlingk's  attack 
came  out  in  1891  Max  Miiller  wrote  to  the  Secretary  of  the 
Academy  giving  an  explanation.  The  Secretary  wrote  the 
following  answer : — 

'  N'ayant  pu  porter  a  la  connaissance  de  la  Conference  de  I'Aca- 


46  BoehtUngk  [ch.  m 

d^mie  que  lors  de  la  r^ouverture  de  ses  stances  votre  honor^e  lettre 
et  votre  nn^morandum,  qui  me  sont  parvenus  en  dte,  je  suis  charg6 
par  la  Conference  de  vous  informer,  Monsieur,  que  la  brochure  de 
Mr.  Bohtlingk  a  ii^  publi^e  personnellement  par  lui  sans  le  concours 
de  I'Acaddmie  en  quoi  que  cela  soit,  et  I'auteur  n'a  meme  fait  aucune 
communication  a  I'Acad^mie  par  rapport  a  cette  publication,  ni  avant, 
ni  aprbs  son  impression,  de  sorte  que  I'Acaddmie  ne  se  trouve  en 
rien  solidaire  avec  les  opinions  ^mises  par  Mr.  Bohtlingk.  D'autre 
part,  I'Acaddmie,  n'ayant  a  son  grand  regret  jamais  eu  I'occasion 
d'entrer  en  relations  directes  avec  vous,  honor^  Monsieur,  il  ne  peut 
meme  pas  6tre  question  de  m^sentendu  entre  la  Conference  de 
I'Acad^mie  et  I'illustre  sanscritologue,  que  notre  Acaddmie  apprdcie 
k  sa  juste  valeur. 

'  Veuillez  agr^er,  honor^  Monsieur,  I'assurance  de  mes  sentiments 
les  plus  distingu^s.  Le  Secretaire  perpetuel.' 

The  whole  of  this  affair  is  well  summed  up  by  an  English- 
man, a  good  German  scholar,  who  has  carefully  examined  all 
Boehtlingk's  letters.  '  It  is  clear  that  Max  Miiller  had  come  to 
no  agreement  with  Boehtlingk.  The  risks  incurred  by  a  young 
scholar  going  to  St.  Petersburg  without  some  assured  means 
of  livelihood  were  obviously  considerable,  and  Max  Miiller 
evidently  regarded  these  as  a  last  resource.  After  the  warn- 
ings he  had  received,  he  was  certainly  not  to  be  blamed  for 
asking  Boehtlingk,  before  he  agreed  to  go,  for  a  guarantee 
that  the  edition  should  be  completed.  This  quite  reasonable 
request  was  refused,  and  the  project  consequently  came  to 
an  end.  During  the  negotiations  Max  Miiller  was  perfectly 
justified  in  continuing  to  look  out  for  a  publisher  in  Germany, 
or  England,  who  would  offer  him  more  advantageous  con- 
ditions. Boehtlingk's  assumption  that  his  own  plan  would 
be  carried  out  was  premature,  and  he  had  begun  collating 
MSS.  of  the  text  of  the  Rig-vcda  before  any  bargain  had 
been  concluded  with  Max  Miiller.  Boehtlingk  had  not 
originally  meant  to  edit  the  Rig-veda,  but  after  he  had 
taken  the  matter  in  hand,  he  was  evidently  annoyed  at  having 
gone  so  far  himself  when  the  negotiations  came  to  an  end, 
representing  the  request  for  a  guarantee  of  completion  as  a 
slight  to  the  Academy.  It  was  only  natural  that  Max 
Miiller  should  have  wished  to  publish  the  whole  work  him- 
self, if  he  could  obtain  the  means  of  doing  so.    He  entertained 


1846]  Going  to  London  47 

the  idea  of  collaboration  only  because  compelled  to  do  so  by 
circumstances.*  Dr.  Boehtlingk  made  his  attack  in  1891 
when  he  was  in  friendly  correspondence  with  Professor  Max 
Miiller,  and  did  not  even  send  him  a  copy  of  his  pamphlet. 
He  had  destroyed  all  Max  Miiller's  letters  in  1868,  his  own 
letters  exist,  and  by  no  means  bear  out  Boehtlingk 's  version 
of  the  whole  affair,  which  was  drawn  from  an  unsound  and 
somewhat  tainted  memory. 

A  month  later  than  the  last  letter  to  his  mother,  Max 
Miiller  found  that  he  had  saved  enough  money  for  a  short 
visit  to  England,  and  the  next  letter  speaks  of  his  happy 
prospects. 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  Paris,  May  24. 

'  My  prospects  in  London  are  good,  and  everything  well  arranged. 
I  cannot  state  when  I  go,  as  I  expect  a  letter  from  Hagedorn  about 
his  rooms^  which  should  arrive  on  the  7th.  Then  I  go  straight  to 
London.  Baron  von  Cetto  has  written  to  me  three  times  from  there 
with  new  proposals.  Perhaps  I  shall  give  private  lessons,  but  am  sure 
to  make  a  little  money  by  Sanskrit  commissions.  The  prospectus 
for  my  work  will  be  published  in  London  in  five  languages,  German, 
English,  French,  Bengali,  and  Sanskrit.  It  will  be  printed  in  Konigs- 
berg.  A  few  days  ago  I  received  offers  of  support  from  the  German 
Oriental  Society,  of  which  I  am  a  member,  as  well  as  from  the  Soci^te 
Asiatique  in  Paris.  They  offered  money  towards  printing,  and  as  this 
is  no  longer  needed,  I  hope  to  have  something  for  myself  I  have 
written  to  Humboldt.  Burnouf  has  done  so  too,  and  Dr.  Gold- 
stiicker  hopes  to  see  him  about  it  in  Berlin.  I  am  rejoiced  at  going 
to  London,  and  shall  stay  as  long  as  I  can.  But  whatever  happens 
I  will  not  stay  away  another  whole  year  without  once  seeing  you,  were 
it  but  for  an  hour.  In  all  that  I  think  and  do  I  remember  you 
always,  my  dear  mother,  and  it  is  my  greatest  joy  to  be  any  pleasure 
to  you.  I  need  only  patience  and  courage !  One  must  bend  or 
break,  and  perhaps  we  shall  find  a  pleasanter  corner  than  St.  Peters- 
burg in  which  to  spend  the  next  twenty-five  years.  Your  Max.' 

He  went   for  three  weeks,  and  lived   in    England   above 
fifty-four  years. 


CHAPTER   IV 
1846-1847 

London.    W.  H.  Russell.     Bunsen.    Visit  to  Germany.     East  India 
Company  and  the  Rig-veda.      British  Association. 

Translatmi.  46,  Essex  Street,  Strand,  London, 

June  13,  1846. 

'  My  dear  Mother, — Here  I  am  really  in  London ;  but  I  hardly 
know  how  to  write,  my  heart  is  so  full  of  all  I  have  heard  and  seen. 
So  I  will  only  say,  I  arrived  safe  without  being  swallowed  up  by  the 
world-encompassing  ocean.  I  left  Paris  on  the  9th,  at  5  p.m.,  by 
diligence.  I  had  met  with  such  kindness  on  all  sides,  and  had  so 
many  invitations,  that  it  was  difficult  to  get  away.  My  neighbours 
at  table  gave  me  a  dinner,  so  did  the  Marrins,  Burnouf,  Countess 
Berthoer,  whom  I  do  not  think  I  have  mentioned  to  you.  She  is  a 
young  and  very  agreeable  woman,  whose  husband  was  killed  eight 
months  ago  in  Algiers.  She  was  for  some  time  in  Lidia,  and  is  very 
musical,  and  we  have  played  and  smoked  a  great  deal  together. 
Many  friends  came  with  me  to  the  post-house,  and  I  drove  away 
with  rather  a  heavy  heart.  I  had  many  expenses  those  last  days, 
and  I  am  all  the  more  grateful  for  the  thirty  thalers  you  put  up  with 
the  shirts ;  the  orange  sugar  was  confiscated  on  the  frontier — which 
will  make  you  very  angry,  as  it  made  me.  So  I  left  Paris,  travelled 
the  whole  night,  and  arrived  at  1 1  a.m.  in  Boulogne.  At  last  from 
far  off  I  saw  the  dancing,  widespread  sea,  and  I  had  hardly  patience 
to  get  down  at  the  hotel,  but  set  off  at  once  for  a  walk  along  the 
shore.  Vou  know  that  no  words  can  describe  its  wondrous  beauty. 
I  wandered  about  for  five  hours,  till  I  was  forced  to  return  to  the 
hotel  from  sheer  hunger.  At  ten  at  night  I  went  on  board  a  ship, 
bound  direct  for  London.  It  was  almost  full  moon,  and  the  sea 
was  smooth  and  beautiful,  and  except  for  a  short  time  of  misery 
I  really  enjoyed  it.  We  got  into  the  Thames  early  in  the  morning ; 
and  you  can  have  no  idea  of  the  life  and  traffic.      The  river  was 


1846]  Dr.   William  Russell  49 

alive  with  ships,  among  them  huge  three-masted  vessels.  Thus  we 
reached  the  Custom  House,  where  all  my  books  and  papers  were 
turned  out.  I  took  a  cab,  and  looked  for  lodgings,  which  I  soon 
found  in  a  pleasant,  respectable  street.  I  have  a  room  on  the  first 
floor,  looking  on  the  street,  for  which  I  pay  los.  a  week.  The  house 
belongs  to  a  tailor,  and  as  yet  I  am  fairly  comfortable.  In  the 
morning  I  make  my  tea,  and  dine  at  four  or  five  o'clock  for  is.  6d. 
I  have  been  running  about  paying  visits,  but  found  hardly  any  one  at 
home.  To-morrow  I  shall  call  at  Bunsen's  and  on  Baron  von  Cetto. 
To-day  I  went  to  the  East  India  House,  where  Wilson  was  very  kind, 
and  invited  me  to  dinner.  I  have  been  to  the  British  Museum,  and 
made  some  pleasant  acquaintances.  Now  I  have  my  MSS.  at  home, 
and  am  happily  settled  in  quiet  to  work.  I  shall  do  all  I  can  to  give 
private  lessons,  for  German  money  does  not  go  far  here.  I  always 
hope  for  the  best,  and  I  shall  manage.  Only  think  that  I  am  in 
London,  that  I  have  seen  Hyde  Park,  St.  James's  Palace,  St.  Paul's, 
Westminster,  and  the  Tower  !  It  seems  to  me  impossible,  and  I  am 
most  fortunate;  how  well  all  goes  with  me,  how  far  beyond  all 
I  deserve  !  Write  to  me  soon  ;  that  is  the  one  thing  left  to  wish  for. 
Life  here  is  very  wonderful,  and  so  different  from  Paris.  I  find  the 
language  very  difficult,  but  I  shall  soon  manage  it.  Yesterday 
evening  I  spent  with  an  Englishman,  a  reporter  for  the  Times,  whose 
acquaintance  I  have  made,  and  who  has  already  been  most  helpful 
and  kind  to  me.  I  am  so  tired  with  running  about  that  I  am  nearly 
asleep,  and  don't  know  whether  you  can  read  my  scrawl. 

'Your  M.' 

It  will  be  seen  by  the  above  letter  that  Max  Miiller  did 
not  enter  into  all  details  in  writing  to  his  mother.  The  life 
was  so  different  to  anything  to  which  she  was  accustomed, 
and  required  so  much  explanation,  that  we  often  find  him 
passing  over  things  well  known  to  his  friends  on  the  spot. 
He  does  not  recount  above  his  first  meeting  with  his  kind 
friend  and  benefactor,  the  famous  Times  correspondent, 
Dr.  now  Sir  William  Russell,  whose  own  pen  shall  describe 
the  event: — 

202,  Cromwell  Road,  S.W., 
October  8,  1901. 
*  Dear  Mrs.  Max  Muller, — My  daughter  is  writing  for  me ;  I  have 
to  use  her  pen,  conscious  that  I  have  too  long  delayed  fulfilling  the 
promise   I    made   to   recall   the   incidents    connected  with  my  first 
acquaintance  with  my  ever  dear  friend,  your  husband. 
I  E 


50  Arrival  in  England  [ch.  iv 

'Early  in  June,  1846,  I  was  in  France,  and  was  summoned  back 
to  take  charge  of  the  Parliamentary  Committee  on  Railway  Bills. 
I  took  my  passage  on  board  a  steamer  which  went  direct  from 
Boulogne  to  London,  landing  passengers  at  the  Custom  House  above 
Blackwall.  I  distinctly  remember  the  interest  I  took  in  a  young  man, 
a  little  younger  than  myself,  who  was  very  anxious  to  ascertain  the 
names  of  the  places  on  the  river  which  the  steamer  passed  on  her 
way  from  the  Downs  up  to  the  Docks.  He  was  evidently  a  foreigner, 
and  had  some  difficulty  in  making  himself  understood  by  the  mate, 
who  appeared  to  have  him  in  charge.  I  had  observed  him  during 
a  rather  rough  passage  seated  on  the  deck  and  holding  on  by  one 
of  the  stays,  evidently  engaged  in  a  contest  with  the  advanced  posts 
of  mal  de  ?ner,  but  he  resisted  stoutly,  and  by  the  time  we  entered 
smooth  water  he  was  conqueror.  He  was  neatly  and  carefully  dressed 
in  a  suit  which  showed  his  erect,  slight,  but  well-built  figure  to  advan- 
tage ;  the  expression  of  his  face  was  most  engaging,  regular  features, 
fine  intelligent  eyes,  no  trace  of  whiskers,  beard,  or  moustache,  but 
thick  dark  hair  under  his  felt  hat ;  an  alert  air  and  penetrating 
looks.  Some  casual  question  which  he  addressed  to  one  of  the 
passengers  produced  a  very  misleading  answer,  and  I  ventured  to  give 
the  true  explanation  of  the  vessels  which  were  moored  in  the  Downs, 
waiting  for  favourable  wind  or  tide.  The  melancholy  look  which  had 
attracted  my  attention  when  we  were  in  mid-channel  as  he  sat  holding 
on  to  a  rope  had  vanished ;  there  was  something  to  look  at  and  to 
inquire  about.  Soon  we  became  on  good  terms,  and  he  told  me  that 
he  was  going  to  England  to  pursue  his  labours  in  Oriental  literature  ; 
whilst  I  informed  him  that  I  was  a  law  student  residing  in  the  Middle 
Temple.  At  the  Custom  House  there  was,  I  remember,  some  trouble 
about  passports,  and  my  companion  produced  a  paper  in  which  his 
name  was  set  forth  as  Max  Miiller — an  official  document  which 
satisfied  the  authorities.  But  he  was  soon  in  much  distress ;  his 
portmanteau  could  not  be  found;  he  told  me  it  contained  all  his 
worldly  goods,  with  his  letters  and  papers,  and  that  it  would  be  ruin 
to  him  if  it  were  not  forthcoming.  All  the  passengers'  luggage  was 
overhauled,  and  still  not  a  trace  of  the  missing  trunk.  I\Iy  newly 
made  friend  was  in  serious  anxiety,  and  I  felt  for  him  deeply. 
What  could  he  do  ?  an  utter  stranger  with  very  little  money  about  him, 
almost  all  he  possessed  being  in  the  unfortunate  box  that  could  not 
be  found.  The  Custom  House  people  having  cleared  all  the  baggage, 
were  anxious  to  clear  us  out ;  so  I  told  my  young  friend  that 
I  had  chambers  where  I  would  be  most  happy  to  give  him  a  shake- 
down for  the  night,  and  on  the  following  day  he  could  go  back  to 
the  Custom  House  and  see  if  the  missing  box  had  been  landed.     He 


1846]  The  Temple  51 

was  very  much  moved,  and  accepted  my  proposal  with  a  charming 
cordiality.  We  drove  together  to  the  Temple,  and  despite  his  anxiety 
the  strange  new  sights  filled  him  with  the  greatest  interest.  We  dined 
at  Anderton's  in  Fleet  Street,  and  when  we  got  back  to  the  Temple 
we  found  that  the  laundress  had  arranged  a  comfortable  couch  for 
him,  and  had  laid  out  a  sleeping-suit  for  the  stranger.  Next  day  we 
made  a  journey  to  the  Custom  House,  and  to  his  inexpressible  joy 
Max  Miiller  was  shown  his  treasured  portmanteau,  which  he  opened 
for  examination,  and  then  saw  passed,  with  the  traditional  chalk-mark 
on  it,  to  the  cab  and  carried  to  my  rooms.  I  think  it  was  that  day 
that  I  went  out  with  him,  at  his  request,  and  found  a  decent  bedroom 
in  Essex  Street,  close  by,  of  which  he  became  the  tenant,  and  where 
he  had  his  breakfast  every  morning.  Max  Miiller  had  letters  for 
Professors  at  King's  College,  the  Prussian  Embassy,  &c.,  and  he  was 
soon  in  communication  with  some  of  them ;  but  I  saw  him  every 
day  I  should  think  for  two  or  three  months,  and  every  hour  I  did  so 
increased  my  regard  for  him — so  simple,  so  straight,  and  so  learned ; 
kindly  and  grave,  but  with  a  keen  sense  of  humour,  and  a  most 
bright  and  joyous  disposition.  In  those  days  gentlemen  of  the  press 
were  more  in  favour  with  the  dramatic  world  than  they  are  at  present. 
I  could  always  obtain  free  admissions  to  concerts  and  theatres,  and 
so  we  went  together  night  after  night  to  Drury  Lane,  Her  Majesty's, 
the  Haymarket,  Adelphi,  and  so  forth ;  and  Max's  enjoyment  of  the 
Opera  was  intense  and  delightful.  It  was  the  custom  at  that  time  for 
students  after  dining  in  hall  (at  the  Temple)  to  go  off  to  their  rooms 
with  a  friend  or  two,  and  others  dropped  in.  Max  Miiller  was 
always  the  most  welcome  guest  at  mine,  and  he  provided  strange  and 
wonderful  entertainment  for  the  company.  For  the  first  time  the 
Temple  was  enlivened  by  the  strains  of  "Edite,  bibite,  conviviales," 
"  Crambambuli,"  and  other  Studenten-Lieder.  One  morceau  of 
surpassing  excellence,  as  we  all  thought,  we  always  encored,  and  Max 
smilingly  complied  \  It  was  an  imitation  of  a  whole  orchestra — 
trumpets,  drums,  bassoons,  and  goodness  knows  what  besides ! — 
delivered  with  the  greatest  precision.  Those  of  the  company  who 
had  rooms  in  the  Temple  were  eager  to  secure  a  special  right  for 
this  diversion.  There  are,  as  far  as  I  know,  none  of  these  now  alive. 
At  last  INIax  went  away,  but  whether  back  to  Germany  or  to  Oxford 
I  cannot  remember.  In  the  winter  I  was  dispatched  on  a  special 
commission  in  relation  to  the  famine  in  Ireland,  and  whilst  there 
I  received  a  letter  from  Max,  written  in  a  hand  I  could  not  read 
then,  but  which  I  made  out  later,  in  which  he  told  me  of  his  projects  j 

^  '  O  Tannenbaum  !  o  Tannenbaum  ! ' 
E  a 


52  Professor  Wilson  [ch.  iv 

but  I  did  not  see  him  again  till  I  visited  Oxford  in  1848.  He  had 
established  himself  at  Oxford,  and  had  already  gained  the  position 
there  due  to  his  character  and  acquirements.  Then  came  the 
revolutions  in  Europe,  ample  employment  for  me  in  all  quarters, 
so  that  for  a  good  many  years  there  could  be  but  very  short  and 
accidental  snatches  of  intercourse  between  us  ;  but  I  heard  of  his 
rising  fame  with  great  satisfaction.  After  the  Crimean  War  I  deli- 
vered a  series  of  lectures  at  various  towns  in  England,  and  a  visit 
to  Oxford  enabled  me  to  renew  an  acquaintance  always  delightful  and 
dear  to  me ;  and  after  I  returned  from  India  in  1859  we  met  several 
times,  and  engaged  in  correspondence  concerning  my  experience  of 
a  country  in  which  he  was  deeply  interested.  And  now  I  think  I  may 
make  a  jump  to  1870  and  the  war  with  France,  when  as  soon  as 
I  came  home  we  had  frequent  meetings ;  and  the  only  cloud  that  ever 
obscured  the  warmth  and  brightness  of  our  intercourse  arose  from 
a  discussion  caused  by  an  intemperate  objection  I  made  to  the 
opinions  he  expressed  about  the  great  Bismarck,  then  the  god  of 
the  people  who  worshipped  success  all  over  the  world.  You  know 
what  happiness  it  was  to  me  to  make  a  descent  upon  Oxford,  and 
spend  a  few  days  under  your  roof  at  7,  Norham  Gardens,  and  how  my 
wife  entered  fully  into  the  great  repose  and  comfort  we  enjoyed  there. 
I  shall  say  no  more,  except  that  I  reckon  your  husband's  friendship 
one  of  my  greatest  treasures,  and  that  I  shall  lament  his  loss  as  long 
as  I  live. 

'  I  am  sorry  to  send  you  such  a  bald  account,  but  my  memory  of 
late  has  melted — it  is  without  form  and  void. 

'  Yours  very  truly  and  with  great  regard, 

'W.  H.  Russell.' 

Max  Mliller  had  been  in  correspondence  whilst  in  Paris 
with  Professor  Wilson,  the  Librarian  of  the  East  India  House, 
so  there  was  no  difficulty  about  borrowing  MSS.  and 
beginning  work  at  once.  The  following  letter  to  his  mother 
mentions  the  momentous  visit  to  Bunsen  which  determined 
the  whole  course  of  his  life  : — ■ 

Translation.  3,  Wardrobe  Place,  Doctors'  Commons, 

July  13,  1846. 

'  I  have  only  time  to  tell  you  that  all  goes  well  with  me  here,  that 
Bunsen  has  received  me  in  the  most  friendly  way  as  the  son  of  his 
friend,  and  has  promised  me  his  fatherly  support  in  every  way  possible. 
I  have  therefore  explained  my  exact  position  to  him,  that  my  work, 


1846]  First  Visit  to  Bunsen  53 

which  interests  him  very  much,  makes  a  long  stay  in  London  abso- 
lutely necessary,  and  he  assures  me  I  have  found  a  friend  in  him,  who 
will  care  for  me  as  a  father  for  his  son.  I  stayed  two  days  in  the 
country  with  him.  His  family  are  very  pleasant  and  cultivated.  One 
evening  I  went  to  a  party  where  were  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury, 
the  Bishop  of  Jerusalem,  and  others  of  the  hatiie  voUe.  He  is  himself 
a  very  clever  man,  and  a  great  favourite  here,  and  perhaps  he  may 
find  something  for  me.  I  do  my  best  too  with  Wilson,  but  I  can't  do 
much,  for  I  must  first  master  the  language.  I  have  already  changed 
my  room,  because  it  was  not  clean  and  so  hot.  I  am  not  satisfied 
here,  and  must  pay  \os.  weekly.  I  have  signed  the  contract  with  my 
publisher;  the  prospectus  will  be  out  November  i,  and  then  also  the 
Mcghaduta^  and  I  hope  at  Easter  a  thick  volume  of  Sanskrit.' 

Of  Max  Muller's  first  visit  to  the  Prussian  Legation  Mme. 
Ernest  de  Bunsen  writes  : — 

'  I  remember  the  Professor  on  the  morning  of  his  arrival  when  he 
joined  the  family  party  at  No.  4,  Carlton  Terrace.  The  Legation  was 
then  in  full  swing,  and  Baron  Bunsen  and  the  Professor  were  absorbed 
in  one  another  independently  of  our  home  party.  I  value  my  vivid 
remembrance  of  his  first  appearance,  for  we  were  astonished  at  his 
youth  and  cheerfulness,  and  immediately  he  gained  a  place  amongst  us.' 

Max  Miiller  had  not  been  long  in  London  before  he  wrote 
to  acquaint  his  friend  and  teacher  Burnouf  with  his  prospects. 
After  thanking  him  for  his  friendly  counsel  and  encourage- 
ment, and  the  loan  of  his  valuable  MSS.,  which  had  helped 
him  to  continue  his  work  when  he  was  almost  in  despair, 
a  work  which  he  now  hoped  to  be  able  to  carry  through  and 
make  of  use  to  science,  he  adds : — 

Translation. 

'I  never  can  forget  all  I  owe  to  you.  As  to  my  stay  in  London, 
I  am  on  the  whole  thoroughly  satisfied  with  it.  The  MSS.  are 
splendid,  but  in  such  masses  that  to  copy  all  that  concerns  the  Veda 
and  my  work  would  take  at  least  two  or  three  years  of  merely 
mechanical  labour.  So  I  must  stay  in  England,  and  with  the  MSS. 
at  hand  bring  out  the  Veda  and  its  Commentary.  I  shall  do  this  if 
I  can  possibly,  by  private  lessons  and  copying  MSS.,  make  enough  to 
face  the  great  expense  of  life  here.  I  hope  that  in  this  way  it  will  be 
possible  for  me  to  carry  out  the  work  in  a  shorter  time  than  I  at  first 
expected.  I  do  not  deny  that  it  is  perhaps  foolish  to  make  such 
a  sacrifice,  and  lead  this  anxious  life  for  another  five  years  without 


54  Bunsen  [ch.  iv 

doing  anything  that  can  secure  a  settled  post ;  but  as  I  have  once 
begun  the  work  it  must  be  finished,  and  I  see  no  other  way  of  doing 
it.  Professor  Wilson  is  most  friendly,  and  I  meet  him  constantly 
either  at  his  own  house  or  in  the  Library  of  the  East  India  House.' 

Burnouf  replied  that  he  thought  his  plans  excellent,  and 
that  those  who  understood  the  magnitude  of  the  task  Max 
Miiller  had  undertaken  and  the  wealth  of  materials  for  it 
in  London,  would  consider  that  he  must  work  very  fast,  if  he 
only  stayed  four  years.  '  Mr.  Wilson  will  indirectly  render 
a  great  service  to  Indian  letters,  if,  with  the  benevolent 
liberality  with  which  he  meets  all  those  who  ask  his  support, 
he  makes  it  possible  for  you  to  stay  in  London  as  long  as 
the  task  of  publishing  your  Rig-veda  with  its  commentaries 
and  indispensable  indices  may  require.' 

To  his  mother  he  writes : — 

Translation.  London,  August  3,  1846. 

'I  had  meant  to  write  sooner,  but  I  have  been  so  busy.  I  am 
between  two  fires,  or  rather  Ministers,  for  the  Bavarian  Minister,  Baron 
von  Cetto,  has  made  fresh  offers  to  me  which  are  tolerably  advan- 
tageous— 1,000  thalers  a  year  and  free  board;  so  that  I  could  have  put 
by  600  thalers,  and  later  he  would  recommend  me  for  some  place  in 
Bavaria.  On  the  other  hand  Bunsen  advised  me  strongly  to  decline 
this  offer,  taking  on  himself  all  the  responsibility,  and  told  me  to  trust 
myself  absolutely  to  him.  He  is  really  marvellously  kind  to  me,  and 
I  am  constantly  in  his  house,  early,  late,  and  to  dinner.  I  have  not 
quite  decided,  and  want  to  postpone  a  decision.  Bunsen  is  so  much 
interested  in  the  publication  of  the  Veda,  which  falls  in  with  his  own 
studies,  and  he  urges  me  first  to  print  some  of  it.  I  shall  do  so  as 
soon  as  I  can,  but  have  still  a  great  deal  to  do  to  it.  Wilson  too 
is  very  helpful,  and  promises  to  do  all  he  can  to  get  me  some  place 
in  England,  which  is  the  height  of  my  ambition ;  but  that  may  take 
years,  and  meantime  how  shall  I  eat  and  drink  ?  Bunsen  sent  me  an 
article  from  the  Augsburger  Zei'hmg  with,  the  heading  "Max  Miiller"  ; 
if  you  have  not  seen  it,  get  it,  and  I  think  even  you  will  be  satisfied ! 
Of  London  I  can  tell  you  little,  except  that  last  Saturday  I  saw  its 
full  splendour.  A  friend  took  me  to  the  Italian  Opera,  which  I  had 
not  yet  seen  either  here  or  in  Paris.  It  was  wonderful.  A  larger 
house  than  I  have  ever  seen,  and  every  one  in  full  dress.  The  boxes 
filled  with  the  nobility,  and  I  saw  Queen  Victoria  and  Prince  Albert, 
the  Duke  of  Cambridge,  &c.  The  music  absolutely  perfect;  Anna 
Bolena,  sung  by  Grisi,  Mario,  and  Lablache ;  all  the  highest  artistic 


1846]  Archdeacon  Hare  55 

perfection.  And  then  a  ballet  to  which  there  can  be  nothing  equal, 
the  Jugement  de  Paris  with  Taglioni,  Grahn,  and  Cerito  as  the  three 
goddesses.  The  decorations  were  beautiful.  The  stalls  cost  7^.  dd. 
The  same  friend  asked  me  to  go  with  him  to  Scotland  as  his  guest, 
but  I  cannot,  gladly  as  I  would  do  so.  So  you  see  your  son  is  still 
afloat,  and  everywhere  friendly  hands  are  stretched  out  to  help  him 
on  his  way.  '  Your  Max.' 

Translation.  August  28. 

'  Dearest  Mother, — I  have  been  able  to  arrange  that  your  letters  ^ 
may  come  by  messenger.  They  leave  Berlin  every  Tuesday,  and  you 
must  send  them  to  the  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  under  Bunsen's 
address.  The  letters  leave  here  to-day  and  reach  Berlin  in  five  days, 
and  Chemnitz  therefore  in  six.' 

T,o  THE  Same. 
Translation.  August  25,  1846. 

*  All  goes  tolerably  well  with  me.  My  work  gets  on.  Bunsen  is 
wonderfully  good  to  me.  I  dine  there  once  or  twice  every  week,  and 
he  always  gives  me  fresh  courage  and  hope.  When  my  first  volume 
is  out  he  hopes  to  get  a  salary  for  me  from  the  Prussian  Government. 
I  must  stay  in  England  till  the  whole  work  is  finished,  and  that  will 
be  five  years.  If  I  should  then  return  to  Germany  is  the  question,  for 
I  am  so  delighted  with  this  country.  I  could  willingly  live  here 
always,  if  only  a  place  could  be  found  for  me.  But  those  are  future 
plans  which  do  not  trouble  me  much  now ;  at  all  events  I  feel  nearer 
my  haven  here,  if  only  my  pilot  holds  out  1  To-morrow  I  am  again 
invited  to  Bunsen's  for  his  birthday.  Professor  Lepsius  from  Berlin  is 
now  staying  at  Bunsen's  with  his  young  wife ;  he  owes  everything  to 
Bunsen.  He  got  him  a  Stipendium  to  study,  then  to  go  to  Italy, 
France,  and  England,  and  at  last  to  Egypt;  and  now  he  is  Professor 
at  Berlin,  with  1,500  thalers  a  year.  I  have  become  acquainted  with 
Archdeacon  Hare,  and  dined  with  him.  He  is  a  very  kind  old  man, 
and  I  am  on  most  happy  terms  with  him.  I  am  still  in  Wardrobe 
Place,  and  more  comfortable,  as  I  can  dine  in  the  house  with  one  of 
the  other  lodgers ;  very  good,  and  only  \s.  He  is  a  young  German 
bookseller,  married  to  an  Englishwoman,  with  whom  I  can  talk 
English,  which  is  already  much  easier  to  me,  I  have  not  seen  much 
more  of  London  ;  the  city  is  less  interesting  than  the  people  and  the 
life.     I  am  well  and  don't  feel  anything  of  the  spleen  to  which  I  am 

"^  He  had  to  pay  \s.  6d.  in  England  for  letters  on  which  his  mother 
had  already  paid  something. 


56  Visit  to  Germany  [ch.  iv 

naturally  inclined.  I  read  the  Twies  every  day  with  great  interest, 
while  I  drink  my  tea  and  smoke  a  pipe,  and  then  to  work.  The  one 
thing  I  long  for  is  quiet  and  a  certainty,  and  a  pleasant  home  life 
with  my  dear  mother.  But  as  often  as  I  think  it  is  near  at  hand 
it  goes  again,  and  who  knows  when  I  may  at  last  gain  it  ?  My  work 
is  full  of  interest,  and  keeps  me  straight ;  but  sometimes  one  longs 
for  more  in  life  than  this  everlasting  struggle.  Now  only  quiet  and 
content ! ' 

In  September  Max  Mliller  issued  a  prospectus  of  the  Rig- 
veda  to  be  published,  as  has  been  seen,  by  subscription  by 
Samter  of  Konigsberg.  This  plan  was  given  up  when  the 
East  India  Company  undertook  the  publication  of  the  Rig- 
veda.  The  prospectus  contains  a  proposal  for  a  German 
translation,  and  sets  forth  clearly  the  importance  of  the  Rig- 
veda  for  the  history  of  human  thought.  Soon  after,  he  heard 
of  the  very  alarming  illness  of  his  mother,  and  his  ever 
faithful  friend  Bunsen  sent  him  with  dispatches  to  Berlin,  to 
enable  him  to  see  her.  Such  was  his  anxiety  to  reach  his 
mother,  that  he  insisted  on  crossing,  though  it  was  a  frightful 
storm  and  he  was  the  only  passenger.  It  took  nearly  six 
hours  to  get  to  Calais !  He  was  able  to  spend  several  weeks 
with  her,  and  returned  by  Berlin. 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  Berlin,  October  27. 

'  Your  letter  which  I  got  yesterday  was  a  great  pleasure,  though  it 
made  me  sad,  when  I  saw  how  my  leaving  you  had  excited  and 
weakened  you.  Now  I  hope,  if  you  really  love  me,  you  will  think  of 
your  health,  and  spare  yourself  as  much  as  possible.  Remember  the 
distance  is  not  so  very  great,  and  that  Ave  can  reach  each  other  now  so 
easily ;  think  too  that  it  is  of  great  importance  and  use  to  me,  and  that 
in  after  years  we  shall  find  a  rich  reward  for  it.  There  is  not  much 
to  tell  you  of  my  journey.  ...  I  arrived  early  in  Leipzig,  and  went 
straight  to  Victor  Cams.  I  went  also  to  Brockhaus,  with  whom  I  had 
much  to  talk  over,  and  then  on  to  Dessau.  Here  they  were  all  very 
well,  and  glad  to  get  a  better  account  of  you.  That  evening  I  had  to 
go  with  them  to  the  theatre,  and  there  the  Duchess  saw  me,  and  the 
next  morning  commanded  me  to  the  Schloss.  She  was  exceedingly 
friendly,  and  kept  me  nearly  an  hour.  .  .  .  She  then  gave  me  a  letter  of 
introduction  to  Prince  Waldemar  in  Berlin.  I  have  been  to  Bopp  and 
Lepsius,  and  have  still  to  call  on  Humboldt,  Schelling,  &c.  . .  .  There 


1846]        Rig-veda  and  East  India  House  57 

was  a  large  party  here  last  night  .  .  .  where  I  met  many  interesting 
people.     I  shall  be  glad  when  I  am  quietly  back  in  London. 

'Your  Max.' 
To  THE  Same. 
Translation.  Berlin,  Novem5er  ii. 

'  You  will  be  surprised  at  getting  another  letter  from  Berlin,  when 
I  hoped  to  be  already  in  London.  But  there  was  so  much  to  do 
of  real  importance  concerning  my  work  and  prospects  that  I  was 
obliged  to  put  off  my  journey,  and  cannot  even  now  fix  the  day. 
The  worst  is  I  have  had  no  rest  the  whole  time,  always  running 
about,  paying  visits  to  Geheimrathe  and  Ministers.  Humboldt  has 
again  been  most  good  to  me,  and  done  all  he  could  to  support  the 
publication  of  the  Veda,  in  such  a  way  that  I  should  gain  something 
by  it.  He  gave  my  prospectus  to  the  King,  who  had  it  read  out  to 
him,  and  spoke  most  graciously  about  it,  and  sent  me  word  through 
Humboldt  I  should  write  him  a  letter  regarding  the  religious  impor- 
tance of  the  Veda.  I  had  to  do  this  at  once,  and  you  know  how 
much  care  and  time  such  a  thing  takes.  The  King  is  unfortunately 
not  in  Berlin,  but  has  received  my  letter,  and  already  promised 
a  considerable  sum  towards  the  undertaking.  Then  there  was  much 
to  arrange  about  the  Sanskrit  types,  which  belong  to  the  Academy, 
but  I  am  in  great  hopes  that  my  plans  will  be  successful,  and  that 
I  can  return  to  London  in  good  spirits.  ...  I  dined  with  Prince 
Waldemar,  who  is  a  remarkably  charming  and  cultivated  man.  After 
dinner  we  had  coffee  in  an  Indian  tent,  with  fine  carpets  and  tiger- 
skins,  everything  Indian,  even  to  the  long  pipes  and  tobacco.' 

Soon  after  his  return  to  London  the  negotiations  with  the 
East  India  Company  for  printing  and  publishing  the  Ri^-- 
veda  began.  The  success  of  his  plan  of  publishing  the  Veda 
in  Konigsberg  depended  on  the  support  of  the  East  India 
Company — who  were  asked  to  subscribe  for  100  copies,  the 
King  of  Prussia  and  the  French  Government  having  already 
promised  to  take  a  large  number.  But  when,  as  advised  by 
Bunsen  and  Wilson,  Max  Miiller  called  on  the  various  Directors 
on  the  subject,  they  declared  themselves  averse  to  suppoi-ting 
a  work  carried  out  by  a  foreign  country.  Bunsen  was  ready 
to  seize  the  opportunity,  for  he  saw  at  once  that  the  East 
India  Company  was  the  proper  body  to  undertake  the  whole 
work. 

'It  was  not  an  easy  task,'  says  the  Autohiography,  'to  persuade  the 
Board  of  Directors,  all  strictly  practical  men,  to  authorize  so  considerable 


58  East  India  Company  [ch.  iv 

an  expenditure,  merely  to  edit  and  print  an  old  book  that  none  of  them 
could  understand,  and  many  of  them  had  never  even  heard  of.  Bunsen 
pointed  out  what  a  disgrace  it  would  be  if  some  other  country  than 
England  published  this  edition  of  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  Brahmans.' 

Professor  Wilson,  the  Librarian  of  the  India  House,  who 
had  long  been  preparing  a  translation  of  the  Rig-veda 
and  often  found  himself  hampered  from  want  of  a  perfectly- 
correct  text,  added  his  powerful  advocacy,  and  though  months 
of  uncertainty  were  yet  to  try  the  young  scholar,  everything 
was  finally  arranged  by  April,  1847. 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translalion.  London,  December  25. 

'  I  put  off  writing,  for  I  hoped  to  give  you  news  of  employment, 
about  which  I  have  been  busy  ever  since  the  end  of  November,  and 
in  constant  hopes  of  a  favourable  decision,  but  I  am  still  without  any 
definite  information.  I  can  hardly  tell  you  how  uncomfortable  such 
a  position  is,  such  uncertainty  makes  me  unfit  for  anything.  I  can 
truly  say  I  have  lost  the  whole  of  December,  as  I  could  do  nothing 
but  write  official  letters  to  the  Honourable  Court  of  Directors 
of  the  East  India  Company,  and  pay  official  visits,  &c.  But  if  it 
succeeds,  I  shall  have  £150  a  year,  and  nothing  to  do  but  bring  out 
a  Sanskrit  work  for  the  Company.  You  can  imagine  how  delightful 
such  a  position  would  be,  and  can  picture  to  yourself  my  intense 
anxiety  as  to  yes  or  no !  Bunsen  and  Wilson  have  done  all  in  their 
power,  and  Bunsen  especially  has  taken  the  liveliest  interest  in  the 
whole  affair,  but  such  arrangements  cannot  be  made  in  a  hurry,  and 
so  I  must  be  patient.  My  birthday  passed  by  quietly,  with  no  one 
who  knew  it.  I  dined  at  Bunsen's.  The  whole  month  has  gone  in 
hopes,  expectations,  disappointments,  and  rejoicings,  and  though  it  is 
possible  I  might  hear  to-day  that  all  is  settled,  it  may  dawdle  on  into 
next  year,  and  even  fail  entirely.  So  do  not  talk  about  it,  and  do  not 
paint  my  future  to  yourself  in  rosy  colours,  for  it  may  first  be  very 
grey !  I  feel  sure  I  can  depend  on  Bunsen  under  all  circumstances. 
How  I  have  deserved  his  kindness,  I  know  not,  for  he  has  done  me 
so  many  kindnesses,  not  only  where  his  position  made  it  easy  for  him, 
but  even  when  it  was  disagreeable  to  him,  and  required  great  self- 
restraint.  I  was  there  for  Christmas  Eve.  The  whole  family  were 
together,  children  and  children's  children — in  all  thirty  people,  and 
then  all  the  servants.  A  huge  Christmas  tree,  and  two  large  rooms 
lighted  up  and  decorated,  and  presents  for  every  one.  I  had  a 
beautiful  writing  portfolio  fitted  up  with  everything;   I  was  as  happy 


1846]  English  Friends  59 

as  one  can  be  when  obliged  to  be  away  from  home.  We  have  been 
waiting  five  days  for  the  courier,  who  comes  by  Hamburg,  and  is  prob- 
ably frozen  in  !  From  January  i,  a  letter  to  Germany  will  only  cost  one 
shilling.  To-day  I  dine  with  Wilson — a  large  party.  The  English 
keep  Christmas  by  eating  enormously,  but  one  needs  an  English 
appetite  for  it !  ...  I  have  forgotten  to  send  my  New  Year's  wishes — • 
you  know  how  I  wish  you  all  with  all  my  heart  a  very  happy  year — 
and  no  year  will  be  happier  for  me  than  the  one  when  I  find  myself 
able,  if  only  in  the  smallest  degree,  to  add  to  your  comfort  1 — Max.' 

His  life  all  these  months  had  been  one  of  very  hard  work 
and  constant  self-denial,  and  but  for  Bunsen's  substantial  help 
he  could  not  have  lived  on  in  England.  He  tells  us  hov\^  he 
walked  to  and  from  the  India  House  every  day,  his  arms  full 
of  books  and  papers.  One  day  he  left  his  spectacles,  which 
he  had  broken,  to  be  mended  at  a  shop  in  the  Strand,  and  on 
calling  to  fetch  them,  he  laid  down  a  sovereign  to  pay  for 
them.  The  shopman  returned  him  change  for  half  a  sovereign, 
and  persisted  that  Max  Miiller  had  only  given  him  ten 
shillings.  It  was  in  vain  to  remonstrate,  the  man  only  became 
abusive  to  the  unmistakable  foreigner  in  a  well-worn  coat, 
and  Max  left  the  shop,  sadly  aware  that  the  missing  ten 
shillings  represented  several  dinners,  which  he  must  give  up. 
Some  days  passed,  dinnerless,  when  one  evening  the  man 
rushed  out  of  the  same  shop  as  Max  was  passing  it,  with  ten 
shillings  in  his  hand,  which  he  held  out  to  him — '  Oh,  sir,'  he 
said,  '  I  have  watched  for  you  several  days.  You  were  right ; 
I  found  I  had  ten  shillings  too  much  when  I  counted  up  my 
money  that  evening,  and  I  have  longed  to  get  it  back  to  you,' 
adding,  '  for  you  look  as  if  you  wanted  it.' 

Meantime  he  was  making  friends  in  England.  He  had 
stayed  more  than  once  in  the  country  at  Totteridge  with 
Bunsen,  and  with  him  had  visited  Archdeacon  Hare.  Mr. 
Vaux  of  the  British  Museum  had  become  a  fast  friend,  an 
intimacy  which  lasted  till  Mr.  Vaux's  death.  Max  Miiller 
constantly  attended  the  suppers  given  by  his  friend,  where  the 
invitation  cards  were  adorned  with  pictures  of  Nineveh  bulls 
and  hawk-headed  deities,  and  where  clouds  of  not  over-good 
tobacco  smoke  filled  the  air.  '  Billy  Russell,'  as  we  know, 
constantly  sent  him  tickets  for  concerts  and  theatres,  so  that, 


6o  Visit  to  Oxford  [ch.  iv 

notwithstanding  his  hard  work,  and  the  uncertainty  about  the 
Veda,  his  early  London  Hfe  was  far  more  enjoyable  than  the 
first  year  of  his  stay  in  Paris.  There  were  several  young 
German  Sanskritists  at  work  in  England,  and  with  these  and 
the  colony  of  German  merchants,  living  chiefly  at  Denmark 
Hill,  and  the  members  of  the  German  Consulate  he  was  in 
constant  intercourse. 

Early  in  1 847  he  went  for  a  short  time  to  Oxford  to  copy 
Sanskrit  MSS.— his  first  sight  of  his  future  home.  About 
the  same  time  he  made  acquaintance  by  letter  with  Benfey, 
the  great  Sanskrit  scholar  at  Gottingen,  an  acquaintance  that 
soon  ripened  into  a  true  friendship.  Benfey  was  then  engaged 
on  his  edition  of  the  Sdma-veda,  and  many  letters  passed 
between  the  friends  on  points  of  Vedic  grammar. 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  London,  February  12,  1847. 

'  Still  in  great  uncertainty.  I  have  only  just  returned  to  London, 
for  I  have  been  staying  at  Oxford,  working  in  the  Library  there,  and 
have  thus  seen  the  most  interesting  and  beautiful  city  in  Europe. 
The  whole  town  is  of  the  Middle  Ages,  and  consists  almost  entirely 
of  churches,  monasteries  (now  Colleges),  castles,  and  towers,  all  in 
old  English  or  Gothic,  and  the  whole  life  is  of  the  Middle  Ages.  All 
students  in  black  and  white  gowns  and  black  caps,  and  so  are  the 
Professors,  &c.  And  then  the  wealth  and  easy  life  in  the  Universities 
{sic),  which  are  more  High  Schools  than  Universities.' 

Not  long  after  Max  Midler's  return  from  Oxford  he  was 
able  to  write  to  his  mother  : — 

Translation.  5,  Newman's  Row,  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields, 

April  15,  1847. 

'  At  last  the  long  conflict  is  decided,  and  I  have  carried  off,  so  to 
speak,  the  prize  !  I  can  yet  hardly  believe  that  I  have  at  last  got 
what  I  have  struggled  for  so  long,  entire  independence,  and  I  am 
filled  with  the  thought  of  how  much  more  I  have  gained  than 
I  deserve.  ...  I  am  to  hand  over  to  the  Company,  ready  for  press, 
fifty  sheets  each  year — the  same  I  had  promised  to  Samter  in  Ger- 
many; for  this  I  have  asked  £200  a  year,  £4  a  sheet.  They  have 
been  considering  the  matter  since  December,  and  it  was  only  yester- 
day that  it  was  officially  settled.  I  have  to  read  the  corrections,  and 
shall  have  plenty  of  time  left  to  devote  to  my  studies.  ...  As  the  work 


1847]  Rig-veda  settled  61 

will  be  above  400  sheets,  I  have  a  certain  position  for  the  next  eight 
years,  and  the  work  is  really  so  light  I  could  take  another  post  with 
it.  This  in  fact  has  been  already  offered  me,  i.  e.  a  place  as 
Librarian  at  the  British  Museum,  with  £150  a  year.  But  on 
Bunsen's  advice  I  have  refused  this,  as  I  would  rather  be  free  the 
first  years  to  study,  till  something  more  suitable  presents  itself,  of 
which  there  is  Httle  doubt  in  time.  And  now  what  do  you  say, 
dearest  mother.?  Is  it  not  more  than  I  could  have  ever  expected? 
And  have  I  not  been  right  throughout  to  hold  out  to  the  very  last, 
and  devote  all  my  time  and  strength  and  money  to  one  aim,  and 
pursue  that  to  the  last  gasp  1  But  only  think  that  I  had  not  a  penny 
left,  and  that  in  spite  of  every  effort  to  make  a  little  money,  I  should 
have  had  to  return  to  Germany  had  not  Bunsen  stood  by  me  and 
helped  me  by  word  and  deed.  It  has  been  a  bad  time,  and  now 
that  it  is  over  I  may  say  so.  I  saw  that  the  turning-point  of  my 
life  had  come,  and  that  after  all  the  uncertainty  I  was  only  a  few 
steps  from  the  goal,  and  yet  I  was  not  in  a  position  to  wait  longer, 
but  should  be  forced  to  return  to  Germany,  to  give  up  my  favourite 
studies,  if  not  entirely,  yet  mostly,  in  order  to  gain  a  scanty  living 
at  a  school  or  by  private  lessons.  I  knew  that  none  of  my  relations 
and  friends  agreed  with  me;  on  the  contrary,  that  they  all  thought 
my  plans  foolish  and  exaggerated,  and  I  had  no  one  from  whom 
I  could  expect  support — I  mean,  who  would  have  lent  me  a  small 
sum  for  a  few  years.  In  fact,  all  my  time,  money,  and  work,  indeed 
my  whole  life  perhaps,  would  have  been  sacrificed  and  lost,  had  not 
Bunsen,  who  had  once  been  in  the  same  position,  without  my  saying 
anything  to  him,  stood  by  me,  and  in  this  way  made  it  possible  for 
me  to  struggle  on  with  joyful  confidence  and  firm  faith  towards  the 
goal  I  had  set  before  me.  I  do  not  know  whether  I  should  thank 
God  more  that  I  have  at  last  attained  my  long-desired  and  long- 
sought  object,  or  that  I  have  gained  the  friendship  of  so  noble  and 
distinguished  a  man  as  Bunsen.  It  is  in  these  last  weeks  that  I  have 
learned  to  know  and  value  him  so  thoroughly.  Archdeacon  Hare 
invited  Bunsen  and  me  to  spend  Easter  with  him  in  the  country,  and 
so  I  spent  the  whole  time  in  constant  intercourse  and  conversation 
with  these  two  men  and  Sir  John  Herschell,  the  famous  astronomer, 
who  was  there  on  a  visit,  and  thus  I  forgot  all  my  troubles.  In  fact, 
I  spent  a  delightful  time,  and  when  I  reached  London  yesterday 
I  found  all  settled,  and  I  could  say  and  feel,  Thank  God !  Now 
I  must  at  once  send  my  thanks,  and  set  to  work  to  earn  the  first 
£100.  Till  then  Bunsen  will  lend  me  some  money,  which  will  not 
be  necessary  later  on,  as  one  can  live  here  comfortably  on  £150,  and 
at  first  my  expenses  will  be  small.     We  will  not  make  any  plans  yet 


62  Death  of  Mendelssohn  [ch.  iv 

for  the  future.  When  my  work  is  once  arranged  I  can  easily  spend 
a  month  or  two  each  year  in  Germany,  and  when  I  have  put  by 
a  httle  you  might  try  if  you  could  live  comfortably  in  England. 
But  at  first,  patience  1  My  rooms  here  are  small,  but  very  nice — 
sitting-  and  bed-room — with  a  beautiful  view  over  an  old  park  and 
Gothic  buildings.  I  pay,  however,  nearly  £45,  and  that  is  cheap. 
As  soon  as  I  have  earned  a  little  money,  my  first  purchase  will  be 
a  piano — hiring  is  almost  as  dear  as  buying  a  second-hand  one, 
which  is  always  easy  to  find.  What  did  you  think  of  my  Meghaduia  ? 
I  am  well  and  happy.' 

This  summer  Max  mentions  hearing  Mendelssohn  several 
times,  both  in  public  and  at  Bunsen's.  It  was  his  last  inter- 
course with  the  friend  of  his  childhood,  boyhood,  and  youth ; 
for  at  the  close  of  the  year  he  writes  : — 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  i,  Garden  Place,  December  ii. 

'  The  death  of  Mendelssohn  was  a  great  shock  to  me,  and  yet  is  not 
his  lot  to  be  envied  ?  and  if  to  live  is  to  work,  has  he  not  Kved  longer 
than  many.?  What  comes  from  God  is  right  and  good.  How 
beautifully  Jean  Paul  speaks  of  comfort,  but  how  much  more  beautiful 
and  elevating  is  another  book,  which  unhappily  through  man's  un- 
reason and  man's  wisdom  is  so  spoilt  for  us  from  childhood,  that  we 
can  only  slowly  and  by  degrees  read  and  live  into  it  again.  Here  the 
general  sympathy  has  been  expressed  in  so  many  different  ways. 
Elijah  was  twice  performed,  all  in  mourning,  no  applause,  and  at  the 
beginning  the  Dead  March  in  Saul.  I  could  not  go,  it  was  too  much 
for  me.  I  could  not  at  first  touch  the  piano.  Now  there  is  a  col- 
lection for  a  monument,  probably  in  Westminster,  where  you  know 
Handel  is  buried.' 

To  return  to  his  daily  life,  now  given  up  to  the  preparation 
of  the  text  and  Commentary  of  the  Rig-veda.  The  MS.  of 
the  first  volume  was  rapidly  approaching  completion.  '  I  get 
up  at  five  every  morning,'  he  says  (May  10), '  for  I  have  a  great 
deal  to  do,  and  the  evenings  are  generally  wasted  in  society. 
Summer  is  beginning,  and  there  is  more  green  each  morning 
on  the  great  trees  before  my  window.' 

For  nearly  four  years  Max  Miiller  had  been  copying  and 
collating  the  MSS.  of  the  Rig-veda  in  order  to  publish  a  cor- 
rect text,  but  this  was  by  no  means  the  most  difficult  part  of 


1847]  Rig-veda  63 

his  taskj  though  it  is  the  part  that  has  been  best  understood 
and  appreciated  by  the  pubhc.  Real  Sanskrit  scholars  know 
that  his  knowledge  of  Sanskrit  was  tested  and  shown  in  the 
critical  edition  of  Sayana's  Commentary.  This  work  involved 
enormous  labour,  and  he  was  often  urged  to  work  faster  and 
less  critically,  but  he  kept  to  his  first  resolution,  to  publish 
the  whole  text  of  the  Commentary,  making  it  as  perfect  as 
possible.  At  the  time  he  began  his  edition,  many  of  the 
Sanskrit  works  quoted  by  Sayana  were  still  unedited,  whilst 
the  references  were  brief,  presupposing  an  intimate  acquain- 
tance with  the  works  quoted.  Max  Miiller  had  to  trace  these 
references,  to  copy  the  MSS.  where  they  occur,  and  make  full 
and  careful  indices.  This  he  did,  though  often  delayed  by 
some  obscure  reference  to  Panini's  Grammar  or  Yaska's  Glos- 
sary. All  these  references  had  to  be  found,  and  their  meaning 
ascertained,  before  any  printing  could  be  begun.  They  are 
now  given  in  his  edition  of  the  Veda.  He  tells  us  he  was 
often  driven  to  despair  by  some  obscure  reference  which 
neither  Burnouf  nor  Wilson,  the  greatest  Sanskrit  scholars 
of  the  day,  could  help  him  to  discover,  '  It  often  took  me 
whole  days — nay,  weeks — before  I  saw  light.  In  the  purely 
mechanical  part  other  scholars  could,  and  did,  help  me  ;  but 
whenever  any  real  difficulty  arose,  I  had  to  face  it  by  myself, 
though  after  a  time  I  gladly  acknowledge  that  here  too  their 
advice  was  often  valuable  to  me.' 

Bunsen  was  determined,  as  his  young  friend  would  live  in 
England,  at  all  events  for  several  years  to  come,  that  he  should 
make  the  acquaintance  of  influential  and  distinguished  people, 
not  only  in  London  society,  but  in  scientific  and  literary  circles, 
and  therefore  insisted  on  his  attending,  under  his  guidance,  the 
meeting  of  the  British  Association,  which  in  1847  was  held 
at  Oxford.  He  not  only  attended,  but  prepared  and  read 
a  paper  in  English  on  the  relation  of  Bengali  to  the  Aryan  and 
aboriginal  languages  of  India.  He  had  been  but  a  year  in 
England,  and  though  he  had  completely  mastered  English, 
and  wrote  and  expressed  himself  correctly  and  forcibly,  his 
pronunciation  was  still  very  foreign,  and  it  was  with  no  little 
trepidation  that  he  stood  up  for  the  first  time  before  a  large 
and  critical  English  audience.     His  subject  was  one  entirely 


64  British  Association  [ch.  iv 

new  to  most  of  his  hearers,  but  it  excited  great  interest,  and 
gave  rise  to  a  keen  discussion,  in  which  the  young  scholar  was 
ably  and  chivalrously  defended  by  Dr.  Prichard,  President 
of  the  Section,  against  the  attacks  and  objections  of  certain 
members  who  thought  that  no  good  thing  could  come  out  of 
Germany.  Though  Max  Miiller  never  reprinted  this  paper 
separately,  and  considered  it  as  the  crude  production  of  a  very 
young  man  (he  was  not  twenty-four),  he  received,  as  late  as 
1892,  a  letter  from  a  gentleman  engaged  in  like  studies  with 
this  allusion  to  his  early  essay  :  '  It  seems  to  me  that  you  have 
stated  far  more  clearly  than  I  have  seen  elsewhere  the  main 
facts  of  Bengali  agglutination,  and  it  is  astonishing  to  me 
how  wonderfully  you  have  grasped  them  without  visiting 
Bengal.' 

It  was  on  this  occasion  that  Max  Mijller  first  came  into 
personal  contact  with  Prince  Albert,  for  whom  he  ever  after- 
wards felt  the  strongest  admiration  and  sympathy.  They  met 
from  time  to  time  at  public  dinners,  or  whenever  the  Prince 
Consort  visited  Oxford,  but  both  were  aware  that,  strongly  as 
they  felt  drawn  to  each  other  by  common  interests  and  national 
sympathies,  more  constant  intercourse  would  not  be  wise  for 
either  of  them,  both  being,  in  their  different  spheres  of  work, 
jealously  watched  as  foreigners  by  suspicious  John  Bull. 

After  Max  Muller's  return  to  London  he  tells  his  mother 
that  he  was  '  feeling  mentally  and  physically  exhausted,  as  the 
various  discussions  in  English  tried  him  rather.'  Still,  he 
speaks  of  this  meeting  as  a  delightful  time,  and  he  felt  sure  it 
would  be  of  use  to  him. 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  Jtdy,   1847. 

'  The  suggestion  came,  of  course,  again  from  Bunsen,  who  is  deter- 
mined to  push  me  in  the  world.  He  continues  just  the  same  to  me, 
and  his  friendship  and  affection  make  my  life  very  happy  here. 
Yesterday  there  was  a  great  Egyptian  dinner  at  Bunsen's.  I  was 
there ;  for,  after  long  indecision,  I  too  have  joined  the  hieroglyphists. 
The  printing  goes  on  very  slowly,  as  new  letters  have  to  be  made,  and 
it  will  be  a  whole  year  before  the  first  volume  is  ready:  but  when 
everything  is  in  order,  I  shall  make  £3  or  £4  a  week.  As  yet  Bunsen 
is  still  my  banker,  but  my  credit  stands  high  with  him !     The  death 


1847]  Printing  the  Rig-veda  65 

of  Fanny  Hensel  has  grieved  me  very  much.  I  have  not  heard  Jenny 
Lind  yet,  it  is  too  expensive.  How  gladly  would  I  have  a  quiet 
fortnight  with  you ;  one  gets  no  rest  here.' 


To  THE  Same. 
Translation.  Lot^do^^  ,  July  13. 

'  London  is  really  unbearable  from  heat  and  dust,  and  I  am  longing 
so  for  the  country  that  I  shall  try  and  find  a  little  room,  if  possible, 
at  the  seaside,  which  I  know  will  do  me  good.  If  only  England  were 
not  so  very  dear,  especially  when  one  wants  to  amuse  oneself.  Prince 
Waldemar  is  here,  and  I  have  seen  him  several  times  and  had  several 
good  dinners  with  him.  I  enclose  the  menu  of  the  largest  dinner, 
given  by  the  Directors  of  the  East  India  Company.  Each  cover 
cost  £5.  It  is  impossible  to  describe  it,  and  I  assure  you  I  had 
rather  eat  potatoes  jn  Chemnitz !  Lord  John  Russell  was  there, 
and  the  //t'/e  of  society.  Bun  sen  again  did  Httle  else  but  intro- 
duce me  to  people  who  would  be  useful  to  me.  But  running  about 
in  society,  eating,  drinking,  and  talking,  tires  one  out,  and  I  shall 
get  away  as  soon  as  I  can.' 

The  printing  of  the  Veda  had  now  begun  in  real  earnest, 
and  on  July  13,  1847,  he  was  able  to  send  to  Burnouf  in 
Paris  the  first  two  sheets  of  Volume  I.  '  How  willingly,'  he 
says,  '  would  I  have  visited  Paris  this  summer  to  seek  advice 
and  information  on  many  points  from  you,  but  I  am  chained 
here.  When  my  first  volume  is  ready  I  shall  take  a  holiday, 
that  I  may  present  it  to  you  in  person.  I  rejoice  in  the  pros- 
pect, for  I  cannot  repeat  often  enough  that  I  owe  it  to  your 
advice  and  friendly  sympathy  alone  that  I  am  now  realizing 
the  plans  I  formed  in  my  youth.* 

In  August  he  writes  to  his  mother  from  i,  Garden  Place, 
Lincoln's  Inn  : — 

Translation. 

'  As  you  see  I  have  changed  my  rooms  once  more,  as  there  was 
a  bad  smell  in  the  other  house  in  this  heat,  and  I  thought  it  was  not 
healthy.  I  am  quite  away  from  the  street,  and  live  as  in  a  garden. 
I  have  in  fact  two  houses,  for  all  day  long  I  am  in  the  India  House, 
where  I  have  my  own  room,  all  surrounded  by  books  and  MSS. 
I  have  a  long  way  to  walk  there  and  back  every  day,  which  is  very 

I  F 


66  Friends  in  London  [ch.  iv 

good  for  me.  My  printing  goes  on  well,  so  that  I  am  quite  happy 
and  satisfied.  I  had  to  give  up  my  stay  in  the  country,  or  at  the  seaside, 
as  I  had  neither  money  nor  time  for  it.  Instead,  I  have  hired  a  piano, 
which  is  a  great  delight.  How  often  I  have  thought  of  you  lately,  and 
your  pleasant  life  at  Dresden.  Yes,  however  good  the  life  here  is  for 
the  brain  and  soul,  one's  heart  often  longs  for  something  else,  and  if 
I  had  not  Bunsen  and  his  family,  life  here  would  often  be  very  sad 
to  me.  But  I  will  not  complain,  I  am  determined  to  be  as  happy 
as  I  can  be,  for  how  much  brighter  has  my  whole  life  turned  out,  than 
I  ventured  to  expect  or  hope.  My  life  in  London  now  is  so  quiet 
and  uniform  that  I  have  nothing  to  tell  you.  The  Bunsens  are  going 
into  the  country,  where  he  will  rest  after  the  long  season.  He  does 
a  great  deal  of  literary  work,  and  I  read  or  hear  it  all,  and  we  often 
have  sharp  discussions,  as  you  may  imagine,  as  I  cannot  help  speaking 
out  plainly,  and  he  also  wields  a  sharp  sword.  But  he  is  delightful, 
and  we  always  remain  good  friends.' 

To  THE  Same. 
Translation.  September  i. 

'  My  rooms  in  London  are  delightful,  and  my  piano  a  real  joy.  In 
the  same  house  lives  Dr.  Trithen,  an  Orientalist,  whom  I  knew  in  Paris, 
and  who  was  once  employed  in  the  Office  for  Foreign  Affairs  in 
St.  Petersburg.  Then  there  are  a  great  many  other  Orientalists  in 
London,  who  are  mostly  living  near  me,  and  we  form  an  Oriental 
colony  from  all  parts  of  the  world.  Dr.  Bergstedt,  a  Swede ;  Koll- 
gren,  a  Finn ;  Abb^  Bardelli,  an  Italian ;  Dr.  Dillmann  from  Suabia ; 
Dr.  Spiegel  from  Bavaria;  Dr.  Weber  from  Berlin.  When  we  are  all 
together,  it  sounds  like  a  perfect  Babel,  and  we  have  a  good  deal  of 
fun  at  our  cosmopolitan  tea-evenings.' 

By  the  middle  of  October,  Max  Miiller  was  able  to  send  the 
first  sheet  of  Sayana's  Commentary  to  M.  Burnouf.  He  says 
in  a  letter  dated  '  i,  Garden  Place,  Oct.  18  ' : — 

Translation, 

'  This  first  sheet  has  cost  me  much  time  and  trouble,  as  they  had 
not  sufficient  types  at  Oxford,  which  caused  endless  delay.  Now  that 
they  have  founded  the  accented  letters,  I  hope  to  get  on  faster,  but 
I  send  this  first  sheet  because  if  you  have  any  serious  objections  to  the 
general  plan  I  have  adopted,  conformably  with  my  position  here  in 
London,  I  could  still  make  necessary  alterations.  I  often  feel  that 
the  Rig-veda  and  Commentary  ought  to  have  fallen  into  worthier 
hands,  but  I  will  do  all  that  I  possibly  can.     I  count  on  your  indul- 


1847]  Btirnouf  on  the  Veda  67 

gence,  but  shall,  at  the  same  time,  be  most  grateful  if  you  will  point 
out  any  mistakes.' 

To  this  Burnouf  replied  : — 

Translation.  November  9. 

'  My  dear  Friend, — I  thank  you  for  having  sent  me  the  sheets  of 
your  grand  edition  of  the  Rig-veda.  I  use  the  word  grand,  not  to 
avoid  saying  excellent,  because  I  consider  it  both  grand  and  excellent, 
but  because  I  must  express  my  admiration  of  Professor  Wilson's  fine 
and  vigorous  Devanagart  type.  I  have  examined  your  sheets,  and  I 
must  own  that  I  am  astonished  that  in  so  short  a  time  you  have  been 
able  to  master  the  mass  of  materials  at  hand.  One  has  a  right  to 
demand  of  an  editor  a  correct  list,  a  suitable  division  of  the  words,  an 
indication  of  the  Hindu  divisions  according  to  the  two  systems,  the 
text  so  far  separated  from  the  Commentary  that  they  can  never  be 
mistaken  the  one  for  the  other,  a  reproduction  of  the  Pada  MS.  and 
position  of  the  accents  according  to  the  copies  of  the  Rishis.  You  have 
given  all  this  with  exemplary  care  and  completeness.  But  you  have 
given  us  much  more,  and  here  I  cannot  praise  you  too  highly.  You 
indicate  the  quotations,  and  trace  them  not  only  to  works  that  are 
accessible,  but  to  many  that  are  still  entirely  unedited.  I  congratulate 
you  with  all  my  heart  on  your  de'but,  and  I  venture  to  say  on  your 
success,  for  your  success  is  secured.  You  know  me  well  enough, 
I  hope,  to  feel  the  sincerity  of  my  congratulations.  We  older  men, 
who  came  too  early  to  embark  on  the  great  enterprises  which  younger 
men  can  undertake,  we  have  only  the  duty  of  clapping  our  hands  to 
show  the  public  what  they  ought  to  honour  and  esteem.  Believe  me, 
I  shall  not  fail  in  doing  this  ;  and  it  is  a  great  delight  to  do  it  for 
a  man  whose  knowledge  I  admire  and  whose  character  I  love.  And 
I  think  I  may  be  allowed  to  reflect  with  pleasure  on  any  effort  I  may 
have  made  to  encourage  you  to  march  on  in  entire  independence, 
avoiding  all  collaborations.  This  is  the  only  thing  on  which  I  can 
pride  myself,  and  it  again  is  entirely  to  your  honour,  because  it  only 
proves  that  I  recognized  all  that  science  might  expect  from  you. 
Believe  me  that  I  am  more  than  ever  filled  with  this  sentiment,  and 
continue  to  reckon  me  among  those  who  follow  your  success  with  the 
greatest  delight.  'E.  Burnouf.' 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  November  9. 

'  My  time  is  entirely  occupied  with  the  Veda  .  . .  but  my  work  is 
delightful,  and  I  feel  sure  that  in  six  or  seven  years  it  will  bring  in 

F  2 


68  Babylonian  Inscriptions  [ch.  iv 

plenty,  and  I  am  quite  independent,  and  that  is  worth  more  than  anything 
else.  But  the  idea  of  marrying  is  absurd,  and  happily  as  yet  love  has 
left  me  tolerably  alone,  for  I  have  other  things  to  fill  my  head  and 
heart.  I  have  just  had  an  offer  to  go  to  Benares,  and  print  the  Veda 
there,  which  I  have  refused.  I  correspond  with  the  Brahmans  there, 
and  the  Indian  papers  often  mention  Dr.  M.  M.,  but  that  is  of 
no  help.' 

To  Burnouf  he  writes : — 

Translation.  i,  Garden  Place,  December  5,  1847. 

'  Your  last  letter  gave  me  the  greatest  pleasure,  and  I  thank  you 
warmly.  I  know  well  that  you  are  full  of  indulgence  and  kindness, 
such  as  I  must  not  expect  from  the  severe  critics  of  Russia  and 
Germany,  but  I  own  that  your  favourable  opinion,  and  that  of  Wilson, 
Lassen,  and  Bopp,  are  the  most  delightful  reward,  and  the  only  one 
I  wish  for,  and  that  it  gives  me  new  courage  to  persevere  in  a  task 
that  would  otherwise  often  seem  dry  and  distasteful.  The  news  that 
I  have  received  through  M,  d'Eckstein  that  you  have  successfully 
deciphered  the  Nineveh  inscriptions  would  have  asionished  me,  had 
one  not  been  accustomed  to  such  happy  surprises  from  the  successor 
of  Champollion.  I  consider  this  discovery  the  grandest  and  most 
important  of  the  century ;  it  must  throw  light  on  many  fundamental 
questions  of  ancient  ethnography.  Up  to  now,  I  have  not  found 
anything  really  solid  and  satisfactory  in  all  the  conjectures  on  the 
so-called  Indian,  Babylonian,  and  Assyrian  inscriptions.  I  hear  that 
Dr.  Hincks  sent  yesterday  to  the  Asiatic  Society  a  complete  transla- 
tion of  the  inscriptions  of  Van,  made  by  means  of  an  Indo-germanic 
language.  But  I  must  examine  it  myself.  Rawlinson  has  at  last 
managed  to  copy  a  part  of  the  third  inscription  at  Behistun,  and  he 
writes  that  he  now  for  the  first  time  touches  solid  ground.  Incredulous 
as  I  have  been  about  all  these  promises  and  experiments,  I  am  now 
convinced  that  under  your  guidance  a  new  region  will  be  opened  to 
science,  and  I  await  the  signal  impatiently.' 

This  important  year  of  Max's  life  was  dravi^ing  to  a  close. 
His  success  had  justified  his  perseverance  in  a  career  which 
had  at  one  time  seemed  utterly  hopeless,  and  he  was  rewarded 
at  last  for  the  long  struggle,  for  the  bitter  self-denials  of  his 
early  years. 

For  the  first  time  we  find  a  mention  in  his  Christmas 
letter  of  a  gift  of  money  to  the  mother  to  whose  unceasing 
care   and   self- forgetfulness  he  owed  everything.      This  he 


1847]  Christmas  Gift  69 

never  forgot  to  the  last  hour  of  her  life,  and  it  was  his  constant 
delight  from  this  time  onwards  to  add  to  her  comforts  and 
pleasures. 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  i,  Garden  Place,  Lincoln's  Inn, 

December  ii,  1847. 

*. . .  I  must  now  give  you  some  commissions.  Take  the  enclosed  £5 
note  and  change  it  at  a  banker's,  and  with  half  of  it  buy  something 
very  nice  for  Frau  Hofrathin  Muller ;  with  the  other  half  something 
pretty  for  Frau  Dr.  Krug,  and  some  toys  for  the  two  little  Krugs. 

'  Your  Max.' 


CHAPTER  V 

1848 

Visit  to  Paris.     Revolution.     Settles  at  Oxford.     Friends  there.     Letters 

to  Burnouf  and  Bunsen. 

The  year  1848  began  gaily  for  the  young  stranger.  He 
had  moved  to  King  WiHiam  Street,  Strand,  to  be  a  little 
nearer  to  the  Prussian  Legation,  though  he  already  began  to 
recognize  the  disadvantage  of  being  so  far  from  his  printers, 
now  that  the  first  volume  of  the  Rig-veda  was  passing 
through  the  Press.  No  London  firm  could  have  undertaken 
the  work,  from  want  of  the  proper  types,  whilst  the  Oxford 
University  Press,  with  the  help  of  Professor  Wilson,  had 
secured  the  finest  Devanagari  types  then  known.  Of  his 
gaieties  he  writes  to  his  mother : — 

Translation.  5,  King  William  Street,  Strand, 

Jainiary  27,  1848. 

'  Last  week  I  went  to  two  balls  in  English  families  to  whom  I  have 
been  introduced.  It  was  a  beautiful  sight,  and  the  balls  lasted  till  four. 
I  have  not  treated  myself  to  a  new  evening  coat — my  old  one  does 
fairly  well,  and  I  danced  away  in  it.  The  young  girls  in  England 
are  very  beautiful  and  very  pleasant ;  one  hardly  sees  a  single  ugly  face 
in  a  ball-room — which  one  cannot  say  in  either  France  or  Germany — 
and  so  one  spends  a  very  pleasant  evening.  The  Bunsens  do  not 
give  balls,  but  most  agreeable  parties  with  good  music.  But  my  chief 
employment  is  my  work  at  the  East  India  House,  and  I  hope  this 
year  to  finish  the  first  volume  of  about  600  pages.' 

In  February  he  found  it  necessary  to  visit  Paris,  to  look 
at  some  MSS.  in  the  Bibliotheque  Royale,  and  was  still  there 
when  the  Revolution  broke  out.  In  the  Autobiography  he 
has  described  his  difficulty  in  getting  back  to  England,  but 


1848]  French  Revolution  71 

says  little  of  what  he  actually  saw  in  Paris,  and  the  letter  he 
wrote  to  his  mother  immediately  after  his  escape,  for  it  was 
really  that,  is  full  of  interesting  details. 

Translation.  London,  Monday,  March  i,  184S. 

'  I  went  for  a  fortnight  to  Paris,  partly  to  see  Hagedorn,  partly  to 
finish  some  work  at  the  Bibliotheque  Royale.  You  will  have  seen 
from  the  papers  what  a  fearful  time  I  had  there,  and  I  thanked  God 
when  I  stood  safe  again  on  English  ground.  I  am  sdll  so  excited 
that  I  can  hardly  describe  all  I  have  seen  and  done.  Since  Tuesday 
last,  I  have  had  sleepless  nights  from  fighting,  the  roar  of  cannon, 
burning  of  houses,  fall  of  buildings,  &c.,  men  murdered  by  hundreds 
or  simply  shot  down  in  the  streets.  No  one's  life  was  safe,  for  there 
was  neither  Government,  police,  nor  soldiers.  The  man  in  the  blouse 
was  lord  of  all,  and  blood  ran  in  the  streets,  which  were  filled  with 
barricades.  Women  on  horseback,  ruffians  on  the  finest  officers' 
chargers  paraded  the  streets,  carrying  Louis  Philippe's  throne  in 
triumph.  The  only  brave  soldiers  were  the  Municipal  Guards,  and 
I  saw  them  cut  down  and  hacked  in  pieces  by  the  mob.  One  could 
see  all  that  went  on  from  Hagedorn's  windows ;  the  bullets  whistled 
on  every  side,  and  yet  ladies  went  out  on  foot  pour  voir  la  Revolution. 
We  did  the  same,  and  were  more  than  once  pursued  by  the  cavalry. 
I  saw  barricades  built  up  of  omnibuses,  tables,  and  pianos,  attacked 
and  taken,  and  again  built  up,  till  at  last  the  soldiers  fraternized  with 
the  people,  gave  up  their  weapons,  and  finally  withdrew.  There  was 
nothing  grand  in  it.  The  French  journals  have  no  authority,  for  they 
are  written  by  and  for  the  victors,  who  proclaimed  liberty  of  the  Press, 
but  against  whom  the  Press  dare  not  assert  its  liberty.  It  might  have 
been  worse,  that  is  the  only  thing  one  can  say  for  the  mob.  The 
Garde  Nationale  were  cowards,  never  appeared  at  all  the  first  day, 
from  fear  of  the  Minister.  The  second  day  everything  seemed  over 
and  quiet,  and  one  rejoiced  that  without  any  loss  of  life  a  blinded 
Ministry  had  fallen,  and  the  people  had  carried  their  point  in  a  constitu- 
tional way.  But  those  who  had  made  the  demonstration  the  first  two 
days  were  not  yet  satisfied ;  the  Republicans  and  Communists  tried  to 
profit  by  the  public  excitement  to  stir  the  people  up  again.  On  the 
other  side  the  friends  of  Thiers  intrigued,  especially  Bugeaud,  who 
was  Commandant  of  Paris,  and  who  on  the  evening  of  the  second  day 
could  still  have  re-established  order,  had  he  not  connived  with  his 
troops  to  place  the  Ministry  in  Thiers'  hands  by  letting  the  revolution 
have  its  own  way  a  little.  But  when  this  was  effected,  it  was  too  late  ; 
the  people  and  the  troops  fraternized  and  streamed  together  to  the 
Tuileries:   the  people  armed,  but  not  the  military.     Louis  Philippe, 


72  French  Revolution  [ch.  v 

the  King  of  the  barricades,  fled  from  the  barricades,  and  from  the 
people  who  trusted  their  rights  to  him,  and  whose  interests  he  had 
sacrificed  in  his  selfish  plans  for  his  own  dynasty.  No  resistance  was 
then  possible ;  the  Repubhcans  had  no  opposition  to  fear ;  the  Duchess 
of  Orleans  with  her  sons  was  insulted,  and  the  Republic  proclaimed. 
The  railways  were  already  broken  up,  only  the  one  to  Havre  had 
been  forgotten,  so  over  the  barricades,  and  with  shots  on  all  sides, 
I  got  to  the  station  at  ten  at  night  on  Thursday.  Next  morning 
I  reached  Havre,  and  by  six  on  Saturday  evening,  after  a  very  bad 
passage,  arrived  in  London.  I  am  glad  to  have  seen  what  I  did,  but 
seeing  it  was  terrible.  I  was  at  one  time  quite  close  to  the  mob, 
and  escaped  by  some  side  steps  from  the  Boulevard  des  Capucins, 
where  Guizot's  house  stands,  into  the  Rue  Basse  des  Remparts.  In 
one  instant  came  a  shot,  then  a  fusillade,  and  from  that  moment  the 
fighting  and  flying  never  ceased,  till  Louis  Philippe  was  gone  and  the 
Republic  proclaimed.  I  could  do  little  work,  and  am  thankful  to  be 
back  and  in  safety  with  my  Veda.  In  spite  of  all  this  turmoil  I  am 
much  better,  and  so  my  work  will  get  on  faster.' 

It  was  Max  MUller  who  brought  Lord  Palmerston  the  first 
certain  news  of  Louis  Philippe's  flight. 

To  his  friend  Dr.  Pauli,  the  Anglo-Saxon  scholar,  at  this 
time  settled  in  England,  and  whom  he  had  first  met  in  Paris, 
he  wrote :  'It  was  terrible,  but  one  learns  history  by  it.' 

On  March  23  he  writes  again  to  his  mother  : — 

Translation. 

'  You  must  not  trouble  yourself  too  much  with  these  bad  times, 
and  their  reforms  and  revolutions.  They  are  developments  which 
are  unavoidable  in  history,  and  such  crises  are  necessary  to  get  rid 
of  all  the  poison  that  has  long  been  collecting  in  society.  One  must 
not  imagine  that  a  few  men  who  are  at  the  head  of  affairs  ma^e 
these  revolutions.  Such  events  are  not  made;  they  happen,  through 
a  higher  Will,  though  the  tools  employed  do  not  always  seem  the 
most  worthy.  When  one  sees  the  beginning  of  a  revolution,  with 
all  its  details  and  apparent  accidents,  as  I  saw  it  in  Paris,  one 
quickly  perceives  that  it  is  in  no  one's  power  to  reckon  on  these 
movements,  where  often  one  look,  one  resolution,  one  cry,  determines 
the  fate  of  hundreds  and  thousands.  In  such  moments  a  man  feels 
his  true  weakness,  he  realizes  what  he  is ;  during  the  quiet  course 
of  a  peaceful  life  a  man  becomes  so  self-confident  and  so  certain  of 
his  own  wisdom,  that  such  shocks  are  necessary  to  bring  him  again 
to  himself.  These  lessons  are  specially  good  for  the  wise  diplomatists 
who  imagine  they  can  direct  mankind  according  to  their  own  prudent 


1848]  Climate  of  England  73 

and  self-seeking  calculations,  and  for  the  sovereigns  who  imagine 
mankind  is  only  made  for  them.  Now  is  the  time  for  all  to  learn 
that  nothing  lasts  or  gives  us  power  but  what  is  right,  and  the 
consciousness  of  having  desired  the  welfare  of  others  and  not  of  our 
own  selves.  I  hoped  this  movement  would  pass  over  more  quietly  in 
Germany  than  elsewhere.  I  trusted  our  kings  as  having  a  more 
upright  judgement,  and  higher  desires,  more  love  for  their  people, 
and  a  more  self-sacrificing  spirit.  Instead  of  this,  everywhere,  either 
cowardice  or  miserable  blindness  and  self-confidence.  The  punish- 
ment for  this  will  not  be  wanting,  and  it  is  sad  that  bad  teeth  can 
only  be  extracted  with  loss  of  blood  and  much  suffering  of  the 
whole  body.  If  all  those  gentlemen  could  be  sent  to  England  to 
the  Universities,  they  might  learn  what  are  the  conditions  which 
alone  make  a  king  possible  in  these  days.  Would  to  God  they 
might  learn  the  lesson  !  The  longer  they  hesitate,  the  greater  will  be 
the  demands,  the  more  terrible  the  conflict.  The  German  people 
are  good-tempered,  but  can  be  roused  by  deceit,  distrust,  and  selfish- 
ness. Here  in  England  all  is  quiet,  and  the  means  exist  here  for 
making  revolutions  in  a  peaceful,  lawful,  and  constitutional  way. 
I  am  only  afraid  they  may  summon  Bunsen  to  Berhn.  He  might  do 
much  good  there,  but  it  would  be  a  terrible  loss  to  me,  and  I  hardly 
think  I  could  endure  life  here  without  him.  He  is  the  sort  of  diplo- 
matist they  all  should  be,  a  true  man,  simple  and  good,  desiring  and 
striving  for  what  is  right,  and  leaving  the  rest  to  Providence.  For 
this  the  wise  Metternich  pronounces  him  to  be  no  diplomatist.  We 
shall  see  who  stands  firmest.  In  spite  of  the  great  excitement  in 
which  one  lives,  I  can  collect  myself  enough  to  work  hard — and 
that  quiets  one.  I  am  much  better  since  I  was  in  Paris,  and  have 
got  rid  of  my  cough.  I  really  feel  quite  well,  so  there  is  no  cause 
for  you  to  be  anxious.  Your  last  letter  arrived  some  time  after 
I  had  sent  mine  off,  for  the  post  everywhere  is  most  irregular  now. 
If  the  weather  is  fine,  I  may  spend  part  of  the  summer  in  Oxford 
to  be  nearer  my  printers.  The  Governors  of  the  East  India  House 
wish  to  see  something  for  their  money ;  but  I  have  only  two  arms — 
not  a  thousand  like  Vishnu.' 

During  his  whole  life  in  England,  Max  Miiller  found  the 
variable  climate,  and  especially  the  damp  winters,  a  great 
trial  to  his  strength,  and  in  his  two  first  winters  passed  in 
London  he  was  so  constantly  laid  up  with  severe  colds  and 
headaches,  and  unable  to  do  his  work,  that  his  mother  was 
seriously  anxious  about  him.  He  always  maintained  that 
the  severe  cold  of  a  German  winter  was  less  trying  to  the 


74  Settling  at  Oxford  [ch.  v 

constitution  than  the  fogs,  and  damp,  and  bitter  east  winds  of 
England.  Early  in  May  he  went  for  change  to  Oxford, 
intending  only  to  stay  through  the  bright  summer  months  in 
a  place  which,  from  his  first  visit  in  June,  1847,  cast  the 
glamour  of  its  beauty  over  him,  and  which  was  to  be  his  home 
for  above  fifty-two  years.  He  settled  himself  in  two  small 
rooms  in  Walton  Place,  as  being  near  the  Press,  and  soon 
after  his  arrival  he  writes  to  his  valued  patron  and  friend  the 
first  of  many  letters  : — 

Translation.  J7,  Walton  Place,  Oxford, 

May  18,   1848. 

'  Your  Excellency, — Beautiful  and  pleasant  as  Oxford  is  at  this 
season,  and  happy  and  contented  as  I  feel  in  this  sedes  Musartim, 
it  is  difficult,  at  least  on  a  day  like  this,  the  opening  day  of  the 
Reichstag  in  Frankfort,  to  subdue  the  longing  for  one's  German  home  ; 
and  so  I  hope  you  will  allow  me,  at  all  events  for  a  short  time,  to 
feel  as  if  I  were  in  my  native  surroundings,  by  writing  to  you.  The 
delightful  hours  which  you  allowed  me  to  spend  with  you  in  London 
are  indeed  the  only  thing  that  I  miss  here  in  Oxford,  and  that  make 
me  long  sometimes  to  be  back  in  old  London.  I  therefore  hope  you 
will  allow  me  from  time  to  time  to  recall  in  writing  those  happy 
hours,  and  if  my  letters  arrive  like  inopportune  visitors  in  the  midst 
of  dispatches  and  diplomatic  notes,  please  lay  them  aside,  just  as  you 
so  often  used  to  say  in  your  friendly  way,  "  Now,  make  haste  and  go." 
It  is  delightful  that  you  have  chosen  Schleswig,  and  Schleswig  has 
chosen  you.  It  is  indeed  no  usual  object  of  ambition  to  sit  on  the 
same  bench  with  master  butchers  and  cobblers,  but  it  is  a  sacrifice 
which  in  these  days  the  true  Aryan  is  willing  to  make  for  the  Father- 
land, when  he  has  the  right  and  opportunity  to  do  so.  In  this 
indistinguishable  chaos  the  necessary  thing  is  to  find  men  who  can 
form  a  party,  and  attract  a  majority  to  them.  In  Germans,  however, 
personal  opinion  and  conviction  are  so  supreme  and  unruly,  that 
we  need  men  who  will  seize  the  German  John  Bull,  not,  as  is  usual, 
by  the  horns,  but  in  a  friendly  way,  by  his  soft  and  weak  points. 
No  doubt  there  will  be  many  good  men  of  the  State  there,  but  few 
good  statesmen.  Everything  in  Frankfort  will  depend  on  how  the 
first  majority  is  formed,  but  I  don't  believe  that  any  party  in  Germany, 
be  it  what  it  may,  would  have  any  prospect  of  influence,  if,  when 
finding  itself  in  a  minority,  it  resorts  to  violence.  Modern  history 
accustoms  itself  to  look  on  majorities  which  have  arisen  naturally 
in  the  same  way  as  the  old  world  must  have  originally  looked  upon 


1848]  Life  in  Oxford  75 

their  "Judgement  of  God,"  but  with  this  diflference,  that  for  the 
Christian  world  the  Godlike  has  assumed  the  form  of  humanity 
and  freedom,  by  the  side  of  that  of  nature  and  necessity.  Life  here  in 
Oxford  is  remarkably  pleasant ;  the  place  is  so  beautiful,  and  every- 
body so  friendly  and  good,  many  people  very  superior  and  interesting. 
I  have  not  seen  much  of  Stanley,  as  he  is  very  much  occupied ;  but 
I  know  many  of  the  Fellows,  who  pursue  the  same  objects,  and  with 
even  more  understanding  and  determination,  From  many  different 
sides  one  hears  of  a  wish  for  reforms  in  the  life  of  the  University,  but 
they  are  afraid  of  the  Government ;  and  that  if  they  once  give  it  the 
opportunity  it  will  interfere  far  more  than  they  desire.  They  par- 
ticularly dread  the  tendencies  of  the  Cheap  Government,  which  might 
involve  them  in  Cheap  Education,  and  therefore  they  would  rather 
remain  quiet  and  keep  their  own.  I  have  given  your  pamphlet  on 
Schleswig  to  Stanley,  Dr.  Jacobson,  Dr.  Plumptre,  and  Dr.  Acland, 
and  I  hear  that  Dr.  Twiss  means  to  write  an  answer ;  the  same  man 
who  wrote  on  the  Oregon  question.  One  hopes  it  may  come  post 
factum,  like  King  Oscar's  troops,  though  I  must  own  that  it  would  be 
wonderful  if  they  could  persuade  the  Holger  Danske  to  listen  to 
reason  and  act  accordingly.'  ' 

To  his  mother  he  describes  his  new  life  thus : — 

Translation.  17,  Walton  Place,  May  21. 

'  Here  I  am  at  last  settled  in  Oxford.  I  have  already  told  you  how 
beautiful  it  is,  and  now  in  spring  it  is  perfect ;  the  finest  gardens  I  have 
ever  seen,  the  old  trees  and  the  green  velvety  turf  such  as  one  only  sees 
in  England.  I  am  enjoying  the  spring  here  as  I  have  not  enjoyed  it 
for  years,  and  feel  better  than  I  ever  felt  in  hot,  dirty,  noisy  London. 
I  like  the  people  here  very  much,  and  my  work  gets  on  much  faster, 
which  will  delight  you.  Forty  large  sheets  already  printed,  and  £  160 
already  spent !  But  I  can  Hve  more  cheaply  here,  and  save  a  little, 
which  as  yet  I  have  not  been  able  to  do.  I  have  not  had  a  piano  for 
a  long  time ;  now  I  have  hired  one  for  305-.  a  month.  I  find  my 
music  very  useful  in  society,  for  they  like  to  hear  it,  though  few  people 
play.  Of  course  I  miss  Bunsen  very  much,  but  who  can  say  how  long 
he  will  stay  in  London .?  and  in  these  busy  times  I  have  seen  but  little 
of  him.  My  speech  at  Oxford  is  published  under  the  title,  "  Three 
Linguistic  Dissertations  read  at  the  Meeting  of  the  British  Association 
in  Oxford,  by  Chevalier  Bunsen,  Dr.  INIeyer,  and  Dr.  Max  MuUer." 
I  find  it  a  good  visiting  card  here.  It  is  difficult  to  say  when  my  first 
volume  will  be  ready,  as  the  printing  is  sometimes  easy  and  sometimes 
very  difficult ;  but  be  sure  I  work  as  hard  as  I  can,  for  it  is  most 
important  for  me  to  get  the  first  part  published.' 


76  Dean  Gaisford  [ch.  v 

To  THE  Same. 
Translation.  OxFOVJi,  June  28. 

'  I  live  here  so  quietly  that  I  often  wish  I  had  you  all  here,  safe  out 

of  the  trouble  and  turmoil  in  Germany.     It  is  the  greatest  delight  to 

walk  in  these  gardens,  where  the  old  gables  and  towers  peep  through 

the  green  trees  on  all  sides.     I  am  asked  to  dinner  nearly  every  day — 

this  is  at  five  o'clock  in  one  of  the  old  Colleges.     After  dinner  we  have 

coffee  and  tea  in  the  gardens  on  the  grass,  and  smoke  our  cigars. 

We  have  a  great  deal  of  music,  and  I  get  on  very  well  with  all  these 

reverend  sirs.' 

Peaceful  as  his  life  in  Oxford  was,  Max  Miiller  was  too 
patriotic  not  to  be  deeply  occupied  with  the  events  in  his 
native  country,  and  he  writes  to  Dr.  Pauli : — 

Translation.  June  27,  1848. 

'  One  needs  earnest  and  difficult  work  to  keep  one  quiet.  I  sup- 
pose in  time  one  will  get  accustomed  to  this  new  world,  but  up  to 
now  I  have  not  had  courage  or  power  even  to  talk  about  it :  in  time 
the  sea-sickness  will  leave  one,  and  then  one  can  watch  the  storm 
carefully  and  wonder  at  it.  You  ought  to  come  to  Oxford ;  it  is  the 
most  beautiful  city  I  have  ever  seen,  and  one  must  have  seen  it  to 
know  England.  Living  is  tolerably  cheap,  and  the  libraries  rich  in 
manuscript  treasures.  I  shall  stay  here  till  October,  then  publish 
a  volume  and  go  to  Germany.' 

Max  Miiller  became  almost  immediately  on  intimate  terms 
with  a  number  of  undergraduates,  as  well  as  many  younger 
dons,  whilst  several  of  the  heads  of  houses  and  Professors 
showed  great  kindness  to  the  man  whom  they  remembered 
as  reading  a  paper  but  the  year  before  at  the  British 
Association,  on  a  subject  quite  unknown  to  most  of  them, 
but  which  had  provoked  interesting  and  important  discussions. 
Dr.  Gaisford  was  particularly  condescending  to  the  young 
scholar,  who  often  mentioned  with  pleasure  the  real  courtesy 
of  the  Dean^  as  being  the  only  head  of  a  house  who  thought 
it  necessary  to  call  before  sending  him  an  invitation  to  dinner. 

He  has  given  an  amusing  account  of  that  visit,  and  the 
attack  made  on  the  Dean  by  his  Scotch  terrier.  Belle.  To 
the  few  who  still  remember  those  days  the  name  of  Belle 
will  recall  many  a  happy  hour.  She  was  a  small  terrier,  by 
no  means  a  great  beauty,  and  had  belonged  to  Robert  Morier, 
who  willingly  passed  her  on  to  his  friend,  to  avoid  the  trouble 


1848]  Oxford  Friends  77 

of  looking  after  her.  She  lived  to  a  great  age,  and  gave  her 
new  master  a  good  deal  of  occupation  in  taking  care  of  her 
and  her  innumerable  puppies.  Her  devotion  made  her  very- 
jealous,  and  when  some  years  after  a  beautiful  Skye  puppy 
was  given  him  by  a  much-loved  friend,  Belle  ill-treated  it  so, 
that  he  had  to  part  with  it  to  save  its  life !  Max  Muller  was 
always  devoted  to  dogs,  and  his  friends  will  recollect  his  great 
deerhound  Oscar,  Musk,  a  Skye  terrier,  and  in  later  years 
his  well-known  dachshunds,  Waldmann  and  Mannerl,  and  at 
the  very  last.  Longbow  and  Big  Ben. 

Among  Max's  intimate  friends  at  this  time  were  Morier, 
afterwards  Sir  Robert  Morier,  who  died  Ambassador  at  St. 
Petersburg ;  William  Sellar,  later  on  Professor  of  Latin  at  Edin- 
burgh ;  Palgrave,  to  whose  advice  he  owed  a  great  deal  when 
he  first  began  to  write  English  books;  William  Spottiswoode; 
Alexander  Grant,  who,  after  many  years  in  India,  became 
Principal  of  the  University  of  Edinburgh ;  Theodore  Walrond, 
afterwards  his  brother-in-law,  and  whom  for  many  years  he 
used  to  call  his  English  conscience  ;  Earle,  later  Professor  of 
Anglo-Saxon  ;  Church,  afterwards  Dean  of  St.  Paul's ;  George 
Butler  ;  ffolliott,  who  in  the  last  letter  he  wrote  to  Max  Muller 
says,  '  Your  friendship  has  been  one  of  the  happiest  elements 
of  my  life ' ;  Thomson,  of  Queen's,  who  became  Archbishop 
of  York ;  Story-Maskelyne,  later  Professor  of  Mineralogy ; 
Clough,  the  poet ;  Dr.  Stanley,  then  Tutor  of  University ; 
Dr.  Acland ;  Manuel  Johnson,  the  Radcliffe  Observer; 
Professor  Donkin,  drawn  to  him  by  their  common  love  of 
music  ;  '  Bodley '  Coxe  ;  Jowett,  then  the  popular  young  Tutor 
of  Balliol ;  and  J.  A.  Froude,  of  Exeter.  To  the  two  last 
Max  Muller  was  a  staunch  friend,  standing  by  them  when 
their  opinions  exposed  them  to  a  good  deal  of  obloquy  and 
closed  many  doors  against  them.  Most  of  these  men 
remained  Max  Miiller's  devoted  and  intimate  friends  through 
life  ;  from  others,  from  circumstances  of  residence  and  occupa- 
tion, he  was  more  or  less  separated,  though  when  they  met 
there  was  always  a  hearty  recollection  of  the  '  merry  days 
when  they  were  young,'  and  enjoyed  many  a  joke  and  many 
a  discussion  in  their  various  rooms,  whether  in  College  or  in 
lodgings.     The  very  few  left  who  remember  quite  the  early 


78  Max  Muller  at  Twenty-four  [ch.  v 

years  when  Max  Muller  first  settled  in  Oxford,  recall  his 
great  powers  of  attraction,  his  lively  conversation,  even 
though  in  still  rather  quaint  English,  his  fun,  his  power  of 
repartee,  above  all  his  kindly  lovable  nature,  to  which 
a  singularly  beautiful  countenance  bore  witness,  his  brilliant 
pianoforte-playing,  and  behind  all  this  a  seriousness  of 
purpose,  a  loftiness  of  aim,  with  an  amount  of  general 
culture  seldom  met  with  in  a  man  of  little  more  than 
twenty-four ;  whilst  the  almost  entire  ignorance  of  the  great 
subject  to  which  he  was  devoting  his  life  only  added  to  their 
wonder  and  interest. 

Mr.  Tuckwell  in  his  delightful  Reminiscences  says :  *  I  recall 
the  black-haired,  slight  young  foreigner  in  1846^  or  there- 
abouts, known  first  as  a  pianist  in  Oxford  drawing-rooms, 
whose  inmates  ceased  their  chatter  at  his  brilliant  touch.' 

To  Chevalier  Bunsen. 

Translation.  17,  Walton  V-lkcy.,  June  13,  1848. 

'  'Tis  hard  to  carry  a  full  cup  even.  Oxford  is  most  beautiful,  but 
one  longs  for  German  Professors,  for  Greek  societies  and  seminars ! 
My  Veda  gets  on;  forty-five  sheets  are  printed.  I  have  good  news 
from  India.  The  Pundits,  to  whom  I  sent  proof-sheets,  are  delighted 
with  the  plan  and  the  way  it  is  being  carried  out.  As  it  does  not 
seem  likely  that  the  Prussian  Government  will  at  this  moment  grant 
any  money  for  MSS.  from  India,  I  shall  apply  to  the  East  India 
Company.  The  expense  is  very  small,  1,000  lines  of  thirty-two 
syllables  for  eight  shillings.  I  think  of  staying  here  till  my  first 
volume  is  ready,  which  it  cannot  be  before  the  end  of  the  year,  and 
then  I  shall  go  to  Germany.  But  I  must  find  some  further  occupa- 
tion here,  for  Sanskrit  alone  does  not  yield  enough  to  live  on.  It  is 
delightful  to  reconstruct  a  chapter  in  the  historical  consciousness  of 
mankind,  especially  one  that  is  so  ancient  and  so  important  for  the 
intellectual  migrations  of  the  Aryans  as  is  the  Vedic  epoch.  But 
when  mankind  is  at  work  it  requires  people  who  can  wield  the 
hammer  in  order  to  forge  a  new  link  in  the  chain  of  humanity.  Only 
I  don't  know  with  what  hammer  I  should  try  to  work,  but  it  seems 
to  me  pretty  certain  that  for  the  next  thirty  years  the  Veda  and  such 
literary  ruins  will  find  few  friends  and  explorers.  For  what  we  now 
see  is  but  the  prelude  to  wake  and  shake  the  mind,  to  bring  it  into 
the  necessary  condition,  "  corruptos  hominum  mores  bellis  emendare 
atque  conterere." ' 

^  1848  it  should  be. 


i8^8]  Commemoration  79 

In  the  following  letter  to  his  mother  he  describes  his  first 
Commemoration,  little  imagining  how  many  more  he  was  to 
see^  till  his  own  children  were  enjoying  them  from  thirty  to 
forty  years  later : — 

Tratislaiion.  July  ii. 

'  There  were  great  festivities  for  the  end  of  term.  Guizot  was 
here,  two  sons  of  Metternich,  Baron  von  Hiigel,  and  many  of  the 
best  English  families,  and  a  crowd  of  such  beautiful  women  as  I  have 
never  before  seen.  The  festivities  lasted  from  early  dawn  till  night  ; 
the  gardens  lighted  up,  with  music  and  singing,  were  enchanting. 
There  were  good  concerts,  the  Messiah,  the  Creation,  in  which  Birch, 
Tadolinde,  and  Lablache  sang ;  in  fact  it  was  magnificent,  and  cham- 
pagne and  hock  flowed  in  streams.  Now  every  place  is  empty. 
I  have  the  beautiful  gardens  to  myself,  and  that  is  delightful,  where 
I  take  a  walk  of  an  evening  and  smoke  my  cigar ;  but  it  would  be  yet 

better  on  the  Terrace  at  Dresden  I    "However "  as  the  English  say, 

and  I  do  my  best  to  acquire  an  Englishman's  patience  and  indifference.' 

The  summer  was  spent  quietly  in  Oxford,  working  at  the 
Veda  and  the  long  Introduction,  or  Prolegomena,  of  which  we 
hear  more  in  the  following  year. 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  Oxford,  August  8. 

'  The  times  are  not  suited  for  quiet  enjoyment,  and  who  knows  when 
this  struggle  of  the  discontented  masses  will  cease .?  But  when  one 
remembers  all  the  suffering  and  sorrow,  the  thousands  who  are  perish- 
ing from  war,  disease,  and  famine,  one  ought  to  be  contented  oneself, 
and  thank  God  if  we  escape  with  a  few  inconveniences.  It  sometimes 
seems  to  me  wrong  to  be  sitting  and  working  here  so  peacefully  in 
Oxford,  whilst  so  many  in  Germany  are  torn  away  from  their  scientific 
employments  and  must  share  all  the  dangers  of  war.  One  is  not 
better  than  all  those  who  die  by  thousands  in  battle  or  of  cholera,  or 
who  see  all  their  prospects  for  life  ruined  in  a  moment.  And  yet, 
surely,  all  this  want  and  calamity  must  do  some  good,  by  teaching  men 
that  they  are  placed  on  the  earth  not  for  enjoyment  but  for  a  struggle 
and  trial :  in  quieter  times  one  forgets  too  easily  the  real  earnest  task 
of  life,  and  the  true  man  in  us  perishes.  Now  every  one  must  stand 
fast  and  be  ready  for  anything.  If  we  do  our  duty  and  have  a  good 
conscience  and  trust  in  God,  this  little  world  cannot  do  us  much  harm. 
I  lead  a  most  pleasant  life  here  in  Oxford.  Many  of  my  friends  come 
to  see  me,  and  live  in  the  same  house — Dr.  Kollgren  from  Helsingfors, 
Dr.  Pauli  from  Berlin.  Then  of  course  I  do  not  get  through  so  much 
work — we  take  long  walks,  bathe,  &c. ;  but  when  they  are  gone  I  shall 


8o  Revolution  in  Germany  [ch.  v 

be  able  to  work  hard  again  till  the  first  volume  is  ready.  That  will  not 
be  till  Easter,  as  the  first  volume  will  have  i,ooo  pages,  and  only  500 
are  now  printed.  Everything  seems  to  have  quieted  down  in  Dessau : 
they  had  not  a  large  aristocracy  to  put  down  !  I  should  like  to  see  for 
myself  how  things  are,  for  here  one  can  form  but  little  idea  about  it.' 

The  next  letter  tells  of  the  spread  of  the  revolutionary 
spirit  to  Chemnitz,  u'here  his  mother  still  lived,  though  no 
longer  in  her  daughter's  house. 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  Oxford,  October  3. 

'  You  can  imagine  my  anxiety  about  you  when  I  read  in  the  papers 
of  the  insurrection  of  the  workpeople  in  Chemnitz,  of  barricades 
and  fighting  in  the  streets,  and  remembered  how  far  from  strong 
Auguste  is.  From  day  to  day  1  looked  for  a  letter,  and  at  last  heard 
from  you  that  you  had  escaped  all  danger.  We  must  not  complain 
of  small  deprivations,  but  thank  God,  who  has  watched  over  us 
hitherto  with  fatherly  care.  If  I  know  that  you  are  well  in  Chemnitz, 
and  have  always  a  sure  refuge  with  Krug,  and  if  you  know  that 
I  am  happy  and  well  in  Oxford,  even  if  we  do  not  see  each  other 
often,  we  can  think  of  each  other  with  perfect  satisfaction ;  and  how 
few  can  say  that  in  these  times.  One  cannot  expect  things  to  settle 
down  in  Germany  for  many  years.  I  cannot  wish  to  be  back  in 
Germany,  however  much  I  long  for  German  life,  for  one  would  only 
be  drawn  into  all  these  party  conflicts,  without  power  to  eifect  any 
good.  I  often  think  it  might  be  well  to  settle  down  entirely  in 
England.  I  think  one  might  be  quite  at  home  and  happy  here. 
If  I  go  to  Germany  next  year,  I  must  look  about  and  see  what  can 
be  done  there,  and  if  any  prospects  open  for  me  ;  if  not,  I  must 
look  out  for  some  career  that  later  on  would  settle  me  here.  I  like 
Oxford  so  much  better  than  London,  that  I  shall  remain  here.  Life 
is  cheaper  here,  and  I  had  already  saved  £20,  but  have  spent  it 
on  MSS.  from  India,  which  I  need  for  my  work.  Dr.  Pauli  is  still 
living  here,  which  is  very  pleasant,  and  gives  me  some  one  to  talk  to. 
Dessau  seems  to  set  an  example  to  the  world  with  its  liberal  institu- 
tions. What  does  Stockmarr  ^  say  to  it  all  ?  Uncle  Fritz,  doubtless, 
is  much  amused.  I  should  like  to  see  it  with  my  own  eyes ;  it  sounds 
a  little  fabulous  ! ' 

Max  Miiller  seems  to  have  been  so  m.uch  absorbed  in  the 

■^  An  old  and  very  conservative  General,  married  to  the  sister  of  Max 
Miiller's  aunt,  Frau  Prasident  von  Basedow.  The  old  man  lived  to  keep 
his  Iron  Wedding  (sixty-five  years),  and  died  a  few  days  after,  as  did  his 
wife,  and  they  were  buried  the  same  day. 


1848]  Nineveh  Inscriptions  81 

Veda  as  to  let  a  long  time  pass  without  any  communication 
with  his  revered  master,  Burnouf,  who  sent  him  the  following 
gentle  reminder,  which  shows  how  even  the  life  of  a  quiet 
student  was  upset  by  the  political  disorders  of  the  times  : — 

Translaiion.  Paris,  October  7,  1848. 

'  My  dear  Friend, — It  is  a  long  time  since  I  heard  anything  of  you, 
and  enough  has  happened  here  to  make  me  forget  any  one  to  whom 
I  was  less  attached  than  I  am  to  you.  But  I  have  heard  of  you 
indirectly.  I  received  a  few  days  ago  a  sign  of  your  remembrance  of 
me,  which  touched  me  much ;  and  I  have  read  your  me'moire  with 
delight,  and  have  learnt  from  it  many  curious  facts  of  the  way  in  which 
Bengali  has  used  for  its  own  analytic  purposes  concrete  words  borrowed 
from  Sanskrit.  The  work  is  well  done,  and  I  have  observed  with 
great  satisfaction,  among  other  things,  a  virtuous  attack  on  the 
modernizers  of  Brahmanism  in  the  interests  of  Buddhism,  which  has 
nothing  to  gain  by  outraging  history  and  good  sense.  I  venture  to 
assert  that,  notwithstanding  their  pretensions,  the  dilettante  authors 
of  these  heteroclite  hypotheses  understand  neither  Brahmanism  nor 
Buddhism.  I  am  now  working  at  the  second  volume  of  my  Introduc- 
tion to  Buddhism,  having  been  obliged  to  set  aside  the  work  I  had 
begun  on  the  Nineveh  inscriptions.  These  researches  cannot  be 
carried  on  usefully  in  a  time  of  political  disturbance,  such  as  the 
present ;  the  tempest  in  the  streets  distracts  the  mind.  .  ,  .  Under  these 
circumstances,  I  am  devoting  myself  to  Buddhism,  to  occupy  my  mind  ; 
it  is  the  only  one  of  my  labours  for  which  I  do  not  need  State  aid. 
Yours  heartily,  'E.  Burnouf.' 

To  this  Max  Miiller  replied  : — 

9,  Park  Place,  November  i,  1848. 

'  My  Honoured  Master  and  Friend, — .  .  .  I  was  very  sorry  to 
learn  that  the  political  agitation  in  France  has  disturbed  your  literary 
work.  Every  one  felt  that  the  only  hope  of  a  successful  and  scien- 
tific deciphering  of  the  Nineveh  inscriptions  lay  with  you,  for  you 
stand  alone  in  such  work.  Yet  the  second  volume  of  Buddhism 
will  be  a  welcome  gift  to  many,  to  some  perhaps  not  welcome,  as  it 
will  destroy  their  last  heteroclite  hypotheses.  Unfortunately  things 
look  very  black  for  literature  in  Germany  too,  and  I  am  glad  that 
I  can  give  my  time  here  in  England  quietly  to  the  Veda.  The  first 
Ashtaka,  with  a  long  introduction,  will  appear  at  Easter.  I  am 
now  writing  the  latter,  and  I  often  wish  I  could  go  to  you  for 
advice,  for  here  in  England  there  is  really  no  one  who  takes  much 
interest  in  real  Indian  antiquity.     Wilson  has  finished  his  History 

I  G 


82  Progress  of  Rig-veda  [ch.  v 

of  British  India,  which  is  very  much  liked,  and  is  at  work  now  on 
a  lexicon  of  modern  Indian  names  for  measures,  weights,  and  other 
words  in  daily  use  between  Indians  and  Englishmen.  Besides  that 
he  is  preparing  a  catalogue  of  the  MSS.  of  the  East  India  House,  as 
well  as  a  translation  of  the  Rig-veda.  It  is  wonderful  how  busy  he 
is,  though  one  often  wishes  he  v/ould  devote  his  valuable  time  and 
powers  more  exclusively  to  Indian  antiquity.  ...  I  have  heard  nothing 
of  Baron  d'Eckstein  since  the  Revolution,  and  would  gladly  hear  how  he 
is.  .  .  .  My  time  is  so  taken  up  with  printing  the  Rig-veda,  which  has 
reached  page  608,  that  I  have  no  time  for  any  other  work ;  for  this 
I  am  very  sorry,  for  the  Commentary  is  terribly  wearisome,  and  yet 
full  of  small  difficulties,  for  which  I  often  miss  the  help  of  MSS.  from 
other  parts  of  India.  I  have  therefore  ordered  for  myself  a  copy  from 
Poonah,  where  your  own  valuable  MS.  was  copied,  and  must  await 
its  arrival  before  I  begin  the  second  Ashtaka,  as  I  have  no  collation  of 
your  MS.  for  that,  and  the  MSS.  here  of  the  second  Ashtaka  are  very 
imperfect.  The  East  India  Company  has  declared  itself  ready  to  buy 
Vedic  MSS.  if  they  can  get  them,  so  I  hope  for  much  new  help  from 
India.' 

The  following  letter  to  Bunsen  is  the  only  allusion  to  a 
scheme  which  Max  Miiller  can  hardly  have  contemplated 
seriously,  though  a  Pass  Degree  would  have  been  child's  play 
to  him,  and  no  doubt  a  hfe  in  College  such  as  that  led  by 
many  of  his  friends  must  have  appeared  more  attractive  than 
his  solitary  lodgings : — 

Translation.  17,  Walton  Place,  October  8,  1848. 

'  I  think  of  going  to  London  for  a  few  days  early  next  week  to  do 
some  work  at  the  East  India  House.  It  would  be  a  great  delight  to 
me  if  I  could  see  you  for  a  few  minutes,  to  ask  your  advice  in  a  matter 
which  occupies  me  a  good  deal.  The  revolutions  in  Germany  have 
laid  such  hold  on  all  the  circumstances  of  life,  and  have  so  under- 
mined the  foundations  of  society,  that  one  loses  all  courage  to  build 
one's  future  on  such  a  soil.  Unless  one  feels  the  strength  and  power 
to  take  an  active  part  in  initiating  and  settling  matters,  but  wishes  to 
find  one's  ideal  of  life  in  the  narrow  quiet  circle  of  science,  one  has 
the  right,  I  think,  to  seek  shelter  there,  where  science,  if  not  patronized 
and  aided,  is  at  least  tolerated  and  let  alone.  With  all  my  love  of 
the  past,  and  with  a  full  belief  in  the  future  of  Germany,  I  feel  more 
drawn  at  present  to  English  than  to  German  soil.  My  work  will  keep 
me  in  England  for  the  next  few  years ;  and  as  Oxford  is  a  very 
pleasant  place  of  residence,  I  have  an  idea  of  entering  one  of  the 


1848]  Thinks  of  entering  College  83 

Colleges  as  an  undergraduate,  keeping  my  twelve  terms,  and  then  taking 
my  degree.  I  should  hope  to  defray  the  expense  by  my  own  work, 
and  the  competition  in  the  Oriental  market  is  so  small,  that  my 
prospects  later  on  would  probably  not  be  bad.  It  is,  of  course, 
difficult  to  resolve  to  take  such  a  backward  step,  and  begin  again 
from  the  beginning,  when  my  friends  and  contemporaries  have 
already  found  their  spheres  of  activity  as  teachers  and  Professors. 
My  own  studies  would  meet  with  many  interruptions,  but  when  one 
sees  that  the  path  one  has  hewn  for  oneself  does  not  lead  to  the  goal, 
it  is  better  to  turn  round  than  to  pursue  the  wrong  road  till  no  return 
is  possible.  My  work  goes  on  merrily ;  seventy-two  sheets  are  printed, 
and  I  am  writing  the  preface,  which  often  overwhelms  me  ;  but  I  have 
time  till  Easter,  when  the  first  two  volumes  and  the  preface  will 
appear.  Dr.  Pauli  is  still  living  with  me,  but  he  has  a  good  chance  of 
being  appointed  to  the  Advocates'  Library  in  Edinburgh.  In  the  hope 
of  soon  having  the  happiness  of  seeing  you,  I  am,  with  my  whole 
heart,  yours  obediently.' 

We  hear  no  more  of  the  undergraduate  scheme,  and  on  his 
return  from  London  he  moved  to  pleasanter  lodgings,  No.  9, 
Park  Place,  now  18,  Banbury  Road,  where  he  remained  till 
January,  1856.  Here  he  occupied  the  front  floor,  and  some 
other  German  generally  lodged  in  the  same  house. 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  9,  Park  Place,  November  5. 

'  I  have  been  staying  with  Bunsen  in  London  and  the  country  for 
a  week.  I  was  in  his  house,  and  we  had  long  talks  together,  and 
I  came  back  to  my  work  with  fresh  courage.  He  is  a  delightful, 
excellent  man,  so  that  it  is  a  real  refreshment  to  see  him.  He  is  so 
quiet,  so  contented,  and  so  confident,  although  living  in  the  very  midst 
of  all  the  troubles ;  he  trusts  mainly  to  Frankfort,  and  his  whole  soul  is 
with  Germany.  When  I  returned  to  Oxford  I  changed  my  lodgings. 
If  I  could  afford  it  I  should  take  riding  lessons.  Every  morning 
crowds  of  students  pass  by  in  their  red  coats  and  jockey  caps 
going  out  hunting ;  but  that  is  very  dear,  so  I  never  think  of  it,  but 
work  on  quietly  at  the  Veda^  and  when  Volume  I  is  finished,  I  shall 
pack  up  and  be  off;  620  pages  are  finished.  It  has  been  a  hard 
piece  of  work.  I  have  no  desire  to  join  the  Dessau  mihtia.  I  would 
rather  become  a  naturalized  EngHshman.  The  news  from  Vienna 
is  terrible,  one  can  hardly  believe  it,  and  in  Berlin  it  is  fermenting  and 
seething  as  if  for  something  of  the  same  sort.' 

On  his  birthday  he  writes  to  her  again  : — 

G  % 


84  Jenny  Lind  [ch.  v 

Translation.  Oxford,  December  6,  1848. 

'  Twenty-five  years,  an  age  that  might  make  one  sad,  but  we  are 
all  well  and  happy ;  though  my  life  in  a  foreign  country  often  seems 
too  long,  and  I  should  like  to  get  away ;  but  it  can't  be  helped,  one 
must  work  to  live,  and  work  where  one  finds  v/ork.  I  am  quite 
content  with  mine.  Of  course,  if  one  could  find  work  in  Germany 
instead  of  here,  and  live  at  one  of  the  Universities  on  the  Rhine, 
at  Bonn  or  Heidelberg,  one  might  enjoy  life  more.  That  will  come 
some  day,  and  then  we  can  live  happily  together  and  drink  a  good 
glass  of  Rhine  wine.  Hurrah  !  If  only  the  Veda  were  not  so  long  1 
The  old  Indians  3,000  years  ago  might  have  written  less;  1,000 
quarto  pages.  But  work  agrees  with  me,  and  I  take  long  walks, 
and  the  life  is,  on  the  whole,  very  pleasant,  and  yet  one  feels  as  if  one 
hardly  belonged  to  it ;  people  are  too  polite  for  one  to  feel  quite  at 
one's  ease.  Do  you  know  I  would  willingly  take  the  post  of  Librarian 
at  Dessau  if  it  were  free  ?  I  could  carry  on  my  work  there,  and  in 
these  troublous  times,  the  more  retired  one's  life,  the  safer  and  happier 
for  one.  But  those  are  only  plans,  and  one  must  be  satisfied  to  be 
independent  and  able  to  earn  one's  daily  bread ;  and  it  is  better  in 
these  days  to  be  a  bachelor,  in  spite  of  ail  the  good  advice  you 
give  me  from  time  to  time — rich  heiresses  are  not  so  plentiful,  even  in 
England.  Last  week  Jenny  Lind  sang  here  in  a  concert.  I  had  never 
heard  her,  and  paid  my  ten  shillings,  which  I  do  not  regret.  She  sings 
wonderfully,  has  a  full,  strong,  rich  voice,  but  there  was  a  want  of 
softness.  She  sang  Italian  songs,  and  Weber's  Und  ob  die  Wolke,  which 
she  sang  most  beautifully,  and  showed  a  real  love  of  her  art.  Her 
Swedish  songs  are  lovely,  so  original.  I  longed  to  hear  her  sing 
some  of  Mendelssohn's  songs;  but  she  had  to  think  of  her  public, 
and  the  John  Bulls  have  little  knowledge  of  music.  She  said  after- 
wards to  a  friend  of  mine,  that  she  considered  Mendelssohn's  Suleika 
the  most  beautiful  song  she  knew,  and  she  loved  to  sing  it.  The 
people  here  were  wild  about  her,  perfectly  enchanted;  but  when 
Beethoven's  Septette  was  played  as  a  finale,  they  mostly  went  away ; 
perfect  barbarians !  And  yet  they  are  good  honest  people,  with 
whom  it  is  easy  to  live  when  one  understands  them,  I  get  on  very 
well  with  John  Bull,  and  he  does  not  mind  when  I  sometimes  take 
him  by  the  horns  and  shake  him.' 

To  Bunsen  he  writes  the  same  day : — 

Translation.  December  6,  1848. 

'You  will  have  perhaps  already  seen  in  the  paper  the  delightful 
news  of  Trithen's  appointment  as  Professor  here.    I  am  as  pleased  as 


1848]  Trithen  made  Professor  85 

if  I  had  got  it  myself,  for  it  was  perhaps  the  only  way  of  making 
a  good  useful  man  of  him,  after  all  the  disappointments  which  of 
late  weighed  more  and  more  on  him.  Though  I  had  myself  thought 
of  this  place,  and  had  perhaps  better  chances  than  Trithen,  I  feel 
I  have  acted  rightly,  perhaps  calculated  rightly;  for  had  Trithen 
divided  votes  with  me,  most  probably  a  third  candidate  would  have 
appeared,  whereas  now  Trithen  was  almost  unanimously  elected.  I  hope 
something  of  the  same  sort  may  be  found  for  Pauli,  for  I  have  begged 
Trithen  to  do  all  he  can  to  get  the  Secretaryship  of  the  Geographical 
Society  for  him,  which  Trithen  must  give  up.  So  one  helps  another, 
and  if  one  only  desires  what  is  right,  one  feels  happy  and  at  home  in 
that  united  and  ever-mysterious  concatenation  of  results  and  circum- 
stances which  constitute  human  life.  Twenty-five  years  of  this  life  lie 
behind  me  to-day,  and  one  feels  involuntarily  in  a  more  earnest  and 
solemn  frame  of  mind  at  such  a  moment.  I  look  back  with  gratitude 
on  the  first  half  of  my  life,  which,  notwithstanding  many  sad  moments, 
leaves  me  with  the  memory  of  a  happy  youth,  and  which  at  the  same 
time,  after  many  struggles,  has  given  me  a  firm  faith  in  a  Divine 
Providence,  trust  in  mankind  and  peace  in  myself,  and  cheerful 
courage  to  begin  the  second  half  of  my  life.  If  it  is  hard  to  give  up 
all  the  plans  and  hopes  which  might  have  been  realized  in  better 
times,  still  life  is  worth  living,  be  it  but  a  life  of  duty.  God  will  help 
me  further.  Only  continue  your  sympathy  and  kindness  to  me.  It 
will  be  my  endeavour  to  show  myself  worthy  of  them.* 

To  this  Bunsen  sent  the  following  beautiful  answer,  which 
is  the  first  of  the  letters  printed  by  permission  of  Baroness 
Bunsen  in  Chips ^  Vol.  Ill,  first  edition.  Being  out  of  print 
it  is  given  here  : — 

Translation.  London,  December  7,  1848. 

'My  dear  M., — 1  have  this  moment  received  your  affectionate  note 
of  yesterday,  and  feel  as  if  I  must  respond  to  it  directly,  as  one  would 
respond  to  a  friend's  shake  of  the  hand.  .  .  .  And  now,  my  very  dear 
M.,  I  congratulate  you  on  the  courageous  frame  of  mind  which  this 
event  causes  you  to  evince  ^  It  is  exactly  that  which,  as  a  friend, 
I  wish  for  you  for  the  whole  of  life,  and  which  I  perceived  and  loved 
in  you  from  the  very  first  moment.  It  delights  me  especially  at  this 
time,  vAi^xi your  contemporaries  are  even  more  dark  and  confused  than 
mi7ie  are  sluggish  and  old-fashioned.  The  reality  of  life,  as  we  enter 
the  period  of  full  manhood,  destroys  the  first  dream  of  youth;  but 
■with  moral  earnestness,  and  genuine  faith  in  eternal  Providence,  and  in 

*  Trithen's  election  to  Taylorian  Professorship. 


86  Christmas  at  T otter idge 

the  sacredness  of  human  destiny  in  that  government  of  the  world 
which  exists  for  all  human  souls  that  honestly  seek  after  good — with 
these  feelings  the  dream  of  youth  is  more  than  realized.  You  have 
undertaken  a  great  work,  and  have  been  rescued  from  the  whirlpool 
and  landed  on  this  peaceful  island  that  you  might  carry  it  on 
undisturbed,  which  you  could  not  have  done  in  the  Fatherland.  This 
is  the  first  consideration,  but  not  less  highly  do  I  rate  the  circumstances 
which  have  kept  you  here,  and  have  given  you  an  opportunity  of  seeing 
English  life  in  its  real  strength,  with  the  consistency  and  stability,  and 
with  all  the  energy  and  simplicity  that  are  its  distinguishing  features. 
I  have  known  what  it  is  to  receive  this  complement  of  German  life  in 
the  years  of  my  training  and  apprenticeship.  When  rightly  estimated 
this  knowledge  and  love  of  the  English  element  only  strengthens  the 
love  of  the  German  Fatherland,  the  home  of  genius  and  poetry.  I  will 
only  add  that  I  am  longing  to  see  you  amongst  us ;  you  must  come  to 
us  before  long.  Meanwhile  think  of  me  with  as  much  affection  as 
I  shall  always  think  of  you.' 

Max  Miiller  spent  Christmas  with  his  kind  friends  at 
Totteridge,  but  the  large  and  merry  family  party  did  not 
quite  make  up  for  the  distance  from  his  own  relations,  and 
when  sending  his  mother  a  little  money,  which  he  exhorts 
her  to  spend  and  not  hoard  up,  he  adds,  '  The  day  will  come 
that  we  shall  again  be  all  together — only  patience — in  time 
all  will  come  right.' 


CHAPTER    VI 

1849 

Death   of  sister's   children.      Froude.     Visit   to   Lakes.      Prix  Volney. 
Publication  of  first  volume  of  Rig-veda.    Carus.    Visit  to  Germany. 

Max  Muller  returned  from  his  Christmas  at  Totteridge 
and  three  days  alone  in  London  with  Bunsen  with  renewed 
health  and  courage  for  his  work,  resolved  that,  whatever  effort 
it  cost  him,  this  year  should  see  the  publication  of  the  first 
volume  of  the  Rig-veda.  Not  only  the  East  India  Company, 
but  Sanskrit  scholars  abroad  were  getting  impatient  for  a  first 
instalment  of  his  great  work ;  all  but  Burnouf  forgetting  the 
labour  and  time  involved  in  contending  single-handed  with 
such  a  task.  His  old  master,  Brockhaus,  wrote  to  him  from 
Leipzig,  urging  him  to  publish  some  part  at  once :  '  You  must 
have  printed  a  good  deal ;  why  leave  us  so  long  in  suspense  ? 
Pending  your  edition,  all  Vedic  studies  remain  vague  and 
unsettled.'  But  unmoved  by  such  complaints  Max  MUller 
pursued  his  own  course,  determined  that  his  work  should  not 
be  injured  by  hurry  or  carelessness.  He  tells  his  mother  that 
he  hardly  gives  himself  the  time  to  write  her  his  usual 
monthly  letter,  '  I  do  nothing  but  work  at  the    VedaJ 

On  his  return  Max  found  his  old  Paris  friend,  Dr.  Pauli, 
who  later  on  became  Bunsen's  private  secretary,  settled  in 
Oxford,  in  the  same  house  in  which  he  himself  lodged  ;  so  that 
although  it  was  vacation,  and  Oxford  was  nearly  empty,  he 
had  pleasant  companionship.  A  very  intimate  friendship 
sprung  up  between  the  two,  and  their  letters  show  on  what 
easy  terms  they  were  with  each  other ;  and  though  their 
different  lines  of  study  drew  them  apart,  they  had  the  deepest 
affection  for  each  other  to  the  last.     Dr.  Pauli  died  in  1882. 


88  Diary  [ch.  vi 

At  this  time,  Max  Miiller  made  an  attempt  to  take  up  his 
Diary  again,  in  which  he  had  written  nothing  for  four  years. 
This  attempt  lasted  about  a  week,  and  the  habit  was  never 
resumed,  except  for  a  short  time  in  1857. 

Diary,  1849. 

Translalion.  Jaiiuary  6. 

'  What  a  pause  !  By  mere  chance  I  found  this  book  to-day,  and  as 
I  read  it  can  hardly  believe  I  wrote  it !  Four  years  are  gone,  perhaps 
the  most  important  of  my  life ;  well  I  remember  them,  though  I  have 
not  written  them  down.  But  such  short  notices  are  interesting  in 
later  years,  and  so  I  will  begin  again.  I  conquered  Hagedorn, 
have  learnt  of  Goldstiicker  and  Trithen,  and  stand  well  with  Bunsen ; 
688  pages  of  the  Veda  are  printed,  and  my  way  tolerably  clear. 
To-day  I  received  the  news  of  G.  Hermann's  death ;  Letronne,  too, 
died  lately ;  where  are  their  successors  ?  I  would  gladly  have  seen 
old  Hermann  again;  he  was  so  brave,  and  noble,  and  free — a  real 
Greek,  and  yet  a  German,  with  his  small  bright  eyes.  He  has  not 
lived  in  vain  1  Now  for  politics,  but  where  to  begin  ?  In  Germany 
all  is  tottering,  and  only  kept  up  by  bayonets.  The  King  is  frightened 
at  the  Imperial  Crown.  If  Bunsen  only  stays  quietly  in  England ! 
He  is  to-day  with  the  Queen;  one  hopes  it  is  not  to  take  leave. 
Stockmar,  too,  is  there ;  I  have  seen  his  picture,  quiet  and  clever ; 
he  influences  Bunsen,  who,  however,  makes  use  of  him.  Now 
vacation  in  Oxford.     I  worked  bravely  since  I  spent  Christmas  with 

Bunsen.     This  evening  at  a  horrible  party  with in College. 

Ugly  men  and  women,  bad  music ;  escaped  with  Pauli  and  Seliar,  and 
smoked  cigars  in  Balliol  with  Weatherly.' 

January  7. 
'  A  real  English  Sunday,  which  produces  a  certain  dullness  even  in 
one's  work.  Read  proof-sheets,  and  studied  Lepsius's  (Egyptian) 
Chronology  without  much  effect.  There  are  no  clear  results  there 
as  yet,  though  many  clever  hypotheses  and  difficulties.  There  is  so 
litde  in  Egypt  to  warm  one !  Walked  with  Seliar,  dined  with 
Weatherly,  who  had  an  evening  party;  on  the  whole  pleasant,  but 
not  remarkable,  so  that  men  took  to  horse-play ;  that  seldom  happens 
in  Germany.  Bunsen  has  gone  to  Berlin,  ostensibly  to  be  instructed 
on  the  German  question,  but  one  hopes  that  his  letters,  which  he  let 
me  read  in  Totteridge,  have  had  an  effect,  and  his  presence  may  do 
more — unfortunately  only  for  the  moment — in  the  highest  circles  : 
may  he  come  back  safely  1  Pity  that  he  is  a  diplomatist,  or  that  the 
world  wants  such  clever  men.' 


1849]  Prix  Volney  89 

To  Bunsen  he  writes  on  January  24 : — 

Translation. 

*  If  you  are  really  going  to  exchange  beautiful  Totteridge  for  the 
dusty  Wilhelmstrasse,  I  am  sure  England  will  soon  become  strange 
to  me.  You  may  laugh,  but  pray  believe  that  the  thought  of  you  is  so 
closely  united  with  my  whole  thoughts  and  wishes,  however  seldom 
I  venture  to  intrude  upon  you,  that  I  cannot  accustom  myself  to  the 
idea  of  living  so  entirely  separated  from  you.' 

On  January  29  we  find  Max  Miiller  writing  to  Burnouf  to 
inquire  about  the  Prix  Volney,  a  prize  founded  by  Volney  for 
the  best  work  on  language,  written  in  any  language  during  the 
year,  and  sent  in  for  competition.  He  asks  if  his  paper  on  the 
relation  of  Bengali  to  the  other  Indian  languages,  read  before 
the  British  Association,  was  of  sufficient  importance  to  have 
any  chance  of  winning  the  prize.  Burnouf  had  noticed  the 
little  article  very  favourably  in  the  Journal  Asiatique.  Max 
Miiller  ends  his  letter  thus : — 

*  The  printing  of  the  Rig-veda  goes  on  very  slowly,  and  yet  I  give 
up  nearly  all  the  day  to  it,  and  often  the  night  also.  Ninety  sheets 
are  printed,  up  to  half  of  the  sixth  Adhyaya,  but  I  have  undertaken 
a  little  too  much,  and  I  find  I  have  not  much  time  to  study  for 
myself,  and  arrange  in  some  sort  the  results  of  my  researches,  I  shall 
have  to  be  content  with  presenting  only  the  materials  to  the  learned 
world,  and  all  I  wish  is  that  they  may  find  the  text  of  my  edition 
correct  according  to  the  MSS.,  and  that  others  who  are  more  worthy, 
and  more  skilful  than  I  am  for  discoveries  in  the  highest  philology, 
may  draw  the  inferences.  In  any  case  the  mines  of  the  Rig-veda 
are  not  the  mines  of  California ;  the  grains  of  gold  are  not  to  be  found 
so  near  the  surface  that  the  pipilakas'  can  find  them  without  any 
effort.  It  is  for  me  to  act  as  miner  and  for  others  to  sift  the  ore; 
for  it  is  given  to  few  persons  to  do  both,  as  you  have  done  for  the 
Zend-Avesta.' 

But  occupied  as  he  was  with  his  work,  his  longing  for  home 
and  German  life  is  constantly  shown  in  his  letters  to  his 
mother ;  and  in  one  of  them,  in  utter  weariness  of  spirit,  he 
writes  of  Oxford  as  *  the  most  tedious  place  in  the  whole  of 
tedious  England.'  One  pleasant  prospect  he  had  this  summer ; 
he  had  found  occupation  for  his  old  friend  Victor  Cams  as 

^  Gold-finding  ants  in  the  Mahdbhdrata, 


90  J.  A.  Froude  [ch.  vi 

assistant  to  Dr.  Acland,  and  the  letters  to  his  mother  are  full 
of  happy  anticipations  of  his  arrival. 

On  February  9  Burnouf  answered  Max  Muller's  inquiries 
about  the  Volney  Prize.  On  consideration  his  honoured 
master  evidently  thought  the  treatise  too  short  for  the  Volney 
competition,  and  that  being  printed  with  Bunsen's  and  Meyer's 
much  longer  papers  might  also  be  a  disadvantage.  '  Men  are 
so  made,'  says  Burnouf,  '  that  size  and  bulk  impose  even  on 
the  most  enlightened  people.  You  have  plenty  of  time  to 
decide,  and  I  hope  you  are  convinced  that  if  you  compete 
your  work  will  find  a  zealous  advocate  in  me.  I  am  so  occu- 
pied with  all  the  troubles  in  which  we  live,  that  I  have  become 
sadly  and  uselessly  idle,  and  my  health  suffers.  I  owe  the 
Revolution  a  disease  of  the  heart.  Receive  the  assurance  of 
my  lasting  friendship.' 

This  year  began  Max  Muller's  great  intimacy  with  J.  A. 
Froude,  which  continued  till  the  death  of  the  latter  in  the 
autumn  of  1894.  On  the  publication  of  the  Nemesis  of 
Faith  early  in  this  year,  and  the  consequent  loss  of  his 
Fellowship,  Max  Miiller  was  one  of  the  few  people  in  Oxford 
who  stood  by  Mr.  Froude  and  took  a  deep  and  active 
interest  in  his  future  plans  of  life.  A  remarkable  letter  from 
Bunsen  on  the  subject  will  be  found  in  the  third  volume  of  Chips 
(first  edition).     The  following  letter  is  in  response  to  this : — 

Translation.  9,  Park  Place,  May  9,  1849. 

'  Froude  has  asked  me  to  tell  you  that  he  will  be  in  London  in  the 
course  of  a  few  days,  and  that  his  great  wish  is  to  see  and  talk  with 
you.  It  would  be  very  sad  if  talents  such  as  Froude's  fell  into  the 
hands  of  English  Radicals,  Chartists,  and  Unitarians,  who  are  already 
opening  their  arms  for  him.  You  will  see  that  Froude,  on  the  contrary, 
has  all  the  best  elements  of  the  High  Church  party  in  him,  that  the 
unity  of  the  Christian  Church  is  his  ideal,  for  which  he  would  sacrifice 
as  much  as  a  German  for  the  unity  of  Germany.  I  am  quite  con- 
vinced that  the  regeneration  of  the  English  Church  can  only  come 
from  the  High  Church  party.  It  alone  has  influence,  and  the  respect 
of  the  English  people,  and  possesses  the  best  intellectual  power. 
Newmanism  is  now  taking  a  direction  of  which  formerly  one  had  no 
idea,  and  which  with  all  its  bad  motives  must  produce,  nolens  volens, 
the  finest  effect.  In  order  to  prove  the  necessity  of  belief  in  authority, 
men  forget,  to  a  certain  degree,  the  danger  of  the  use  of  the  sacred 


1849]  Death  of  Sister  s  Children  91 

writings,  their  contradictions  and  difficulties  with  regard  to  chronology, 
astronomy,  and  geology.  "  Give  me  the  Bible,"  said  Socinius,  "  and 
I  will  prove  all  my  heresies."  Ewald's  name  is  constantly  mentioned 
here ;  he  has  proved  as  a  grammarian  that  the  five  books  of  Moses 
were  not  written  by  Moses,  thus  destroying  the  theory  of  inspiration, 
and  faith  demands  new  guarantees.  This  the  old  Fathers  foresaw, 
and  therefore  kept  the  Bible  from  the  people.  .  .  .  Whence  then  come 
all  the  difficult  passages  in  the  Bible?  Because  with  your  idiotic 
theological  grammarians,  you  cannot  enter  into  the  language  of  the 
Bible.  Where  is  there  anything  in  the  Bible  of  your  inspiration  a  la 
Houdi7i  V  It  is  not  the  language,  but  the  spirit  of  the  Bible  which 
has  become  strange  to  us.  .  .  .  Newmanism  was  originally  natural  and 
honest  in  the  Enghsh  Church.  The  soil  and  air  spoils  it  and  incKnes 
it  to  Romanism,  but  even  this  spoiling  must  work  for  good,  and  bring 
the  English  Church  into  a  state  of  fermentation  out  of  which  she  will 
come  purified  and  reformed.  Mere  transference  and  translating  of 
German  works  would  never  have  any  influence  in  England,  but  if 
men  like  Froude,  who  know  the  English  nation,  could  show  the 
practical  results  of  German  investigations  and  give  them  to  the 
people  not  as  a  foreign,  but  as  a  native  product,  it  might  be  possible 
for  England  to  complete  its  reformation.  There  are  people  who 
believe  as  little  in  English  mental  power  as  in  German  marine  power, 
but  I  have  seen  so  many  excellent  gunboats  launched  here,  and  think 
that  one  might  risk  an  Eckenforde^.  Froude  is  already  more  of 
a  litde  steamship,  that  need  not  fear  the  salt  water,  but  he  wants  more 
ballast,  and  that  he  must  fetch  from  Germany,  or  he  will  suffer  ship- 
wreck. Vise  his  passport  for  a  German  port,  where,  spite  of  all 
storms,  there  is  less  danger  than  on  the  Dead  Sea.' 

Whilst  working  hard  and  almost  entirely  absorbed  in  the 
Veda,  his  thoughts  were  unexpectedly  turned  into  another 
channel  by  the  almost  sudden  death  of  two  of  his  sister's 
children  within  three  weeks  of  each  other.  The  devoted 
young  mother  never  really  recovered  from  this  sorrow. 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  Oxford,  April  ^,  1849. 

'  The  news  of  the  death  of  my  little  godson  was  wholly  unexpected, 
and  filled  me  with  sorrow,  especially  for  poor  Auguste,  who,  doubtless, 
feels  this  first  loss  deeply ;  but  if  the  poor  Kttle  fellow  was  so  weakly, 
it  is  a  blessing  that  God  called  him  back  so  quickly  to  Himself. 

^  A  great  conjurer. 

*  An  engagement  in  the  Danish-Prussian  War,  1849. 


92  Death  of  Children  [ch.  vi 

I  know  that  it  is  useless  to  look  for  comfort  in  such  thoughts,  or  that 

they  lessen  the  grief  and  pain.     Nor  should  they,  for  sorrow  is  neces-  \ 
sary  and  good  for  men ;   one  learns  to  understand  that  each  joy  must"\ 

be  indemnified  by  suffering,  that  each  new  tie  which  knits  our  hearts  i 
to  this  life  must  be  loosed  again,  and  the  tighter  and  the  closer  it  was 
knit,  the  keener  the  pain  of  loosening  it.      Should  we  then  attach  ^^ 

our  hearts  to  nothing,  and  pass  quietly  and  unsympathetically  through  j 

this  world,  as  if  we  had  nothing  to  do  with  it  ?     We  neither  could  nor  i 

ought  to  act  so.     Nature  itself  knits  the  first  tie  between  parents  and  | 

children,  and  new  ties  through  our  whole  life.     We  are  not  here  for  | 

reward,    for   the   enjoyment   of    undisturbed   peace,   or  from   mere  ! 

accident,  but  for  trial,  for  improvement,  perhaps  for  punishment ;  for  j 

the  only  union  which  can  ensure  the  happiness  of  men,  the  union  ! 

between  our  self  and  God's  self,  is  broken,  or  at  least  obscured,  by  ] 

our  birth,  and  the  highest  object  of  our  life  is  to  find  this  bond  again,  j 

to  remain  ever  conscious  of  it,  and  hold  fast  to  it  in  life  and  in  death.  I 

This  rediscovery  of  the  eternal  union  between  God  and  man  consti-  i 

tutes  true  religion  among  all  people  :  religion  means  binding  together  j 

again.     The  impression  made  on  me  by  the  look  of  a  child  who  is  I 

not  yet  conscious  of  himself  and  of  the  world  round  him,  is  that  of  | 

still  undisturbed  godliness.     Only  when  self-consciousness  wakes  little  \ 

by  little,  through  pleasure  or  pain,  when  the  spirit  accustoms  itself  to  j 
its  bodily  covering,  when  man  begins  to  say  /,  and  the  world  to  call 

things  his,  then  the  full  separation  of  the  human  self  from  the  Divine  I 

begins,  and  it  is  only  after  long  struggles  that  the  light  of  true  self-  1 

consciousness  sooner  or  later  breaks  through  the  clouds  of  earthly  ' 

semblances,  and  makes  us  again  like  the  little  children  "  of  whom  is  j 

the  kingdom  of  heaven."     In  God  we  live  and  move  and  have  our  '; 

being — that  is  the  sum  of  all  human  wisdom,  and  he  who  does  not  find  \ 

it  here  will  find  it  in  another  Hfe.     All  else  that  we  learn  on  earth,  be  ' 

it  the  history  of  nature  or  of  mankind,  is  for  this  end  alone,  to  show  \ 

us  everywhere  the  presence  of  a  Divine  Providence  and  to  lead  us  j 

through   the  knowledge  of  the  history  of  the  human  spirit  to  the  ! 

knowledge  of  ourselves,  and  through  the  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  i 

nature  to  the  understanding  of  that  human  nature  to  which  we  are  < 

subjected  in  life.     The  death  of  a  child  is  as  if  the  flash  of  the  Divine  ; 
eye  had  turned  quickly  away  from  the  mirror  of  this  world,  before  the 

human  consciousness  woke  up  and  thought  it  recognized  itself  in  the  i 

mirror,  often  only  to  perceive  for  a  moment,  just  as  it  closes  its  eyes  ; 

for  the  last  time,  that  that  which  it  took  for  itself  was  the  shadow  or  I 

reflection  of  its  eternal  self.     All  this  is  not  written  in  the  Bible,  but  . 

enough  to  guide  the  thoughtful  Christian.    It  cannot  be  given  to  men,  j 

but  each  must  find  it  for  himself^  and  many  paths  lead  to  the  same  j 


1849]  Modern  Statesman's  Craft  93 

goal.  If  you  think  differently,  there  is  no  harm,  for  the  difference  lies 
only  in  the  form,  in  names  and  words ;  on  the  whole  we  agree,  and 
if  a  difference  of  life  and  occupation,  if  especially  the  powerful  im- 
pressions of  the  moment  bring  greater  joy  or  greater  sorrow,  and 
often  lead  to  excitement,  to  doubts,  one  recovers  oneself  and  finds 
that  the  doubts  and  difficulties  lie  where  we  ourselves  have  made  and 
seek  them !  Each  one  must  help  himself,  for  it  is  difficult  to  discuss 
such  things  !  A  good  conscience  is  better  than  all  knowledge ;  that 
alone  gives  the  peace  we  so  sorely  need.  It  is  not  enough  to  believe 
and  pray,  we  must  work  and  try  to  make  ourselves  useful.  With 
a  firm,  upright  will  one  can  conquer  everything.  A  good  sailor  is  as 
self-possessed  in  a  storm  as  in  fine  weather,  for  he  knows  no  wave 
can  rise  higher  than  God  wills.  Those  are  the  best  statesmen  in  the 
present  crisis  who  do  their  duty  according  to  their  conscience,  un- 
heeding party  strife  and  noise.  There  is  no  rule  of  statesman's  craft 
like  "  Do  right  and  fear  no  one."  Instead  of  this  the  wise  diplomatists 
believe  that  they  can  do  better  with  their  tricks  and  stratagems,  on 
which  they  place  more  reliance  than  on  the  eternal  law  of  universal 
history,  that  what  is  good  bears  good,  what  is  evil,  evil  fruit.  And 
what  applies  to  statesmen  applies  to  every  individual,  and  this  ever- 
lasting vacillation  and  hesitation  in  Germany  and  elsewhere  are  more 
the  result  of  infidelity,  selfishness,  and  vanity  than  of  anything  else, 
and  must  naturally  meet  with  their  reward.  I  consider  myself  most 
fortunate  in  not  being  drawn  into  this  whirlpool,  and  as  little  as 
I  should  hide  my  convictions,  if  so  circumstanced  that  they  might 
produce  some  good,  so  little  would  I  exchange  my  study  for  a  club 
(political)  and  my  Veda  for  newspaper-writing,  from  ambition,  passion, 
or  sloth.  These  are  the  three  powerful  levers  of  our  modern  state- 
craft. Buy  something  for  me  for  Auguste's  birthday  and  give  me 
credit  till  I  come,  which  will  be  some  time  yet.  But  I  won't  grumble  • 
I  know  this  first  volume  of  the  Veda  is  of  the  greatest  importance  for 
me,  and  that  I  must  do  everything  in  my  power  to  make  it  as  good 
and  perfect  as  possible.  I  will  not  tell  you  how  much  I  long  for 
home,  but  I  should  not  enjoy  it,  if  I  had  neglected  anything  in  my 
work,  for  when  I  come  I  mean  to  enjoy  myself;  but  spring,  summer, 
and  autumn  may  pass  first,  though  I  work  as  hard  as  I  can  without 
hurting  my  health.  Bunsen  has  invited  me  several  times  to  stay 
with  them,  but  gladly  as  I  would  do  so,  I  have  always  refused,  so  as 
not  to  waste  time.  I  expect  Victor  Carus  in  August,  so  that  I  can 
myself  introduce  and  settle  him  here.  I  shall  be  glad  to  have  him, 
and  he  seems  very  much  pleased  with  the  post,  though  he  only  gets 
£  1 00  a  year.' 

The  following  letter  is  interesting,  as  containing  a  mention 


94  Tennyson  [ch.  vi 

of  Tennyson,  whose  poems  Max  had  learnt  to  admire  from 
Palgrave,  who  gave  him  the  earlier  volumes  : — 

9,  Park  Place,  April  27. 

'  My  dear  Palgrave, — When  I  went  to  London  a  fortnight  ago, 
I  hoped  to  see  you  there,  but  all  my  plans  were  upset,  and  instead 
of  staying  in  town  three  days  (this  was  all  the  furlough  I  could 
get  from  myself),  I  was  there  only  for  about  six  hours,  and  spent  the 
rest  of  my  time  near  London.  London  is  certainly  not  the  place 
to  see  one's  friends,  but  Oxford  is,  and  I  hope  you  will  keep  your 
promise  as  soon  as  your  duties  as  Ministre  de  I'lnstruction  Publique 
will  allow  you.  Although  I  can  offer  you  no  lotus,  you  will  find 
a  good  weed,  which,  you  may  tell  Tennyson,  does  just  as  well.  I  can 
quite  imagine  how  you  must  rejoice  in  his  acquaintance,  and  I  am 
afraid  you  will  soon  look  down  from  the  poetical  height  of  the  Tenny- 
sonian  Olympus  pitying  that  unhappy  set  of  mortals  who  through 
their  philosophical  spectacles  see  only  forms  and  shadows,  while  you, 
a  poet  amongst  poets,  enjoy  life  and  light.  However,  you  read  old 
Goethe — he  is  more  than  a  poet,  and  more  than  a  philosopher,  he  is 
a  full  man,  a  whole  humanity  in  himself  I  wish  I  could  read  him 
with  you  for  my  own  sake,  not  for  yours,  for  you  are  not  the  man  to 
misunderstand  him.  Did  it  not  strike  you  in  Froude's  Nemesis  how 
the  death  of  the  child  is  a  beautiful  echo  from  the  Wahlverwandt- 
scha/len?  Oxford  is  flourishing  again.  Stanley,  Jowett,  «&c.,  are  up. 
Old  Froude,  however,  has  left  a  blank,  and  if  you  saw  how  they  have 
pulled  down  your  house,  and  how  the  fireplace  where  we  smoked  so 
many  a  jolly  cigar  is  exposed  to  the  eyes  of  the  vulgus  profanum,  you 
would  find  it  a  subject  not  unworthy  an  elegy.  Plans  for  the  summer 
I  have  made  none,  but  think  that  my  work  will  keep  me  till  September. 
Then  I  shall  go  to  pay  homage  to  the  German  Emperor,  or  to  the 
President  of  the  German  Republic,  an  alternative  which  will  be 
decided  in  a  very  few  days.  Bye,  bye,  old  fellow.  Don't  forget 
Oxford  and  the  old  set,  who  send  you  their  love.' 

To  Dr.  PauH,  who  had  settled  in  London,  he  writes  : — 

Trafislation.  Oxford,  May  14. 

'  My  printer  rides  me  nearly  to  death.  I  must  soon  unseat  the 
fellow  and  go  to  grass.  You  would  do  better  if,  instead  of  working 
till  you  are  weary  and  worn,  you  were  to  come  here  to  us,  where  you 
would  amuse  yourself  thoroughly.' 

After  all  the  sorrow  that  his  sister  had  passed  through,  her 
mother  had   taken  her  for  a  few  days'  change  to  Dresden. 


1849]  Revolution  in  Dresden  95 

They  had  hardly  arrived  before  the  Revolution  of  1849  broke 
out.  Max  Miiller  saw  in  the  papers  the  serious  aspect  of 
affairs,  and  for  days  had  no  letter  from  his  mother.  He  writes 
to  her : — 

Trafislaimt.  9,  Park  Place,  May  22. 

'  I  can  hardly  tell  you  the  anxiety  with  which  I  awaited  your  last 
letter.  I  never  had  a  line  for  more  than  a  month,  and  was  afraid  that 
you  were  ill  from  all  the  sorrow  ;  and  then  came  the  terrible  days 
in  Dresden,  and  I  read  each  day  in  the  papers  of  the  fighting  and 
destruction  spreading  more  and  more  towards  the  part  of  the  town 
where  I  knew  you  were.  Thank  God  that  you  escaped !  but  when 
you  write  that  cannon-balls  flew  right  over  you,  you  cannot  wonder 
that  I  am  terrified.  If  this  goes  on  in  Germany  I  cannot  leave  you 
there  without  protection,  and  I  am  really  thinking  of  giving  up  my 
work  here,  and  going  to  you.  In  times  like  this  all  other  considera- 
tions must  give  way,  and  many  plans  be  given  up.  Why  should  one  live 
on  here  in  peace  and  quiet  whilst  others  have  to  make  such  sacrifices  ? 
If  I  could  only  have  you  here  with  me  !  I  have  been  thinking  it  over 
day  and  night,  not  the  cost  only,  but  if  you  could  bear  it  here,  so 
entirely  alone,  I  all  day  at  the  Library  or  busy  at  home,  and  you  with 
no  one  you  could  understand.  I  do  not  urge  you  to  come,  I  only 
suggest  it,  and  if  you  come  I  will  gladly  give  up  my  plans  for 
travelling  when  Vol.  I  is  out.  Your  account  of  little  Agnes'  death  ^ 
was  heartrending.  I  cannot  tell  you  how  hard  it  is  to  hear  all  this 
from  far  away,  and  then  not  to  have  a  moment's  rest  from  the  inces- 
sant pressure  of  work  and  care  and  sorrow.  Wherever  one  looks 
all  is  black  and  hopeless :  I  am  so  out  of  spirits  that  for  weeks 
I  have  been  nowhere,  and  find  no  peace  unless  I  forget  myself  in 
work.  If  I  could  do  anything  to  give  you  a  pleasure,  that  is  the 
only  happiness  I  wish  for.' 

Some  time  before  this  he  had  written  to  Dr.  Pauli : — 

Translation.  Park  Place,  1849. 

'  My  dear  Pauli, — I  expect  every  day  to  receive  marching  orders, 
or  else  be  denounced  as  a  deserter  and  unworthy  son  of  my  Dessau 
Fatherland  !  The  young  Dessauers  have  marched ;  the  old  Dessauers, 
such  as  the  old  Fritzes,  are,  alas  I  no  longer  to  be  found  in  our  days.  It 
seems  hardly  possible  to  avoid  a  civil  war  ;  folly  has  grown  to  mad- 
ness, and  one  shudders  in  thinking  of  the  consequences.  Well,  for 
the  present,  I  shall  stay  quiet  with  my  Veda,  notwithstanding  all 
Dessau  Prime  Ministers.      One  lives  from  day  to  day,  till  the  real 

^  She  died  three  weeks  after  her  baby  brother,  aged  four  years. 


/ 


96  Party  at  Bunsens  [ch.  vi 

marching  order  comes.  If  you  see  the  Minister  Pulski,  tell  him  that 
in  the  old  Tory  University  of  Oxford,  at  the  last  debate  at  the  Union, 
a  vote  of  sympathy  with  Hungary  was  carried  by  a  large  majority.' 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Trarislation.  Oxford,  y««^  15. 

*  As  I  opened  your  last  letter  the  little  lock  of  Agnes's  hair  fell  out  ; 
dear  little  child,  how  much  you  have  lost  in  her,  especially  as  she 
seemed  so  devoted  to  you,  and  was  already  so  useful  to  you.  I  own 
that  my  hopes  for  a  speedy  solution  of  the  difficulties  in  Germany 
disappear  more  and  more,  and  though  I  still  trust  my  later  life  will  be 
spent  there,  I  shall  now  begin  to  look  about  for  a  setded  position  in 
England.  I  am  convinced  that  after  a  time  it  would  not  be  difficult 
to  find  a  settled  and  remunerative  occupation,  where  I  could  give 
you  a  pleasanter  life  than  in  this  student's  housekeeping.  The  great 
advantage  of  my  present  post  is,  that  for  the  next  six  or  eight  years, 
I  can  live  decently  and  am  not  forced  to  accept  the  first  appointment 
that  turns  up.  God  will  help  further,  and,  notwithstanding  the  lone- 
liness and  the  strange  climate  in  which  I  have  now  lived  so  long, 
I  recognize  with  deep  thankfulness  how  much  better  off  I  am  than 
many  of  my  friends,  though  I  have  not  deserved  it.  I  lately  received 
such  a  kind  invitation  from  Bunsen  for  a  party,  that  I  went  to  London, 
and  stayed  with  him  two  days.  He  lives  in  another  house,  a  very  fine 
one,  one  of  the  best  in  London.  They  had  asked  750  people — the 
whole  Corps  Diplomatique,  and  the  elite  of  English  society.  The  whole 
house  was  like  a  garden,  the  balconies  covered  with  awnings  from 
which  one  had  a  splendid  view  over  London,  the  garden  of  the  house 
illuminated,  beautiful  music,  German  songs  with  a  full  chorus,  from  the 
German  Opera  now  in  London.  I  cannot  describe  the  diamonds  and 
the  dresses,  but  I  have  never  seen  such  a  crowd  of  beautiful  women  and 
girls  together.  Guizot  was  there,  and  Palmerston;  in  fact,  all  the  lions 
and  lionesses  of  the  season.  The  next  evening  I  was  invited  to  Lord 
Ellesmere's,  one  of  the  richest  men  here,  whose  collection  of  pictures 
is  famous.  Only  think  of  looking  round  in  the  middle  of  a  conversa- 
tion and  seeing  on  all  sides  Raphaels,  Titians,  Murillos,  Carlo  Dolces 
— all  originals !  This  sort  of  thing  only  exists  in  England.  Bunsen 
is  unchanged  in  his  affection  ;  in  spite  of  all  he  has  to  do,  I  always 
get  a  few  lines  from  him  as  soon  as  anything  of  interest  happens.  He 
always  hopes  for  the  best,  though  prepared  for  the  worst.' 

After  telling  his  mother  she  is  wrong  in  entirely  shutting 
herself  up,  he  ends  with  these  words : — 

*  Every  one  carries  a  grave  of  lost  hope  in  his  soul,  but  he  covers  it 
over  with  cold  marble,  or  with  green  boughs.     On  sad  days  one  likes 


1849]  Prolegomena  to  Rtg-veda  97 

to  go  alone  to  this  God's  acre  of  the  soul,  and  weep  there,  but  only  in 
order  to  return  full  of  comfort  and  hope  to  those  who  are  left  to  us.' 

Knowing  the  general  ignorance  in  England  at  that  time  as 
to  the  value  and  meaning  of  the  Rig-veda,  Max  M tiller  had 
been  busy  in  writing  a  full  and  explanatory  preface  to  the  first 
volume.    This,  when  finished,  he  gave  to  Wilson,  who  corrected 
and  praised  it,  and  had  nothing  to  object  to,  but  when  Max 
Miiller  on  June  i  showed  him  a  letter  he  had  written  on  the 
subject  to  the  Directors,  he  suddenly  turned  round  and  seemed 
determined  it  should  not  be  printed,  and  also  told  Max  that 
he,  Wilson,  would  never  hear  of  his  returning  to  live  in  Ger- 
many till  the  whole  of  the  Rig-veda  was  finished.     Though 
Max  Miiller  had  kept  to  his  bargain  and  prepared  his  fifty 
sheets  a  year,  Wilson,  whose   translation   depended  on  his 
edition,  scolded  him  like  a  schoolboy,  telling  him  he  might 
do  more  if  he  chose.     The  next  day  Wilson  seemed  to  repent 
of  his  ill  humour,  and  said  he  would  like  to  see  the  preface 
printed  as  a  separate  work,  not  with  the  Veda.     Max  Mialler 
concludes  his  account  of  the  whole  scene  with  these  words, 
'  I  cannot  make  that  old  man  out.     He  is  honest  and  straight- 
forward, of  great  power  and  energy,  but  nothing  to  grease  the 
wheels,' 

In  his  letter  to  the  Court  of  Directors  Max  Miiller  mentions 
that  in  this  preface,  which  consisted  of  300  pages  quarto,  he 
had  given  for  the  first  time  an  account  of  the  Vedic  litera- 
ture and  its  three  distinguishable  periods,  and  had  explained 
the  relation  of  the  Vedic  to  the  rest  of  Sanskrit  literature. 
He  had  evidently  discussed  the  matter  with  Bunsen,  for  in 
a  letter  written  about  the  middle  of  June  he  says,  '  I  have  at 
once  copied  again  the  letter  which  you  were  so  good  as  to 
correct,  and  for  which  you  have  personally  secured  a  good 
reception,  and  enclose  it,  begging  you,  if  all  is  right,  to  post 
it,'  and  in  September  he  writes  to  Bunsen : — 

Translation.  Park  Place,  1849. 

'  The  news  of  the  success  of  my  petition  was  a  complete  surprise — 
therefore  all  the  more  joyful,  and  all  the  more  so  that  I  again  owe  the 
success  to  your  friendly  services.  Your  proposal,  which  the  Directors 
accept,  gives  me  far  more  than  I  asked.  Of  course  I  shall  print  and 
publish  it  in  England,  but  first  I  shall  go  to  Germany,  and  spend  the 

I  H 


98  Essay  for  Prix  Volney  [ch.  vi 

winter  there.     Are  three  months  of  holiday  really  too  much  after 
three  years'  work  and  absence  from  home  ? ' 

After  the  pleasant  visit  to  Bunsen  in  June,  he  writes  to 
him: — 

Translaiion, 

'  I  have  returned  safely  to  my  Isola  Bella,  as  though  after  a  fairy 
voyage.  The  awaking  after  such  a  beautiful  dream  is  not  always 
pleasant,  and  so  I  will  employ  the  first  moments  of  my  solitude  here, 
whilst  my  Sanskrit  does  not  yet  attract  me,  in  thanking  you  for  the 
refreshing  hours  which  your  kind  invitation  secured  me.  ..."  Nil 
desperandum  Teucro  duce  et  auspice  Teucro ! "  But  what  would 
have  become  of  me  had  not  such  a  Teucer  taken  me  up  ?  Now  I  do 
not  despair  of  finding  a  new  Salamis,  wherever  it  may  be !  If  the 
wind  improves,  then  up  with  the  sail ;  if  it  is  against  one,  then  "  pull 
away,"  and  perhaps  at  last  one  will  reach  a  safer  and  German  port. 
Oxford  is  so  beautiful  just  now,  I  wish  I  could  show  it  to  you.  .  . .' 

It  w^as  not  long  before  his  unremitting  work  began  to 
tell  on  him.  He  says  in  a  letter  at  this  time,  '  I  am  writing 
all  day,'  and  worse  almost  than  this  was  the  constant 
worry  of  trying  to  hurry  on  the  printers.  At  length  he 
acknowledges  that  '  the  English  will  not  be  driven,  one  must 
take  them  as  they  are.'  His  headaches  became  almost  inces- 
sant, and  his  doctor  at  last  insisted  on  his  taking  some  rest, 
so  Morier  carried  him  off  to  the  Lakes  to  join  a  reading  party 
under  Jowett,  Froude  being  also  in  the  neighbourhood.  He 
writes  from  there  to  Burnouf: — 

July  26,  1849. 

'  The  reason  I  have  left  your  last  friendly  letter  so  long  unanswered 
is  that  I  wished  to  send  you  an  essay  for  the  Prix  Volney.  I  have 
followed  your  kind  advice,  and  instead  of  sending  in  the  printed 
essay,  I  have  put  together  a  special  one  for  this  purpose  from  my 
Collectaneum.  It  treats  of  the  history  of  the  civilization  of  the  Aryan 
nations  before  the  fifteenth  century  b.  c,  as  far  as  one  can  construct  it 
from  the  researches  of  comparative  philology.  I  was  very  much 
grieved  to  hear  that  your  health  has  suffered  of  late,  and  that  your 
work  has  been  therefore  interrupted.  I  hope  you  are  now  feeling 
better,  and  are  able  to  carry  on  your  important  investigations  with 
renewed  vigour.  I  have  been  ill  again  and  had  to  leave  Oxford  to 
recruit  here  at  the  Westmoreland  Lakes.  I  hope  soon  to  be  so 
far  better  as  to  be  able  to  finish  the  first  Ashtaka.  Rawlinson  will 
soon  come  to  England,  and  has  promised  the   explanation  of  the 


1849]  Visit  to  the  Lakes  99 

Babylonian  inscriptions.  Wilson  is  busy  with  an  English  translation 
of  the  Rig-veda  ;  he  does  not  consider  the  translation  of  Langlois 
literal  enough.  I  hope  soon  to  go  to  Germany,  as  I  cannot  stand  the 
climate  of  England;  incessant  headaches  make  any  fatiguing  work 
impossible.' 

Two  days  later  he  writes  to  his  mother : — 

Translation.  Grange,  Derwentwater,  y«^  28. 

'I  have  been  for  a  fortnight  in  this  beautiful  country,  with  two 
great  friends,  who  were  going  to  spend  their  holidays  here,  and  asked 
me  to  go  with  them.  We  take  long  walks  every  day  on  the  mountains, 
or  row  on  the  lakes,  or  ride,  which  we  enjoy  very  much.  I  was 
knocked  up  with  incessant  work,  but  I  feel  perfectly  well  since 
I  came  here,  and  hope  soon  to  be  able  to  return  to  Oxford.  The 
beauty  of  England  is  so  great  that  one  cannot  understand  why 
the  English  always  go  to  the  Continent  in  search  of  beautiful  scenery. 
There  is  nothing  so  beautiful  as  being  alone  with  nature  :  one  sees 
how  God's  will  is  fulfilled  in  each  bud  and  leaf  that  blooms  and 
withers,  and  one  learns  to  recognize  how  deeply  rooted  in  one  is  this 
thirst  for  nature.  In  living  with  men,  one  is  only  too  easily  torn 
from  this  real  home  ;  then  one's  own  plans  and  wishes  and  hopes  and 
fears  spring  up  ;  then  we  fancy  we  can  perfect  something  for  ourselves 
alone,  and  think  that  everything  must  serve  for  our  ends  and  enjoy- 
ments, until  the  influence  of  nature  in  life  or  the  hand  of  God  arouses 
us,  and  warns  us  that  we  live  and  flourish,  not  for  enjoyment,  nor 
for  undisturbed  quiet,  but  to  bear  fruit  in  another  life.  When  one 
stands  amid  the  grandeur  of  nature,  with  one's  own  little  murmurs  and 
sufferings,  and  looks  deep  into  this  dumb  soul,  much  becomes  clear  to 
one,  and  one  is  astounded  at  the  false  ideas  one  has  formed  of  this  life. 
It  is  but  a  short  journey,  and  on  a  journey  one  can  do  without  many 
things  which  generally  seem  necessary  to  us.  Yes,  one  can  do  without 
even  what  is  dearest  to  our  hearts,  in  this  world,  if  we  know  that  after 
the  journey  which  we  have  to  endure  we  shall  find  again  those  who 
have  arrived  at  the  goal  quicker  and  more  easily  than  we  have  done. 
Now  if  life  were  looked  upon  as  a  journey  for  refreshment  or  amuse- 
ment, which  it  ought  not  to  be,  we  might  feel  sad,  if  we  have  to 
make  our  way  alone ;  but  if  we  treat  it  as  a  serious  business-journey, 
then  we  know  we  have  hard  and  unpleasant  work  before  us,  and 
enjoy  all  the  more  the  beautiful  resting-places  which  God's  love  has 
provided  for  each  of  us  in  life.  We  have  all  of  us,  in  these  last  years, 
had  such  a  long  rest,  and  enjoyed  life  so  quietly,  that  now,  when  we 
have  to  fight  on  again,  we  have  quite  forgotten  that  our  power  for 
fighting  was  meant  for  something  more  than  parades  and  reviews. 

H  3 


lOO 


At  the  Lakes  [ch.  vi 


Look  how  the  true  soldier  rejoices  when  a  real  battle  is  at  hand,  and 
so  the  true  man  should  rejoice,  when  God  calls  him  to  an  earnest 
life  struggle ;  and  when  the  last  friends  fall  right  and  left,  one  goes  into 
the  conflict  with  yet  more  determined  courage  to  gain  that  object 
which  is  set  before  each  of  us.  You  may  think  this  too  serious  a  view 
of  life :  I  assure  you  it  is  this  view  of  life  which  has  given  me  my 
cheerful  spirit,  and  helps  to  keep  it  up,  and  which  makes  it  possible 
for  me  with  firm  faith  to  contemplate  fearlessly  the  struggles  of  Hfe 
that  are  still  before  me.  The  one  thing  I  desire  and  hope  is  that 
God  will  give  me  strength  to  maintain  my  independence  by  un- 
remitting work,  so  that  I  may  always  pursue  that  way  in  hfe  which 
according  to  my  convictions  appears  the  right  one.  If  God  gives  me 
more,  and  it  is  granted  me  to  lead  a  quiet  and  happy  life  with  you,  it 
is  more  than  I  deserve  But  courage — nothing  can  happen  to  us 
in  life,  but  what  is  really  the  best  for  us.  And  now  for  my  plans. 
I  have  about  loo  pages  more  to  print,  which  may  be  ready  in  six 
weeks.  Then  I  shall  go  to  Germany  and  spend  the  winter  with  you, 
wherever  you  like.  I  shall  look  about  in  Germany,  to  see  if  I  can 
find  a  place  in  any  University,  preferably  at  Bonn,  and  see  if  it  would 
be  possible  to  prepare  my  MS.  in  Germany,  and  to  come  over  every 
year  for  a  short  time  to  England  for  the  printing.  That  would  be 
delightful — but  I  won't  build  any  castles  in  the  air,  as  there  is  much 
to  consider.  If  this  does  not  answer  I  would  return  to  England,  and 
you  could  come  and  visit  me.  Then  I  should  alter  my  plans  and 
build  my  hopes  on  England  and  on  finding  a  post  here,  where  you 
could  be  quite  comfortable,  and  live  with  me  and  keep  house.  The 
longer  one  lives  in  England,  the  more  one  longs  to  be  back  in 
Germany.  A  stormy  is  better  than  a  dead  sea  !  The  English  grow 
more  like  the  Chinese  with  each  year,  and  nature  herself  has  built 
a  Chinese  wall  round  their  lovely  country.  But  if  one  makes  oneself 
into  a  Chinaman,  one  gets  on  well  with  them.' 

He  writes  to  Dr.  Pauli  from  Borrowdale : — 

T7-anslation. 

'  The  neighbourhood  here  is  glorious,  and  we  are  just  in  from 
a  walk  with  old  Morier.  We  can  jump  out  of  our  windows  into  the 
water,  we  fish  for  trout,  and  smoke  a  weed.  Then  there  are  boats, 
ponies,  carts,  and  no  living  soul  except  dogs  and  sheep,  and  an  old 
farmer's  family  with  a  lingo  which  is  difficult  to  understand.  I  shall 
stay  some  time,  and  wish  you  could  come  here,  for  it  is  really  unique, 
and  whilst  I  write  I  hear  the  sound  of  waterfalls  on  all  sides,  for  they 
are  swollen  by  late  rains.  Froude  lives  close  by,  and  I  am  going 
to  stay  with  him.     Mary  Barton,  Miss  Martineau,  and  other  Hterary 


1849]  Cholera  in  Oxford  loi 

swells  live  about  here — and  the  Veda  may  see  how  it  can  do  with- 
out me.' 

Whilst  at  the  Lakes  Max  Miiller  copied  out  his  treatise  on 
the  '  Results  of  the  Investigations  of  Language  as  to  Ancient 
History,'  forming  part  of  the  Prolegomena  to  the  Veda,  which 
he  sent  to  M,  Burnouf  for  the  competition  for  the  Prix  Volney. 
In  writing  to  acknowledge  the  safe  arrival  of  the  MS.,  Burnouf 
says : — 

Translatiofi. 

'  We  shall  need  all  the  forces  at  our  disposal,  for  the  number  of 
competitors  is  large,  and  from  what  I  hear  powerful,  and  many 
of  these  will  be  supported  by  very  active  friends.  I  have  been 
entrusted  with  the  first  examination  of  your  Essay,  and  shall  receive 
it  to-day.  But  if  we  must  fight,  we  will  fight — you  know  we  French 
do  not  fear  blows,  we  like  them,  alas !  only  too  much.  Good-bye,  my 
dear  friend.  Take  care  of  your  health.  I  am  very  sorry  to  hear 
that  it  has  suffered  from  overwork.     But  to  w-ork,  one  must  live.' 

To  Dr.  Pauli  he  writes  after  leaving  the  Lakes  : — 

Translation.  August  24,  1849. 

'  I  have  at  last  finished  my  holiday,  and  yet,  long  as  it  was,  did 
not  get  to  Scotland.  But  we  amused  ourselves  to  the  last  day.  I  was 
a  fortnight  with  Froude,  boating,  and  fishing,  and  whatever  other 
amusements  there  are,  whereby  we  grow  older  but  not  wiser.  Morier 
and  Jowett  are  gone  to  the  Isle  of  Man,  but  my  old  love,  the  Veda, 
drew  me  back  to  Oxford.' 

On  returning  to  Oxford  he  found  his  friend  Dr.  Acland 
contending  almost  single-handed  with  a  serious  outbreak  of 
cholera.  It  was  the  depth  of  Long  Vacation,  the  members 
of  the  University  were  away,  and  most  of  the  medical  men 
taking  their  summer  holiday.  Max  Miiller  put  himself  at  his 
friend's  disposal,  and  worked  with  him  in  tracing  out  cases, 
attending  to  the  sick  and  giving  relief,  till  he  himself  nearly 
succumbed  to  a  sharp  attack,  and  Dr.  Acland  would  not  allow 
him  to  do  any  more  visiting.  On  recovering  he  writes  to 
Bunsen : — 

Translation. 

'I  enclose  a  letter  from  M.  Reinaud  for  you  to  read.  I  think 
I  can  now  feel  pretty  confident  of  receiving  the  prize.  I  am  delighted 
at  the  result,  and  feel  how  much  more  good  comes  to  me  than  I  have 


102        First  Volume  of  Rtg-veda  finished     [ch.  vi 

ever  deserved.  But  I  will  now  begin  again  to  work  in  all  earnest, 
if  God  gives  me  health,  which  has  again  in  these  last  weeks  lost 
me  much  time,  and  German  air  will,  I  hope,  prove  better  medicine 
than  all  I  have  been  swallowing  here.' 

In  September  his  old  friend  Victor  Carus  arrived,  and  settled 
in  the  same  house  with  Max  Miiller.  They  breakfasted 
together,  and  then  separated  for  their  work,  Carus  working  at 
Christ  Church,  and  they  dined  together,  when  not  asked  to 
dine  out.  Carus  finally  left  Oxford  at  Easter,  1 851,  but  he 
had  been  absent  for  many  months  of  the  time,  working  in 
the  Scilly  Isles,  and  the  last  few  months  of  his  stay  in  Oxford 
he  lived  in  Dr.  Acland's  house,  so  that  the  friends  were  really 
less  together  than  they  had  expected. 

Early  in  October  came  the  welcome  news  that  he  had 
gained  the  Prix  Volney.     Burnouf  writes : — 

Translation.  Paris,  October  5,  1849. 

'  My  dear  Friend, — I  hasten  to  announce  to  you,  that  on  my 
report,  the  Commission  of  the  Institute,  who  have  to  adjudge  the 
annual  prize  founded  by  M.  de  Volney,  has  accorded  you  the  first 
prize  of  1,200  francs,  A  second  prize  of  1,000  francs  has  been 
awarded  to  another  work,  curious  in  fact,  but  not  sufficiently  serious 
in  form.  I  held  that  the  first  prize  must  be  adjudged  you,  as  much 
for  the  merit  of  your  work,  as  for  the  dignity  of  those  great  studies,  of 
which,  in  a  very  short  time,  you  will  be  one  of  the  chief  ornaments. 
No  one  can  feel  greater  pleasure  than  I  do  in  announcing  your  success 
to  you.  Everybody  entertained  the  kindest  feelings  towards  you. 
Remember,  you  are  not  to  mention  your  success  before  the  25th, 
as  it  is  not  till  that  day  that  the  prizes  are  announced  at  the  public 
seance.     Your  devoted  friend,  '  E.  B.' 

And  now,  after  four  years  of  labour  in  collecting  the 
materials,  the  first  volume  of  the  Hymns  of  the  Rig-veda,  with 
Sayana's  Commentary,  was  printed  and  nearly  ready  for 
publication.  The  text  had  been  prepared  from  MSS.  in  the 
Bibliotheque  Royale  of  Paris,  the  East  India  House,  and  the 
Bodleian  Library,  for  in  the  whole  of  Germany  no  MSS. 
were  to  be  found,  except  some  very  old  and  imperfect 
copies  of  the  text  and  a  few  worm-eaten  fragments  of  Sayana 
at  Berlin.  The  MSS.  in  France  and  England  had  been 
collated  and  copied  by  Max  Miiller's  own  hand,  entirely  with- 


1849]  Goes  to  Berlin  103 

out  help.  The  MSS.  of  Sayana  were  most  imperfect,  made 
by  copyists  who  did  not  understand  their  subject,  and  were 
therefore  full  of  mistakes,  which  had  all  to  be  rectified  to  pro- 
duce a  correct  text.  It  abounds  moreover  in  obscure  quota- 
tions, and  many  of  the  works  quoted  had  not  been  edited  at 
this  time,  and  yet  every  quotation  had  to  be  verified  and 
explained.  It  was  a  gigantic  undertaking  for  so  young 
a  scholar,  and  in  his  preface  he  gratefully  acknowledges  the 
constant  encouragement  he  had  received  from  men  like 
Burnouf  and  Wilson,  and  the  readiness  with  which  the  libra- 
rians of  the  public  libraries  in  Paris,  London,  and  Oxford 
spread  their  treasures  before  him,  whilst  Burnouf  and 
Dr.  Mill  generously  placed  their  private  collection  of  MSS. 
at  his  service,  and  Dr.  Rieu,  Sub-Librarian  of  the  British 
Museum,  aided  in  the  correction  of  the  proof-sheets  of  this 
volume. 

So  after  three  years  of  absence  he  was  able  to  hurry  off 
to  his  own  family,  with  the  restful  feeling  that  he  had  well 
earned  his  longed-for  holiday.  He  thus  takes  leave  of 
Bunsen : — 

Translation.  London,  October  20,  1849. 

*  In  the  hurry  of  my  journey  it  is  not  possible  to  answer  your  kind 
letter,  which  is  very  precious  to  me.  Your  confidence  in  me  gives 
me  fresh  courage,  and  an  earnest  resolution  to  work  on  bravely ;  but 
do  not  expect  too  much  from  me,  that  I  may  not  fall  too  far  short 
of  your  expectations.  The  love  of  science  and  desire  of  distinction 
are  often  too  weak  to  overcome  the  vis  inertiae  and  the  longing  for 
rest  and  retirement,  especially  in  these  days  of  barbarism,  of  mental 
poverty  and  godlessness,  where  one  finds  no  hearing  for  research,  let 
alone  the  hope  of  starting  anything  useful.  I  owe  you  much,  very 
much,  were  it  only  that  the  thought  of  you  keeps  alive  in  me  the  love 
of  duty,  and  the  desire  to  win  the  approbation  of  good  men.' 

Immediately  on  his  arrival  in  Berlin  Max  Miiller  sought 
out  his  friend  and  patron,  Alexander  von  Humboldt,  who  con- 
tinued to  the  end  to  take  a  deep  interest  in  the  scholar  whom 
he  remembered  from  his  Berlin  student-days.  Unfortunately 
all  the  letters  from  Max  Miiller  to  Humboldt  have  disappeared, 
but  permission  has  been  given  to  use  one  or  two  of  Hum- 
boldt's  notes   to  Max,  though  there  is   nothing    of  special 


104  ^-  '^on  Humboldt  [ch.  vi 

interest  in  them,  as   showing  his   friendly  feelings   towards 
the  young  Sanskritist. 

Translalion.  Potsdam,  Noveinber  2,  1849. 

'It  is  with  the  greatest  joy  that  I  greet  again  on  German  soil 
so  talented  and  industrious  a  scholar  as  Dr.  Max  Miiller.  An 
unforeseen  absence  from  home  robbed  me  the  other  day  of  the  joy 
of  your  visit.  I  expect  you,  therefore,  the  day  after  to-morrow, 
Friday,  between  i  and  2  o'clock,  if  that  suits  you.  The  Prolegomena 
to  the  Veda  will  be  of  the  greatest  interest  to  me,  and  I  shall  hand  it 
to  the  public  with  pleasure,  if  you  wish  me  to  do  so.  With  kindest 
regards,  yours,  '  A.  v.  Humboldt.' 

From  Berlin  Max  Miiller  writes  to  his  friend  and  master 
Burnouf : — 

9,  ScHADow  Strasse,  Berlin,  November  8. 

'  Dear  Sir, — My  best  thanks  for  your  kind  letter.  You  can  imagine 
how  happy  I  am,  after  having  received  from  the  French  Academy  this 
unexpected  distinction,  but  what  gives  to  this  distinction  its  highest 
value  is  that  this  honour  has  been  bestowed  on  my  essay  on  your 
recommendation.  I  knew  very  well  your  kind  intentions  towards  me, 
and  was  persuaded  that  I  should  find  in  you  a  kind  judge.  But  I  was 
also  too  well  acquainted  with  your  character,  to  expect  that  your 
kindness  for  me  could  exercise  any  influence  on  those  principles  on 
which  you  act.  Having  received  therefore  this  prize  through  you,  I 
think  I  have  solid  reason  to  feel  happy  about  it,  and  to  consider  it 
as  a  good  omen  for  my  future  studies.  The  first  volume  of  the  J^ig- 
veda  has  at  last  appeared.  I  left  it  finished  before  I  went  to  Germany, 
and  though  I  am  afraid  there  will  be  some  delay  by  the  bookbinder, 
bookseller,  &c.,  I  hope  you  will  soon  receive  a  copy  of  it  at  Paris. 
I  have  not  yet  given  up  my  plan  of  coming  to  Paris,  before  I  return 
to  England.  There  are  many  things  connected  with  the  Veda,  which 
I  have  treated  in  my  Prolegomena  to  the  Veda,  on  which  I  should  like 
very  much  to  hear  your  opinion  before  it  is  printed.  I  hope  no  other 
Revolution  will  come  between  it,  as  the  last  time  when  I  came  to 
Paris,  for  I  see  also  here  at  Berlin  that  revolutions  leave  the  minds 
of  men  not  in  a  favourable  disposidon  for  discussing  questions  con- 
nected with  the  history  of  bygone  nations.  I  hope  your  health  will 
soon  be  entirely  restored,  and  I  shall  find  you  again  at  your  morning 
upanishads,  animated  by  the  same  lively  interest,  and  with  the  same 
warmth  of  discussion  and  conversation,  as  three  or  four  years  ago. 
'Believe  me,  dear  sir, 

'  Yours  very  gratefully  and  faithfully, 

'  M.  MilLLER.' 


1849]  Life  at  Berlin  105 

From  Berlin  he  writes  again  to  Bunsen  : — 

Translation.  Berlin,  November  12,  1849. 

'  After  spending  a  short  time  in  Dresden  and  Leipzig,  I  have  come 
to  Berlin,  and  my  mother  with  me,  and  shall  stay  here  till  Christmas. 
I  have  found  many  of  my  old  friends  here,  and  satiated  with  politics 
the  interest  in  scientific  pursuits  seems  to  be  slowly  reviving.     The 
feeling  of  dejection  in  Prussia  and  Germany  is  great,  and  the  good 
see  with  dismay  that  the  pendulum  of  the  State  machinery,  which  in 
March  was  swung  too  far  to  the  left,  now,  with  the  same  want  of 
caution,  is  swung  too  far  to  the  right.     That  from  that  point  there 
will  again  be  a  reaction  every  one  seems  to  forget.     They  fancy  they 
can  hold  the  pendulum  fast  to  the  right,  forgetting  that  either  the 
clockwork  must  break,  or  the  weight  must  fall  back  with  the  same 
force.     Yesterday,  I  received  a  letter  from  Oxford,  in  which    I   am 
told  that  my  Oxford  friends  are  taking  pains  to  secure  me  a  place  in 
the  British  Museum,  and  have  written  to  you  about  it.     It  is  the  place 
of  Keeper  of  the  Oriental  MSS.,  with  £450  income.     I  shall  not  stand 
for  the  place:  the  tastes  of  the  late  librarian  led  him  to  collect  a  wealth 
of  Arabic,  Syriac,  and  Persian  MSS.,  but  Indian  and  Old  Persian 
were  totally  neglected.     I  should  not  suit  the  place,  but  might  not 
Rieu  get  it  ?     His  knowledge  exactly  fits  him  for  it,  and  this  appoint- 
ment would  assure  his  whole  future  and  be  a  great  advantage  to 
science.     Lepsius  is  very  well,  and  is  just  going  to  bring  out  another 
volume,  chiefly  drawings.   Lepsia,  too,  and  Lepsiuncula  are  well.  Bopp 
is  just  the  same,  unchanged  ;   but  one  cannot  expect  anything  more 
from  him  for  Sanskrit.     It  is  to  be  hoped  that  Weber  by  his  work  will 
soon  gain  a  Professorship,  not  only  in  his  own  interest,  but  also  for 
the  sake  of  his  work.     I  have  not  yet  seen  Humboldt ;    he  is  in 
Potsdam,  and  I  will  wait  till  I  have  received  the  copies  of  the  Rig- 
veda.     I  am  going  to-day  to  the  Chamber  for  the  first  time.     The  seats 
in  the  Chamber  are  already  getting  empty,  and  ennui  will  do  more 
service    than    a    state    of   siege.      To    see    men    like    Dahlmann  ^ 
taking  a  part  in  these  transactions  is  really  sad.     He  is  too  good 
an    historian   to   be    a   politician.     I   occupy  myself  here  with   the 
revision  of  my  Prolegomena;   I  cannot  alter  it  much  more.     Yours 
in  true  devotion.' 

»  Died  i860. 


CHAPTER    VII 
1850-1851 

Dinner  at  Potsdam.  Morier's  illness.  Return  to  Oxford.  Rauch. 
Waagen.  Appointed  to  lecture  at  Oxford.  Letters  from  Professors 
Co  well  and  Story- Maskelyne.  Visit  to  Froude.  Article  in  Edin- 
burgh Review.     Made  Deputy  Professor  and  Honorary  M.A. 

After  a  pleasant  Christmas  at  Chemnitz  with  his  mother 
and  sister,  where  also  his  friend  Morier  joined  him,  Max  Miiller, 
with  Morier,  returned  to  Berlin,  where  the  latter  meant  to 
spend  some  months  studying  German.  Max  writes  to  his 
mother  from  Berlin  : — 

Translation,  Berlis,  Jan.  30. 

'  I  am  very  comfortable  with  Goldstucker,  but  I  am  tired  of  being 
idle,  and  am  longing  to  be  back  in  Oxford  now  I  am  no  longer  with 
you.  I  have  been  visiting  old  friends,  Bettina  von  Arnim  and 
Varnhagen  ;  they  have  both  become  red  republicans.' 

He  had  met  Humboldt,  who  told  him  that  the  King  had 
expressed  a  wish  to  see  him  before  he  returned  to  England, 
and  soon  after  brought  him  a  command  to  dine  at  Potsdam. 
He  sends  his  mother  a  lively  account  of  the  dinner: — 

Translation.  Berlin,  I^ed.  2,  1850, 

'  Dearest  Mother, — I  must  tell  you  all  about  my  visit  to  the  King. 
Early  Friday  came  a  messenger  from  the  palace  to  invite  me  to 
dinner  at  Charlottenburg,  and  at  2.30  Humboldt  came  in  his  carriage 
to  take  me  there.  He  told  me  it  would  be  quite  a  small  party,  but 
when  we  arrived  we  found  about  thirty  people  already  assembled,  and 
we  all  waited  for  the  King.  Humboldt  introduced  me  to  various 
people,  and  the  ladies  and  gentlemen  of  the  Court  were  evidently 
much  surprised  at  my  presence,  as  I  was  the  only  man  without  epau- 
lets and  about  ten  Orders.  At  last  came  the  King  and  Queen.  I  was 
again  the  only  person  who  had  not  yet  been  presented.     So  I  was 


1850]  Dinner  at  Potsdam  107 

taken  through  all  the  ladies  and  gentlemen  and  presented  to  His 
Majesty.  "  Brahma  is  great,  but  fear  not ! "  I  thought,  as  I  looked 
at  the  King,  only  separated  from  me  by  his  mountainous  evihonpoint. 
He  asked  me  where  I  was  born,  and  told  me  that  in  the  Dessau 
library  he  had  seen  the  poet  Miiller.  Then  he  talked  of  the  Duchess, 
and  at  last  asked  how  I  liked  England,  and  then  saying  "Wunsche  Ihnen 
guten  Appetit "  (I  wish  you  a  good  appetite),  bowed  and  dismissed  me. 
Then  the  Queen  came  up  to  me,  and  was  asking  me  about  the  Duchess, 
when  the  King  hurried  up  to  her,  gave  her  his  arm,  saying  as  Berlin 
wit,  "  Monsieur,  s'il  vous  plait,  dinner  is  served."  Then  we  went 
into  the  next  room.  I  sat  between  two  officers,  and  enjoyed  my 
dinner,  which  was  a  very  good  one.  I  took  the  liberty  of  letting  my 
knife  and  fork  go  with  each  course,  till  I  remarked  that  the  servants 
looked  askance,  and  then  I  saw  to  my  great  surprise  that  the  ladies 
and  gentlemen  round  me  eat  everything  with  the  same  knife  and 
fork  !  What  to  do  ?  to  imitate  them  ?  No,  I  went  quietly  on  to 
the  last  dish,  and  let  the  footmen  and  my  neighbours  and  vis-a-vis 
think  of  me  what  they  pleased;  but  I  was  amused.  After  dinner 
we  had  coffee  in  quite  a  small  room.  The  King  came  up  to  me 
again,  and  asked  if  I  knew  English,  and  other  kindly  questions, 
and  then  joined  the  Queen.  I  had  some  talk  with  some  of  the 
Gentlemen  in  Waiting,  Count  Puckler,  &c. ;  then  their  Majesties 
went  away,  and  I  drove  home  with  Humboldt.  He  was  very  sorry 
that  the  party  had  been  so  large,  but  said  the  King  was  so  much 
occupied  it  was  difficult  to  see  him  alone.  It  amused  me  very  much 
to  have  this  peep  into  the  royal  circle,  and  it  may  be  useful  to  me 
later  on.  Humboldt  was  delightful.  I  have  been  busy  for  him  on 
the  names  of  the  Dogstar  in  Sanskrit,  which  he  will  mention  in  Cosmos. 
That  is  better  than  dining  with  the  King,  but  I  knew  you  would  want 
me  to  describe  it  all,  but  you  must  not  repeat  it  to  everybody.  I  am 
often  afraid  on  this  account  of  telling  you  everything  when  I  write. 
There  was  no  talk  of  an  Order,  which  would  do  me  more  harm  than 
good.' 

Max  Miiller  had  arranged  to  leave  Berlin  directly  after  the 
dinner  at  Potsdam,  but  his  friend  Morier  u^as  taken  suddenly- 
ill  with  quinsy,  and  he  was  obliged  to  stay  on  and  nurse  him 
through  a  most  alarming  attack,  and  it  was  not  till  quite  the 
end  of  February  that  he  was  able  to  start  for  Paris,  where  he 
received  his  1,200  frs.  for  the  Prix  Volney  and  saw  Burnouf 
and  many  of  his  old  French  friends. 

Meantime  Professor  Wilson — always  a  cold,  hard  man,  unable 


io8  Return  to  Oxford  [ch.  vh 

to  enter  readily  into  the  difficulties  and  engagements  of  other 
people  where  they  were  contrary  to  his  own  views — became 
very  impatient  for  his  return,  and  wrote  to  him  as  follows  : — 

Oxford,  Feb.  26,  1850. 

'  My  dear  Mf'LLER, — I  had  hoped  to  have  seen  you  in  Oxford  on 
the  occasion  of  my  visit  there,  but  it  is  now  drawing  to  a  close,  and 
I  understand  there  is  no  prospect  of  your  early  arrival.  I  regret 
this  much,  as  unless  we  can  proceed  a  little  quicker  than  we  have 
done  with  the  printing  of  the  Rig-veda,  I  fear  I  shall  scarcely  live  to 
see  it  finished,  in  time  at  least  to  finish  the  translation ;  unless  I  do  as 
Langlois  has  done,  and  go  to  work  upon  the  MSS.  only.  In  that  case 
I  should  have  to  walk  off  with  all  the  India  House  copies,  and  leave 
you  to  the  Bodleian  alone.  The  only  other  expedient  I  can  think  of 
is  to  summon  some  other  Vaidik — Roth,  for  instance — to  your  help  ; 
but  seriously  I  wish  you  would  soon  resume  your  labours.  It  is  high 
time  to  put  a  stop  to  all  the  wild  fancies  that  a  partial  knowledge 
of  the  light  and  a  reliance  upon  such  equivocal  guides  as  the 
Brahmanas  and  Sutras  seem  likely  to  engender.  I  want  you  also 
to  help  in  the  distribution  of  the  copies.  I  have  the  Court's 
sanction  to  the  presentation  of  above  100  copies  to  different  public 
bodies  and  eminent  individuals  both  here  and  abroad.  If  I  cannot 
expect  your  assistance  in  carrying  this  sanction  into  effect,  I  must  do 
as  well  as  I  can  without  it,  but  it  is  a  task  that  will  give  me  some 
trouble.  I  have  finished  the  translation,  and  printed  about  half  of  it. 
It  will  be  completed,  I  hope,  in  about  six  weeks.  Trithen  and  your 
other  Oxford  friends  are  all  well,  and  will  be  glad  to  see  you  again 
amongst  them.     Yours  sincerely,  '  H.  H.  Wilson.' 

Max  Miiller  had  written  from  Paris  to  his  mother  : — 

3farch  8. 
*  It  was  an  unfortunate  thing  being  kept  in  Berlin,  but  I  have  the 
happy  feeling  that  I  was  doing  what  was  right,  and  so  I  must  be 
satisfied.' 

He  was  scarcely  settled  in  Oxford  before  he  writes  to 
Bunsen  : — 

Translation.  March,  1850. 

'My  best  thanks  for  your  friendly  welcome  to  England.  I  hope 
your  health  has  not  suffered  from  the  various  efforts  and  excite- 
ments of  your  journey  to  Germany.  I  have  seen  with  great  interest 
in  the  publication  of  the  Prussian  Circular  Note  the  realization  of  the 
ideas  to  which  you  gave  expression  before  the  end  of  last  year.     And 


1850]  Work  on  the  Veda  109 

so,  suddenly,  the  Gordian  knot  of  the  Austrian  diplomatic  tow-rope  is 
cut  to  pieces,  and  Prussia  at  last  appears  z.^  primus  inter  pares.  That 
the  idea  of  an  Emperor  is  put  down  as  a  possible  impossibility  is  sad, 
but  as  it  had  become  a  subject  of  scandal  it  was  better  to  give  it  up. 
Should  the  thunder-clouds  of  civil  war  really  burst  over  Germany,  the 
German  Emperor  would  come,  not  from  Schmerling  or  Gagern,  but 
by  the  grace  of  God.  How  much  I  wish  to  see  you,  how  many 
questions  I  would  gladly  have  answered  1  But  your  invitation  now 
in  the  midst  of  all  your  business  is  too  much  for  me  to  accept, 
though  I  cannot  be  certain  that  a  strong  influence  may  not  drive  me 
to  London  for  a  few  hours.  I  am  expecting  a  lot  of  MSS.  from 
India,  which  I  have  bought  for  myself,  as  I  did  not  think  that  the 
Berlin  Library  would  receive  permission  for  such  things  at  this 
moment.  I  am  in  direct  correspondence  with  the  Asiatic  Society  in 
Calcutta.  My  old  Veda  is  a  real  comfort  to  me,  despite  all  the 
wearisomeness  of  the  difficult  and  yet  mechanical  work  of  revision, 
but  it  will  require  much  time  and  labour  before  the  end  is  possible. 
Mr.  Langlois,  Professor  of  Rhetoric,  has  made  the  task  much  easier 
to  himself.  Without  commentary,  and,  as  he  proudly  says,  without 
philological  considerations,  he  has  translated  the  Veda  straight  away 
very  cavalieremeni :  the  two  first  books  have  just  appeared  at  Didot's. 
One  cannot  enter  into  discussion  with  a  man  of  this  sort,  and  yet  it  is 
provoking,  for  the  book  is  easy  to  read,  and  from  the  first  page  will 
give  ideas  of  the  Veda  which  will  afterwards  cost  much  trouble 
to  remove,  just  as  people  now  use  and  quote  the  translation  of  the 
Ezour-veda  by  Voltaire.  An  approximate  translation  of  the  Veda  can 
be  made,  and  I  believe  that  even  Wilson's  English  translation  will 
only  be  approximate.  And  yet  if  I  had  to  wait  ten  years,  I  would  not 
translate  a  single  line  till  the  whole  Vedic  antiquity  with  its  wealth  of 
thought  lay  clearly  before  me.  If  you  take  a  hymn  from  the  last  book 
of  the  Rig-veda  interesting  for  social  considerations  and  moral  ideas, 
as  a  whole  it  is  clear,  but  the  sequence  of  ideas  is  very  difficult. 
Forgive  this  long  scrawl.  You  need  not  read  it  all,  and  to-morrow  is 
Ash  Wednesday,  when  all  diplomatists  must  do  special  penance  for 
last  year.  The  poor  Pope  must  cover  his  head  with  ashes,  and 
the  new  Roman  Commonwealth  will  be  a  common  misery.  Gioberti 
seems  to  have  had  his  day  of  Damascus,  and  wishes  to  make  himself 
an  Italian  Gagern.  The  worst  are  always  the  best  when  once  the 
scales  fall  from  their  eyes.  They  won't  believe  this  in  Berlin,  but 
Messrs.  Brandenburg,  &c.,  are  really  too  good  for  these  bad  times.' 

Max  Miiller  devoted  nearly  all  the  year  after  his  return  from 
Germany  to  the  Veda,  and  only  gave  himself  a  few  days'  rest 


no  Hard  Work  [ch.  vn 

from  time  to  time,  as  he  continued  to  find  the  Oxford  climate 
very  trying.     He  writes  to  his  mother : — 

Translation.  Oxford,  April  26,  1850. 

'  One  thing  is  necessary  above  all  things  in  order  to  live  peaceably 
with  people,  that  is  in  Latin  humaniias,  German  Menschlichkeit.  It 
is  difficult  to  describe,  but  it  is  to  claim  as  little  as  possible  from 
others,  neither  an  obliging  temper  nor  gratitude,  and  yet  to  do  all  one 
can  to  please  others,  yet  without  expecting  them  always  to  find  it  out. 
As  men  are  made  up  of  contradictions,  they  are  the  more  grateful  and 
friendly  the  less  they  see  that  we  expect  gratitude  and  friendliness. 
Even  the  least  cultivated  people  have  their  good  points,  and  it  is  not 
only  far  better,  but  far  more  interesting  if  one  takes  trouble  to  find 
out  the  best  side  and  motives  of  people,  rather  than  the  worst  and 
most  selfish.  I  write  to  you  what  I  have  often  said  to  myself  when 
I  was  brought  in  contact  with  strangers,  and  because  I  find  that  on 
the  whole  I  get  on  well  with  them.  This  may  appear  very  artificial, 
but  life  is  an  art,  and  more  difficult  than  Sanskrit  or  anything  else. 
A  kindly  nature  can  win  us  by  taking  pains,  but  an  unkind  nature 
fails,  notwithstanding  all  art  and  cunning.  I  am  so  busy  that  one  day 
goes  after  another.  I  hardly  see  any  one ;  then  I  have  caught  cold, 
and  have  constant  toothache  and  headache.  But  one  xViWiXfaire  bonne 
mine  h  mauvaisjeu,  and  if  we  have  no  one  to  pour  out  our  ills  to,  we 
must  get  on  as  well  as  we  can.  I  meant  to  write  sooner,  but  I  have 
been  out  of  sorts  the  whole  time.' 

To  Bunsen,  who  had  begged  him  to  go  *  with  bag  and 
baggage  to  9,  Carlton  Terrace,  to  one  who  longs  to  see '  him, 
he  writes : — 

Translation.  Oxford,  May  17,  1850. 

'  How  gladly  would  I  accept  your  kind  invitation  ;  the  hours  I  am 
allowed  to  spend  with  you  are  not  only  the  happiest,  but  the  most 
instructive  and  most  remunerative ;  but  I  have  sold  my  freedom  and 
made  myself  a  day  labourer,  so  at  all  events  I  must  not  leave  the  cart 
sticking  fast  as  long  as  it  is  in  human  power  to  move  it.  I  have 
a  section  of  MS.  ready,  which  I  can  print  with  a  good  conscience. 
What  will  happen  later  I  don't  yet  know  myself,  but  hope  for  an 
interim  fit  aliquid.  I  hope,  however,  to  make  myself  free  for  a  couple 
of  days  as  soon  as  I  can — that  is,  as  soon  as  Wilson  leaves ;  he  comes 
next  week  to  Oxford  for  his  lectures.  I  have  heard  nothing  of 
Froude  for  a  long  time,  except  that  he  is  very  happily  married. 
I  don't  believe  he  is  the  author  of  any  "  red  and  raw  "  articles,  and 
as  far  as  I  can  discover  he  has  only  written  07ie  literary  article  for  the 


1850]  Bath — Kneller  Hall  11 1 

Leader,  but  I  cannot  answer  for  this,  as  I  don't  know  the  paper. 
I  cannot  get  Rawlinson's  treatise.  His  brother  says  he  told  him 
that  you  are  the  only  person  in  London  with  whom  he  can  talk  about 
Babylon.' 

A  little  later  we  find  Max  Miiller  paying  a  visit  to  Morier's 
father  and  mother  at  Bath.  He  was  delighted  with  the  place, 
and  still  more  with  the  affection  shown  by  the  old  people  to 
one  to  whose  devoted  nursing  their  only  son  owed  his  life — 
a  debt  of  gratitude  never  forgotten  by  any  member  of  the 
family,  who  all  remained  his  faithful  friends  till  called  away 
before  him  one  after  another. 

To  F.  Palgrave,  Esq. 

9,  Park  Place,  Oxford, /««<?  18,  1850. 

'  My  dear  Palgrave, — I  hope  I  shall  be  able  to  get  away  from 
Oxford  about  the  end  of  this  week,  so  if  you  can  give  me  a  bed 
I  should  like  to  come  to  Kneller  Hall  on  Friday  or  Saturday.  I  am 
thoroughly  tired  of  Oxford,  and  hope  I  shall  feel  jollier  again  when 
we  sit  together  on  your  tower  and  smoke  a  weed ;  but  no  In  Memo- 
riam,  rather  something  about  airy,  fairy  Lilians  and  other  sweet 
creatures  without  a  soul.  However,  I  do  not  mean  to  say  that 
Tennyson's  last  poems  are  not  very  beautiful,  yet  I  do  not  like  those 
open  graves  of  sorrow  and  despair,  and  wish  our  poets  would  imitate 
the  good  Christian  fashion  of  covering  them  with  flowers,  or  a  stone 
with  a  short  inscription  on  it.' 

From  Kneller  Hall  Max  Miiller  went  for  a  week  to  Bunsen, 
from  whom  he  always  gathered  fresh  courage  for  his  hard 
work  and  more  or  less  lonely  life.  Of  this  visit  Max  Miiller 
tells  his  mother : — 

Translation.  Oxford,  July  22,  1850. 

'  I  met  Ranch  the  sculptor  in  London,  who  was  staying  at  Bunsen's : 
a  really  delightful  old  man,  who  lives  only  for  the  beautiful,  and  has 
no  eyes  for  anything  else.  He  came  to  Oxford  with  me,  and  was 
quite  enchanted  with  it,  and  I  enjoyed  it  more  than  ever  with  him. 
He  was  quite  ill  with  the  wealth  of  the  buildings,  monuments, 
churches,  halls  and  pictures,  and  the  beauty  of  the  scenery,  and  really 
when  seeing  the  most  striking  things  he  seemed  hardly  able  to  control 
himself  One  day  I  went  with  him  to  Blenheim.  .  .  .  Later  on  I  had 
a  visit  from  Professor  Waagen,  the  Director  of  the  Berlin  INIuseum, 
and  one  of  the  best  German  connoisseurs  of  art ;  I  had  to  show  him 
about.     Then  came  Professor  Ennemoser  from  Munich,  and  lastly 


112         Essay  on  Comparative  Grammar    [ch.  vh 

George  Bunsen,  who  only  left  me  yesterday.     He  sings  beautifully, 
and  we  had  a  great  deal  of  music' 

From  the  following  letter  it  is  evident  that  his  Vedic  studies 
were  beginning  to  attract  general  attention,  and  that  an  article 
on  the  subject  was  desired  for  one  of  the  great  Quarterly- 
Reviews  : — 

To  Chevalier  Bunsen. 

Translation.  9,  Park  Place,  Oxford, /w/j/,  1850. 

'  Your  Excellency, — I  feel  much  refreshed  spiritually  by  having 
been  in  your  presence,  which  always  acts  like  fresh  spring  rain  on 
dusty  fields;  physically  I  feel  better,  though  I  cannot  say  well  yet, 
and  though  the  body  ought  to  be  subject  to  the  spirit,  still  the  spirit 
has  only  too  often  to  follow  the  lead  of  the  body. 

With  regard  to  Empson's  and  Dr.  Wilson's  letters,  it  is  difficult  to 
advise.  I  have  no  doubt  whatever,  that  something  can  be  written 
about  the  Veda  which  would  reach  even  the  dullest  ears.  Whether 
Dr.  Wilson  can  undertake  that  task  is  another  question.  You  know 
the  dry  hard  shell  in  which  the  Veda  is  presented  to  us,  and  which 
seems  still  harder  and  more  wooden  in  the  English  translation. 
Nevertheless  /  of  course  shall  be  glad  if  the  Rig-veda  is  dealt 
with  in  the  Edinburgh  Review,  and  if  Wilson  would  write  from 
the  standpoint  of  a  missionary,  and  would  show  how  the  knowledge 
and  bringing  into  light  of  the  Veda  would  upset  the  whole  existing 
system  of  Indian  theology,  it  might  become  of  real  interest.' 

Only  a  few  days  after  writing  the  above,  Max  Miiller  heard 
from  Bunsen  that  Eastwick,  the  translator  of  Bopp's  Com- 
parative Grammar,  wished  for  a  review  of  it  in  the  Quarterly, 
and  urging  him  to  undertake  it.  This  is  the  first  mention  of 
the  article  which  appeared  ultimately  in  the  Edinburgh  Review 
in  October,  1851,  and  which  was  the  first  of  several  articles 
written  by  Max  Miiller  for  that  periodical. 

To  Chevalier  Bunsen. 
Translation.  Oxford, /uly  14,  1850. 

'  I  accept  with  pleasure  the  proposal  with  regard  to  an  article  on 
Bopp's  Comparative  Grammar,  translated  by  Eastwick,  and  thank  you 
for  it.  I  must  ask  you  to  be  good  enough  to  assure  Mr.  Lockhart  of 
my  readiness.  I  do  not  think  that  a  short  review  will  cost  much 
time  and  labour,  and  if  you  will  allow  me,  next  week,  when  I  shall  be 
in  London  for  a  few  days,  I  will  call  and  get  some  directions  and  hints 
from  you.     God  help  Schleswig-Holstein,  and   not   punish   Prussia 


1850]  Rig-veda  113 

in  His  wrath.  If  the  Schleswig-Holsteiners  are  conquered  and 
annihilated,  they  have  fought  for  their  rights  and  have  fallen  gloriously 
on  the  field  of  honour,  after  the  will  of  history.  But  if  a  power,  to 
which  all  Europe  has  offered  the  leading  position,  allows  itself  to  be 
intimidated  by  the  threats  of  the  Danes  and  Russians,  and  withdraws 
a  given  promise,  that  is  worse  than  a  retreat  before  a  battle.' 

Two  days  later  he  writes  to  Palgrave  : — 

9,  Park  Place,  Oxfokt),  July  i6,  1850. 

'  My  DEAR  Palgrave, — If  you  have  ever  amused  yourself  in  spending 
a  whole  Long  Vacation  in  Oxford — of  which  I  do  not  think  you  have 
ever  been  guilty — you  would  know  that  it  is  more  like  purgatory  than 
anything  else.  Yet  here  I  am,  and  I  cannot  get  away  on  account  of 
one  miserable  MS.  which  I  must  go  and  look  at  every  day  while  I  am 
carrying  my  Rig-veda  through  the  Press.  I  should  have  liked  very 
much  to  spend  a  few  weeks  with  you  and  Froude,  and  I  have  tried 
everything  to  accomplish  my  plan,  but  it  was  impossible  without 
stopping  my  work  altogether,  which  for  many  reasons  I  could  not  do. 
I  shall  be  tied  to  Oxford  for  a  month  or  two  longer — a  pleasant 
prospect,  as  then  the  fine  season  will  be  over,  and  no  chance  left  for 
refreshing  one's  soul  except  in  the  cold  weather.  However,  it  is  no 
use  writing  epistolae  ex  Ponto!  I  am  glad  to  hear  that  Froude  gets 
on  so  well,  and  that  his  choice  has  been  such  a  happy  one.  Johnson 
is  back,  and  looks  very  joyful,  as  well  as  his  bride.  Professor  Waagen 
is  staying  with  him,  and  I  am  sure  you  would  enjoy  their  conversation. 
I  can  only  admire  their  skill  in  admiring  the  most  ugly,  stiff  and  out 
of  joint  pictures :  however,  such  is  art.' 

From  the  very  moment  that  his  own  position  became 
tolerably  settled  by  the  patronage  bestowed  on  his  Rig-veda 
by  the  East  India  Company,  Max  Miiller  was  always  trying  to 
help  others  in  some  respects  less  fortunate  than  himself.  A  long 
correspondence  exists  as  to  the  place  of  German  teacher  at 
I^'Jgby,  which  he  tried  in  1849  to  secure  for  Dr.  Pauli.  Soon 
after  the  latter  became  private  secretary  to  Bunsen,  Max 
heard  of  a  place  vacant  at  the  University  of  Berlin,  and  writes 
to  Pauli : — 

Translation. 

'If  Bunsen  is  interested  about  it,  he  should  not  forget  Weber.     He 

is  older  than ,  and  has  done  more,  and  then  has  a  wife  and  child. 

Please  do  not  forget  to  mention  this.' 


'o^ 


And  in  the  following  letter,  whilst  presenting  his  father's 
I  I 


114  German  Lyric  Poetry  [ch.  vn 

poems   to    Bunsen,    he  tries   to   do   another   friend    a   good 
turn : — 

Tra7islatmi.  Oxford,  October  9,  1850. 

'  I  am  sending  the  new  edition  of  my  father's  poems  which 
I  brought  out  during  my  German  "  Winter-journey."  There  are 
many  new  things  in  it,  and  I  trust  the  work  will  help  to  keep  alive  the 
memory  of  the  poet  who  died  so  early !  You  have  spoken  of  him  to 
me  so  often,  and  in  a  manner  so  grateful  to  my  feelings,  that  it  is 
a  great  pleasure  to  be  allowed  to  send  you  this  new  edition.  Then 
I  wish  to  ask  your  advice.  I  visited  Froude  this  week  to  make  the 
acquaintance  of  his  wife  and  daughter.  He  is  thinking  of  an  article 
on  German  poetry  since  Goethe.  He  has  collected  some  good 
material,  especially  very  successful  translations  from  Uhland,  Heine, 
and  a  few  poems  of  my  father's.  Do  you  think  that  the  Quarterly 
would  open  its  columns  to  an  article  on  Uhland,  Miiller,  Heine, 
Lenau,  &c.,  and  is  it  too  much  to  ask  you  to  persuade  Lockhart  to 
take  such  an  article  ?  It  is  quite  understood  that  the  subject  would  be 
treated  purely  from  the  historical  and  aesthetic  point  of  view.' 

Towards  the  end  of  this  year,  after  an  almost  continuous 
summer  of  labour  at  the  Veda,  Max  Miiller  was  seized  with 
a  sudden  feeling  of  utter  weariness  of  England  and  his  life 
here,  and  writes  to  Bunsen  : — 

Translation.  Oxford,  November,  1850. 

'  As  soon  as  I  received  your  letter  I  wrote  to  Froude.  I  do  not 
think  that  he  can  write  as  comprehensive  an  article  as  you  describe. 
What  he  could  best  write  would  be  a  small  genre  picture  of  German 
lyric  poetry  since  Goethe,  the  time  when  the  old  man  tripped  over 
the  roots  of  the  trees  he  had  himself  planted;  an  estimate  of  the 
(compared  with  Goethe)  poetae  viediocres  to  whom  with  Horace 
one  willingly  denies  all  right  to  existence,  because  they  have  never, 
like  Homer,  Dante,  Goethe,  and  Byron,  visited  the  devil  in  hell.  If 
Froude  once  left  this  sphere  to  sketch  a  picture  of  the  mental  and 
religious  struggles  of  the  Fatherland  since  Goethe,  he  would  from 
want  of  accurate  knowledge  fall  into  extremes ;  and  the  Edinburgh, 
which  is  not  far  behind  the  Quarterly  in  anti-German  feeling,  would 
be  closed  against  him.  The  prospects  for  Germans  in  England  get 
steadily  worse  :  happy  he  who  can  live  in  his  own  land.  Things  look 
very  grey.  The  conferences  in  Bregenz  and  Warsaw  have  made 
a  new  revolution  a  duty  for  every  German,  and  those  who  are  by  nature 
inclined  to  a  bouleversement  mode're'  rub  their  hands.  But  a  stormy 
sea  also  is  splendid,  and  shows  who  are  true  men.     We  must  expect 


I 


1850]  Wishes  to  leave  England  115 

that  some  of  our  stately  steersmen  will  be  seasick,  but  there  are  men 
who  fear  neither  wind  nor  weather,  and  who  do  not  think  that 
Germany's  peace  is  too  dear  to  buy  at  any  price.  I  am  thinking  of 
writing  to  Lassen  to  ask  him  whether  he  can  employ  me  in  Bonn. 
I  am  heartily  tired  of  England,  and  if  there  is  nothing  in  Germany 
I  will  try  India.  My  work  is  entirely  at  a  standstill,  my  MSS.  from 
India  lost  for  the  second  ti?ne  by  the  shipwreck  of  the  Manchester. 
I  must  therefore  come  to  a  decision.  The  problem  of  the  Egyptian 
language  occupies  me  very  much,  but  it  is  difficult  to  find  guiding 
principles  when  the  comparison  depends  on  the  mere  mass,  not  on 
the  organization  of  the  language.  Benfey's  researches  prove  the 
Semitic  character  of  the  Egyptian  grammar  beyond  all  doubt,  and 
much  will  become  simpler  and  clearer  by  the  old  Egyptian  grammar. 
But  in  the  comparison  of  words  with  the  Indo-European,  we  expose 
ourselves  to  many  dangers,  especially  as  long  as  a  sufficient  number 
of  Indo-European,  or  rather  common  roots  in  Semitic  also,  are  not 
authenticated.  To-morrow  Wilson  comes  to  Oxford,  with  whom  I 
have  a  good  deal  to  discuss ;  then  a  decision  must  be  made  as  to 
beginning  a  new  life.' 

Bunsen's  answer  came  by  return  of  post :  *  Your  letter  has 
frightened  me  by  what  you  tell  me  of  your  strong  impulse  to 
go  to  Bonn  or  Benares.  This  is  the  very  worst  moment  for 
Bonn.  .  .  .  The  crisis  in  our  country  disturbs  everything,'  and 
ends  by  urging  him  to  go  up  to  London  at  once  and  stay  at 
the  Legation.     To  this  Max  replied  : — 

Translation.  Oxford,  November  5,  1850. 

'  How  willingly  would  I  have  accepted  your  invitation  to  London, 
were  I  not  kept  by  two  lectures  which  take  up  my  whole  time,  one 
on  astronomy  by  Professor  Donkin,  and  another  by  Wilson  to  learn 
Hindustani.  An  interruption  would  throw  me  out  too  much,  especially 
in  the  astronomy,  which  I  can  only  follow  by  the  closest  attention. 
I  have  spoken  to  Wilson ;  he  advises  me  to  stay  in  England,  or  to  go 
to  India,  but  I  do  not  think  he  would  make  difficulties  if  I  had 
a  definite  purpose  in  Germany,  that  is  if  I  could  tell  him  that  I  really 
expected  a  position  in  a  University.  Therefore  I  think  it  is  best  first 
to  hear  Lassen's  views,  to  know  whether  he  would  recommend  the 
faculty  in  Bonn  to  give  me  an  appointment,  or  whether  he  would 
rather  keep  Sanskrit  to  himself.  I  am  quite  ready  to  stay  another 
year  here,  to  print  my  Introduction,  but  I  should  like  to  have  a  certain 
prospect  and  not  live  on  at  random.  My  early  Oxford  friends,  with 
whom  I  felt  at  home,  leave  this  one  after  another,  and  it  is  not  worth 

I  1 


ii6  Appointed  to  lecture  [ch.  vii 

while  to  make  new  acquaintances.  And  then  in  spite  of  all  disorders 
and  crises  I  am  drawn  back  towards  Germany,  or  if  I  must  live  in 
a  foreign  country,  I  would  rather  go  to  the  Antipodes  than  live  in 
suspense  in  England.  That  I  am  not  in  my  right  place  here,  I 
know  and  feel  more  each  day.  So  away,  and  the  sooner  the  better, 
and  God  will  help  me  further. 

'  Wilson  received  a  letter  from  Benares  the  other  day,  which  says 
that  the  learned  Brahmans  there  shook  their  heads  mightily  at  first, 
but  now,  after  having  received  and  read  a  specimen  of  200  pages, 
they  are  highly  pleased  with  the  edition  of  the  Veda.  They  have 
settled  among  themselves,  and  it  is  common  talk  in  Benares,  that 
a  colony  of  Germans  will  come  and  settle  there,  and  turn  Brahmans. 
So  if  all  my  plans  fail,  I  may  perhaps  find  a  refuge  there.' 

It  was  in  the  very  midst  of  all  this  uncertainty  that  he  was 
asked  by  the  Curators  of  the  Taylor  Institution  to  under- 
take two  courses  of  lectures  as  deputy  for  his  friend  Trithen, 
who  had  suddenly  fallen  into  a  state  of  melancholia,  quite 
incapacitating  him  from  work.  He  tells  his  mother  on 
December  14 : — 

Translation. 

'I  received  for  my  birthday  a  quite  unexpected  present,  a  letter 
from  the  University  asking  me  to  lecture  in  the  place  of  Trithen,  who 
is  very  ill.  He  lectures  on  modern  literature  and  languages.  I  can- 
not say  I  care  very  much  for  it,  as  it  must  break  into  my  other  work, 
but  as  my  Oxford  friends  and  also  Bunsen  were  very  anxious  I  should 
undertake  it,  I  wrote  to  accept.  The  first  course  will  be  on  the 
History  and  Origin  of  Modern  Languages,  and  the  second  on  the 
Nibelu7ige7i.  If  they  make  me  a  Professor,  I  shall  not  object  to  it, 
though  I  should  prefer  a  German  Professorship.     Well,  we  shall  see.' 

Though  wishing  Max  Miiller  to  accept  the  offer  to  lecture 
in  Oxford,  Bunsen  had  written  to  him  on  December  18,  urging 
him  to  pay  a  flying  visit  to  Bonn  before  Christmas  to  see  what 
the  prospects  there  were,  adding :  '  As  a  friend  of  many  years' 
standing,  you  will  forgive  me  if  I  say,  if  the  journey  to  Bonn 
is  not  financially  convenient  to  you  just  now,  I  depend  on 
your  thinking  of  me,' 

To  this  letter  Max  replied : — 

Translation.  Oxford,  December  13,  1850. 

'  Many  thanks  for  the  kind  sympathy  which,  even  in  the  storm  and 
Stress  of  these  evil  times,  you,  an  always  faithful  friend,  have  shown 


1850]  Deputy  Professor  117 

me.  I  quite  acknowledge  how  well  it  would  have  been  had  I  been 
able  myself  to  reconnoitre  the  position  at  Bonn.  But  before  I  received 
George's  answer,  I  had  written  to  Lassen,  to  ask  his  advice  in  this 
affair.  So  I  could  not  change  things ;  the  first  impression  had  been  made, 
and  could  hardly  be  altered  by  my  cursory  presence.  I  will  now  quietly 
await  what  he  writes,  and  have  meantime  accepted  the  Oxford  invita- 
tion to  give  two  courses  of  lectures.  I  only  hope  they  won't  cost  too 
much  time,  for  if  I  go  to  Bonn  at  Michaelmas,  and  wish  first  to  finish 
the  second  volume  of  the  Rig-veda,  and  the  Prolegomena  in  which 
a  Latin  catalogue  of  the  Bodleian  MSS.  is  to  appear,  I  have  my  hands 
full.  If  Lassen  makes  difiiculties  I  must  decide  to  stay  in  England, 
till  a  kindly  fate  leads  me  out  of  the  Oxford  hermit's  cell,  into  free 
German  air,  or  into  a  forest  solitude  in  India.  Here  is  the  review  to 
which  you  were  good  enough  to  promise  your  powerful  recommenda- 
tion. I  should  be  very  glad  if  the  Edinburgh  would  take  it,  but  I  am 
afraid  I  have  hardly  hit  off  the  right  tone,  though  I  tried  hard  in 
writing  it  to  think  of  ladies  uninterruptedly.  The  advice  "think  of 
a  lady  whilst  you  are  writing  "  does  not  come  direct  from  Lockhart, 
whom  I  never  saw,  but  from  Eastwick,  whom  Lockhart  taught.' 

Among  the  references  which  the  Taylorian  Curators  re- 
ceived before  they  appointed  Max  Miiller  as  a  deputy  for 
Trithen,  the  following  was  sent  in  by  Wilson.  Though  it  in 
no  way  guarantees  Max's  gifts  as  a  lecturer  on  Modern 
European  Languages,  it  shows  what  Wilson,  the  Nestor  of 
Sanskritists  as  he  has  been  called,  thought  of  his  young  friend 

as  a  Sanskrit  scholar : — 

November,  1850. 

'  His  knowledge  of  the  Sanskrit  language  I  regard  as  most  com- 
prehensive and  critical,  and  displaying  a  more  than  usual  familiarity 
with  the  principles  of  its  structure  as  established  by  native  gram- 
marians. I  consider  him  also  as  extensively  conversant  with  the 
general  literature  of  the  Hindus,  especially  with  that  part  which  relates 
to  their  traditions,  institutes,  and  laws,  and  I  look  upon  him  as  with- 
out an  equal  in  that  interesting  and  important  department  of  it  to 
which  he  has  particularly  devoted  his  attention,  the  Literature  of  the 
Vedas,  the  study  of  their  ancient  texts,  and  of  the  many  voluminous 
and  difficult  subsidiary  compositions  which  are  indispensable  for  their 
elucidation.' 

Of  Max  Miiller's  position  at  Oxford,  even  in  these  early 
days,  Canon  Farrar  gives  an  interesting  account : — 

'  The  first  time  when  I  met  him,  was  at  dinner  in  the  Hall  at  Balliol 


ii8  Article  for  Edinburgh  Review       [ch.  vn 

about  1850.  At  that  time,  before  society  in  Oxford  was  broken  up 
into  sets  during  the  transitionary  period  of  University  reform,  there  were 
hardly  any  private  dinners.  Certain  days  each  week  were  assigned  in 
each  College  for  inviting  graduate  friends  from  other  Colleges  to  the 
high  table.  On  the  night  in  question  I  was  dining  with  Jowett, 
and  Max  Miiller  with  Walrond.  Though  the  talk  during  dinner  was 
not  strictly  literary,  some  point  of  literature  turned  up,  and  Miiller's 
opinion  on  it  was  asked  across  the  table  by  Walrond.  Instantly  there 
was  silence  among  the  twenty  men  at  table.  All  listened  to  this 
stripling  (as  he  appeared).  Stanley,  who  was  sitting  next  to  me,  and 
who  had  been  discussing  the  memoir  of  Sterling,  stopped  and  listened 
attentively.  Miiller  replied  to  the  question  with  great  modesty,  though 
with  self-possession,  and  with  a  brevity  which  allowed  conversation  to 
flow  back  soon  into  its  previous  course.  I  instantly  asked  Jowett  who 
he  was,  and  learnt  that  he  was  a  young  German  of  great  promise 
who  had  been  in  Oxford  for  about  two  years  and  was  employed 
in  editing  the  oldest  Sanskrit  literature.  I  name  this  as  a  sign  of  the 
profound  respect  which  at  so  early  a  period  was  shown  to  him  in  an 
elite  society  like  that  of  Balliol.' 

Christmas  of  this  year  was  spent  in  Oxford,  though  Bunsen 
had  invited  his  young  friend  again  to  Totteridge,  but  Max 
had  already  promised  Victor  Carus  that  they  should  spend  it 
together ;  and  he  tells  his  mother  they  had  a  tree,  and  gave 
each  other  many  presents,  and  with  Belle's  assistance  passed 
as  happy  an  evening  as  they  could  with  their  thoughts  far 
away  in  their  German  homes. 

The  year  1851  was  the  determining  point  of  Max  Miiller's 
future  life.  Forced  to  continue  his  stay  at  Oxford,  to  print 
the  Rig-veda,  he  found  it  necessary  to  have  some  other  means 
of  support  than  the  Veda  alone,  in  order  to  live  the  rather  ex- 
pensive life  of  a  young  man  in  Oxford  society.  This  was  found 
for  him  in  the  invitation  to  lecture  in  his  friend  Trithen's  place. 
At  first  he  was  only  asked  to  give  two  courses  of  lectures,  but 
they  were  so  well  attended  and  made  such  an  impression, 
that  he  was  invited  to  continue  his  task,  and  was  appointed 
Deputy  Professor  as  soon  as  it  became  apparent  that  Trithen 
was  hopelessly  ill,  and  on  his  death  was  elected  to  succeed 
him  in  the  Taylorian  Professorship.  The  close  of  this  year 
too  saw  his  first  connexion  with  the  Editibtcrgh  Review,  and 
from  this  time  on  he  added  to  his  income  by  constant  con- 


1851]  His  Lectures  119 

tributions  to  various  periodicals  in  England  and   Germany, 
and  some  years  later  in  America  also. 

About  his  article  for  the  Edinburgh  he  writes  to  Bunsen  : — 

Traiislation.  O^yq^h,  January  27,  1851. 

'  I  have  been  waiting  for  Stanley's  return,  to  talk  to  him  about  the 
article  for  the  Edinburgh.  He  tells  me  he  can  write  neither  a  head 
nor  a  tail  to  it:  he  thinks  it  wants  no  head,  though  a  tail  might 
perhaps  be  useful.  Jowett  and  Morier  have  promised  me  to  provide 
the  perhaps  needed  additions ;  I  think  Stanley  is  too  busy  and  has  no 
time  for  it.  If  you  agree  to  this,  and  will  show  me  the  friendly  service 
of  sending  my  MS.  to  Empson  with  a  few  words,  the  thing  can  perhaps 
be  carried  through,  and  I  believe  it  will  be  of  great  use  to  me  here  in 
Oxford.  My  lectures  are  written,  and  your  kindly  advice  as  far  as 
possible  followed.  Jowett  is  now  Select  Preacher,  and  preached  an 
excellent  sermon  last  Sunday.  I  hope  he  will  publish  it  with  the  others. 
Even  the  heathen  acknowledge  it  was  beautiful  language.  Sir  R.  Inglis 
was  present,  but  seemed  httle  edified.' 

To  his  mother  he  wrote  the  same  day  : — 

Translation.  Qy^FO^iy,  January  27,  1851. 

'  I  went  to  London  lately  to  a  party  at  Bunsen's,  most  interesting, 
where  I  met  Macaulay,  the  historian  and  former  Minister,  Lord 
Mahon,  Radowitz,  and  many  other  celebrities.  Old  Bunsen  is  always 
cheerful,  and  studies  Egyptian  and  Chinese  to  drive  politics  out  of 
his  head.  In  a  fortnight  my  lectures  begin.  I  have  only  undertaken 
them  for  six  months,  but  Bunsen  persuades  me  strongly  to  remain, 
and  I  am  thinking  it  over  carefully.  If  I  undertake  it  endrely 
I  should  have  £400  a  year  for  giving  twenty-four  lectures,  and  more 
than  half  the  year  vacaUon.  I  could  go  on  with  the  Veda,  and  should 
have  an  income  of  about  £600,  with  which  one  can  live  well  in 
Oxford,  and  then  you  could  come  and  pay  me  a  visit  for  as  long  as 
you  liked.  But  do  not  talk  about  it — it  is  all  still  uncertain,  and 
I  have  not  myself  determined  to  take  it,  but  would  far  rather  be 
a  Professor  in  Germany,  if  I  could  only  at  the  same  time  carry  on 
printing  the  Veda,  for  that  is  still  my  chief  business.  At  all  events, 
my  prospects  are  not  bad,  and  God  will  help  me  further.  I  have 
hired  a  piano  again,  though  I  have  not  much  time  for  music,  but  my 
Oxford  friends  expect  it,  for  they  all  like  to  listen,  though  few  of  them 
play.' 

Of  these  early   days   and  first  lectures,   Professor  Coweli 


120  Letter  from  Professor  Cozvell       [ch.  vn 

(now  Professor  of  Sanskrit  at  Cambridge)  writes,  December  24, 

1900  : — 

'  My  dear  Mrs.  Max  Mijller, — It  has  occurred  to  me  that  I  could 
not  better  illustrate  Max  Miiller's  influence  on  his  contemporaries  than 
by  briefly  describing  his  influence  on  my  own  career, 

'I  went  up  to  Oxford  as  a  married  undergraduate  in  January,  1851. 
I  had  previously  studied  the  classical  Sanskrit  poetry  by  myself,  and 
I  eagerly  embraced  the  opportunity  of  reading  with  the  Boden  Pro- 
fessor. I  used  to  go  to  his  lodgings  at  the  end  of  the  High  Street. 
It  was  on  one  of  these  afternoons  that  the  Professor  suddenly  stopped 
our  reading  and  said,  "  Dr.  Max  Miiller  is  going  to  deliver  his  first 
lecture  on  Comparative  Philology  at  two  o'clock  to-day ;  let  us  walk 
up  to  the  Taylor  Buildings  and  hear  it."  The  lecture  was  a  written 
one,  and  was  delivered  to  a  large  and  attentive  audience,  and  to  most 
of  those  present,  as  well  as  myself,  it  was  an  introduction  to  the  new 
world  of  Comparative  Philology.  It  was  the  first  of  a  series  of  such 
lectures,  all  of  which  I  carefully  attended.  After  the  lecture,  Professor 
Wilson  introduced  me  to  the  lecturer,  who  kindly  invited  me  to  take 
tea  with  him  that  evening.  We  soon  became  fast  friends,  and  I  found 
in  him  the  very  guide  and  counsellor  that  I  needed.  He  was  espe- 
cially suited  to  inspire  a  younger  student  with  enthusiasm.  He  soon 
discovered  that  I  was  fairly  acquainted  with  the  classical  Sanskrit  and 
its  literature,  but  knew  nothing  of  the  grammarians,  the  commentators, 
or  the  Rig-veda  ;  and  he  read  with  me  some  of  the  first  volume, 
then  just  published,  of  his  great  edition  of  the  Rig-veda. 

'  During  the  six  years  of  my  life  at  Oxford,  Max  Miiller  was  my 
constant  guide  in  my  Sanskrit  studies  ;  he  taught  me  to  read  Sayana's 
Commentary  and  some  of  the  philosophical  works,  but,  above  all,  he 
imbued  me  with  his  own  enthusiasm  for  Indian  literature  and  his  deep 
sympathy  with  the  Hindu  mind.  When  I  went  out  to  Calcutta  in  1856 
I  tried  to  carry  out  many  of  his  suggestions,  and  devoted  my  spare 
time  to  further  studies  on  the  lines  which  he  had  first  pointed  out 
to  me ;  and  my  Brahman  pandits  only  carried  on  the  work  which  he 
had  commenced  for  me  in  Oxford.' 

Mr.  Tuckwell  may  again  be  quoted : — '  I  remember  that 
Sir  Thomas  (then  Mr.)  Acland  and  I  went  together  to  Max 
Miiller's  opening  lecture.  Acland  was  disturbed,  fidgeted, 
bit  his  nails — "  It  frightens  one,"  he  said.  ...  I  attended 
Miiller's  stimulating  philological  lectures,  learning  from  his 
lips  the  novel  doctrine  of  the  Aryan  migrations,  and  the 
rationale  of  Greek  myths ;  the  charm  of  his  delivery  height- 


1851]         Letter  from  Mr.  Story-Maskelyne  121 

ened  by  a  few  Germanisms  of  pronunciation  and  terminology.' 
Mr.  Story-Maskelyne  writes  of  these  early  Oxford  days : — 

Basset  Down  House,  Swindon,  October  13,  1901. 

'  Dear  Mrs.  Max  M-Oller, — In  reply  to  your  letter,  I  regret  to  tell 
you  that  I  cannot  put  my  hand  on  letters  from  Max.  My  acquain- 
tance with  him  began  almost  immediately  after  my  being  called  to 
Oxford  to  take  the  duties  of  one  of  the  Chairs  held  by  Dr.  Buckland, 
at  the  time  when  his  genial  and  energetic  nature  was  clouded  by 
mental  failure.  Max  was  summoned — I  think  in  the  same  term  as 
myself,  in  1851 — to  fulfil  the  duties  of  the  Chair  of  another  Pro- 
fessor under  a  similar  eclipse.  My  impression  is  that  I  first  made 
his  acquaintance  at  the  house  of  Donkin,  the  Professor  of  Astronomy, 
a  fine  mathematician  and  scholar  as  well  as  musician  ;  one,  indeed, 
like  Henry  Smith,  of  those  men  of  refined  and  beautiful  nature  that 
one  meets  only  occasionally  in  the  world,  and  who  leave  it  too  soon. 
There  Max  was  at  home.  In  that  congenial  atmosphere  there  also 
moved  Cams,  a  physiologist  and  friend  of  Max.  Often  would  he, 
a  master  of  the  violin,  accompany  Max,  under  whose  hands  the 
piano  became  a  poem  in  music.  I  am  no  musician,  but  even  to-day 
I  can  remember  with  enjoyment  the  dual  music  that  Max  and  Cams 
used  to  produce ;  occasionally,  too,  in  my  own  queer  little  rooms 
under  the  Ashmolean,  where  I  retained  a  piano  that  would  suggest 
this  use  of  it. 

'  You  know  that  Max  and  I  were  nearly  of  the  same  age,  and  I  am 
now  seventy-eight,  with  a  memory,  alas  I  no  longer  quick  and  vivid. 
The  figure  of  Max  is,  however,  never  dimmed  in  my  vision.  Though 
near  my  age,  I  never  looked  on  him  as  less  than  ten  years  older  than 
myself,  in  wisdom,  tact,  experience  of  Hfe,  and  knowledge  of  men. 
"  Klug  "  was  the  term  Bunsen  applied  to  him,  and  though  he  seems 
from  the  beginning  to  have  lived  with  the  Olympians,  whether  in- 
tellectual or  social,  it  was  they  who  sought  him  rather,  I  think,  than  he 
who  climbed  into  their  company. 

'  He  lived  in  those  days  in  a  little  lodging  in  a  terrace  in  the  Banbury 
Road,  with  a  litde  companion.  Belle  his  dog.  Many  and  many  were 
the  walks — Oxonice,  constitutionals — which  we  three  had  together  in 
those  years,  1851-7,  and  many  of  the  interests  of  my  later  life  had 
their  germs  planted  then. 

'  Johnson,  the  Radchffe  Observer,  was  one  of  his  Oxford  friends. 
Frank  Palgrave,  Froude  (of  course),  Morier  were  among  the  con- 
temporaries outside  of  Oxford  whom  one  met  with  him. 

'  Well  do  I  remember  his  lectures.    I  think  his  first  course  ^  was  on 

^  It  was  his  second  course. 


122  Early  Lectures  [ch.  vn 

the  Nihelungen-Lied.  They  were  given  in  the  Taylor  Building, 
and  were  remarkable  in  various  ways.  It  was  a  new  star  in  the 
Oxford  firmament.  Probably  not  half  a  dozen  of  his  audience  knew 
anything  of  the  old  epic  or  its  history.  Before  the  best  of  the  men 
from  the  Common  Rooms — a  considerable  gathering — stood  the 
young  German  Professor,  and  the  weird  old  tale,  or  redaction  of  old 
tales,  he  illuminated  with  side-lights  from  sagas  and  myths  gathered 
from  the  folk-lore  of  Iceland  and  of  Gamle  Norge  ;  and  through 
the  whole  ran  the  sad  refrain  so  often  recurring  in  the  rugged  music 
of  the  poem.  But  for  pure,  terse  English  and  luminous  exposition 
I  do  not  think  any  Oxford  man — unless  it  was  Church  of  Oriel 
(afterwards  Dean  of  St.  Paul's) — could  have  given  such  a  course  of 
lectures.  It  was  a  new  light,  a  new  idea  of  literature  and  lecture, 
that  Max  imported  into  the  grey  old  walls  of  beautiful  Oxford. 
Mr.  Philip  Pusey  rode  over  all  the  way  from  his  place  near  Faringdon 
with  his  boy-son  to  hear  each  lecture,  an  early  homage  to  the  rising 
fame  of  the  redactor  of  the  Rig-veda.  I  had  to  sit  at  the  back  of  the 
audience,  and  to  offer  faithful  criticism  on  idiomatic  expression  and 
on  pronunciation.  I  had  little  to  offer,  though  of  course  now  and  then 
Max's  fine  English  touched  an  inexact  note,  more  particularly  in  the 
latter  difficulty.  He  received  such  criticisms  with  great  kindness. 
But,  in  truth,  the  lectures  were  too  interesting  to  allow  of  one's 
thinking  of  such  very  slight  and  by  no  means  unpicturesque  foils 
to  them.  Natural  Science  was  not  in  high  vogue  then  at  Oxford, 
but  the  leaves  on  the  trees  were  beginning  to  stir,  so  that  when 
Max  proclaimed  his  thesis  that  Comparative  Philology  and  the 
historical  development  of  language  should  rank  with  the  Natural 
Sciences,  there  was  a  little  rustle  of  scepticism,  though  in  fact  he 
was  anticipating  the  assertion  of  evolution  being  the  key  to  Natural 
Science. 

'  I  should  be  tiring  you — perhaps  I  may  say  any  one  but  you — were 
I  to  continue  reeling  off  these  phonographs  of  a  somewhat  clouded 
memory.  But  these  shadows  of  the  past,  as  they  seem  to  grow  into 
images  and  visions,  call  for  my  pen  to  record  them  as  they  flit  across 
my  memory.  Yours  very  truly, 

'N.  Story-Maskelyne.' 

Max  Miiller's  first  course  was  on  '  The  History  of  Modern 
Languages,'  in  the  Lent  Term  of  1851  ;  his  second  on  'The 
Home  of  the  Nibelungen ' ;  and  the  third,  in  the  Autumn 
Term,  on  '  The  Origin  of  the  Romance  Languages.'  The 
Science  of  Comparative  Philology  was  then  little  known  in 
England,  and  these   lectures  of  the  young  foreigner  struck 


1851]  Success  of  Lectures  123 

a  new,  almost  strange  note,  amid  the  classical  studies  of  the 
old  University,  opening  out  a  dim  vista  of  life  far  older  than 
the  times  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  and  of  a  language  more 
perfect  than  Hebrew,  and  with  which,  as  the  elder  sister  of 
the  Teutonic  tongues,  Englishmen  ought  to  become  better 
acquainted. 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  Oxford,  March  13,  1851. 

'  My  lectures  are  nearly  at  an  end,  and  did  very  well.  I  had  an 
audience  of  from  fifty  to  seventy  people,  mostly  Professors  and  tutors, 
and  a  number  of  ladies.  I  must  prepare  my  course  for  next  term, 
and  I  get  no  rest  and  the  Veda  gets  on  very  slowly,  and  so  my 
finances  suff"er.  I  have  not  yet  decided  whether  I  shall  stay  here.  My 
friends  persuade  me  to  do  so,  but  it  has  its  difficulties  and  disagreeables, 
as  no  foreigner  can  have  the  position  an  Englishman  would  have. 
I  shall  quietly  wait  what  comes,  and  if  they  make  me  a  good  offer 
take  it ;  at  all  events,  for  the  near  future.' 

The  next  day  Max  Miiller  writes  to  Bunsen : — • 

Translation.  March  14,  1851. 

'  For  some  days  I  have  been  intending  to  write  to  you,  to  thank 
you  warmly  for  your  friendly  recommendation  of  my  article  to 
Empson.  I  should  like,  as  there  is  so  much  time,  that  Empson 
should  return  me  the  MS.  to  look  through  again,  before  it  is  printed. 
During  my  lectures  some  jokes  have  occurred  to  me,  which  appear 
to  amuse  John  Bull,  and  which  I  should  like  to  add.  The  lectures 
are  nearly  over ;  to-day  is  the  last  but  one.  They  went  off  better 
than  I  expected.     Many  people  took  real  interest  in  them.' 

The  same  day  Bunsen  writes : — 

Translation.  London. 

*  It  is  such  a  delight  to  be  able  at  last  to  write  to  you,  to  tell  you 
that  few  events  this  year  have  given  me  such  great  pleasure  as  your 
noble  success  in  Oxford.  The  English  have  shown  how  gladly  they 
will  listen  to  something  good  and  new,  if  any  one  will  lay  it  before 
them  in  their  own  halls.  Morier  has  faithfully  reported  everything, 
and  my  whole  family  sympathize  in  your  triumph,  as  if  it  concerned 
ourselves.' 

Through  this  vacation,  Max  Miiller  stayed  quietly  in 
Oxford  to  prepare  his  next  lectures,  and  seems  to  have  been 


124  Lectures  on  the  Nihelungen  [ch.  vn 

far  from  well,  suffering,  as  usual,  from  the  Oxford  climate. 
He  writes  to  Dr.  Pauli : — 

Translation,  April,  1851. 

'  I  have  long  wanted  to  write  to  you,  but  I  have  been  so  unwell  the 
whole  time,  that  I  could  not  manage  it.  Cold,  cough,  headache,  and 
toothache  are  a  quartette  that  makes  one  quite  miserable ;  now  I  only 
have  the  solo  of  toothache,  but  that  is  enough  to  spoil  life.  I  would 
willingly  have  gone  to  London,  but  I  cannot  now,  I  have  lectures 
to  write,  &c.  Have  you  got  any  treatise  on  the  Nibelungen  you  can 
lend  me } ' 

To  Chevalier  Bunsen. 

Translation.  Aprils  1851. 

'After  the  end  of  next  term  I  hope  to  go  to  London,  and  there 
are  many  things  that  I  wish  to  tell  you,  and  consult  about  with  you. 

'  I  shall  lecture  this  term  on  the  Nibelungen,  chiefly  with  reference 
to  the  Homeric  question.  For  the  relation  of  the  poetical  order  to 
the  legendary  material  I  take  Firdusi;  for  the  fact  of  preservation 
in  the  memory,  the  Alahdbhdrata ;  for  the  loss  and  histoiizing  of  the 
legend,  Niebuhr's  Rome ;  for  the  changing  and  misunderstanding  of 
epic  songs,  the  Nibelungen  compared  with  the  Edda.  The  whole  is 
to  be  a  continuation  of  comparative  philology,  brought  about  by 
the  transition  into  the  Epos,  in  its  three  grades  of  legends  of  Gods, 
Heroes,  and  Men.' 

Yet,  notwithstanding  his  hard  work,  Max  Muller  could  write 
to  Dr.  Pauli : — 

Translation.  May  9. 

'  In  spite  of  wind  and  weather  we  are  very  jolly,  and  play  Beethoven 
trios,  duets,  and  solos  every  evening,  and  two  little  singing  birds  from 
London  have  settled  here,  and  so  we  Mendelssohn  a  good  deal.' 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  June  i. 

'  I  am  glad  my  lectures  will  soon  be  over,  and  that  I  shall  then 
return  to  my  regular  work.  I  have  again  had  a  good  audience,  and 
people  have  shown  great  interest.  How  it  will  be  later  I  do  not 
know,  and  trouble  myself  but  little  about  it.  If  the  Professorship 
were  definitely  offered  me,  I  would  take  it  for  five  years.  It  is 
a  pleasant  position,  and  independent,  and  affairs  in  Germany  are  such, 
that  I  don't  desire  any  Government  appointment.  But  I  shall  not 
carry  on  the  lectures  provisionally,  as  they  hinder  me  so  much  from 
my  other  work,  and  I  can  earn  much  more  money  by  the  Veda. 
If  I  could  only  send  you  something  from  time  to  time,  that  you  might 


1851]  Visit  to  the   Froudes  125 

make  your  life  a  more  comfortable  one,  but  I  have  myself  to  be  so 
very  careful  to  manage  to  live  here  in  Oxford,  that  I  don't  think  I  can 
take  a  journey  in  the  vacation.  I  shall  go  to  London  when  term  is 
over,  as  Bunsen  has  invited  me  to  his  house,  but  I  shall  probably 
stay  with  Morier,  where  one  feels  freer.  I  have  been  up  for  the  day 
to  see  the  Exhibition,  but  it  is  quite  impossible  to  give  you  the  least 
idea  of  the  impression  this  house  of  glass  makes  on  one.  I  had 
lately  a  visit  from  the  young  Prince  of  Prussia  \  who  came  to  Oxford, 
and  I  had  to  take  him  about  the  whole  day.  He  seems  to  me  very 
clever,  very  natural,  has  the  greatest  admiration  for  England,  and  is 
evidently  in  good  hands.  I  do  not  envy  him  his  future  ;  he  will  have 
a  difficult  life,  however  happy  and  free  from  care  it  may  now  appear 
as  he  looks  on.  In  the  evening  we  dined  together,  and  I  accompanied 
him  to  the  railway,  where  he  took  leave  of  me  in  the  most  hearty 
manner.' 

In  July  Max  Miiller  went  to  London  to  Morier,  and  tells 
his  mother  that  he  has  been  asked  to  continue  his  lectures 
with  a  higher  salary  as  Deputy  Professor,  and  that  he  has 
accepted.  His  health  at  this  time  was  better,  and  his  head- 
aches less  frequent,  owing  to  a  plan  of  treatment  his  doctor 
had  adopted,  so  that  he  could  work  on  with  less  interruptions. 
'  How  much  time  would  have  been  saved  had  I  known  of 
this  medicine  sooner ! '  He  tried  to  persuade  his  mother  to 
visit  England  this  year  to  see  the  Exhibition,  and  assured 
her,  if  she  would  do  so,  he  would  be  able  in  a  year's  time  to 
repay  her  her  expenses,  though  just  at  the  moment  he  had  no 
spare  money. 

From  London  Max  Miiller  returned  to  Oxford,  and  then 
went  to  Wales  to  the  Froudes',  and  from  there  writes  to  his 
mother : — 

Translaiion.  Plas  Gwynant,  August  21. 

'I  am  staying  with  a  friend  whom  I  knew  earlier  in  Oxford, 
Mr.  Froude,  a  very  gifted  writer.  He  has  written  some  novels  which 
have  made  a  great  sensation  in  England.  He  has  been  married 
nearly  two  years;  his  wife  is  very  highly  educated  and  agreeable,  and 
here  they  live  among  the  mountains,  and  he  enjoys  the  dolcefar  nt'ente, 
fishing,  shooting,  riding,  and  writing.  The  situation  of  the  house  is 
perfect.  ...  I  shall  stay  here  a  fortnight.  The  only  thing  I  miss  is 
my  beautiful  piano,  which  I  bought  in  London,  It  is  a  grand  square 
by  Collard,  and  by  Neukomm's  help,  who  is  a  great  musician,  I  got 

^  The  Emperor  Frederick. 


126  Review  of  Bopp^s  Comparative  Grammar  [ch.  vn 

it  for  £50.  It  is  in  splendid  tone,  but  is  so  large  it  could  not  be  got 
up  the  staircase,  but  with  great  difficulty  was  hoisted  through  the 
window.  You  may  now  address  me  as  Professor  if  you  like,  but 
not  Professor  and  Doctor  together.' 

He  says  later :  '  The  time  in  Wales  was  delightful,  and 
I  was  idle,  which  set  me  up.' 

To  Dr.  Pauli. 

Translation.  Oxford,  September,  1851. 

'  A  few  days  ago  I  found  at  the  Bodleian  the  copy  oi  Alfred'^  you 
sent  there  for  me.  My  best  thanks  for  it.  I  have  only  read  a  little  of  it, 
which  interested  me  very  much,  especially  the  critique  on  Asser's  Gesta. 
Do  you  really  think  that  Asser  wrote  for  his  countrymen  .?  If  so,  they 
must  have  been  different  fellows  to  the  present  Welsh,  who  really  are 
more  like  Wallachians.  I  made  acquaintance  with  them  at  Fronde's, 
where  they  broke  into  the  house  at  night,  and  we  had  to  sleep  with 
loaded  pistols  to  make  our  lives  safe.  But  notwithstanding  I  enjoyed 
myself  there  thoroughly.  I  bathed  every  morning  in  the  waterfall, 
and  all  day  long  we  walked,  and  fished,  and  shot.  Snowdon  is  beauti- 
ful, and  the  lakes  beyond  description.  When  I  have  finished  Alfred 
I  shall  send  it  to  Froude,  who  will  be  delighted  with  it.  He  has,  as 
you  know,  written  the  life  of  St.  Neot  in  the  Lives  of  the  Saints,  and 
does  not  trust  Asser.  He  may  be  able  to  write  a  readable  review  on 
it.  He  is  very  happy  with  his  wife  and  baby,  and  I  would  gladly  have 
stayed  longer,  but  it  was  so  beautiful  I  could  do  no  work.  So  here 
I  am  again  in  Oxford,  busy  with  the  Veda  and  lectures.' 

On  returning  to  Oxford  he  put  the  last  touches  to  his 
review  of  Bopp's  Comparative  Grammar^  which  appeared  in 
the  October  number  of  the  Edinbjirgh.  It  excited  consider- 
able interest  at  the  time,  and  many  were  the  guesses  made 
at  the  authorship,  though  probably  there  are  not  many  now 
alive  who  remember  reading  it.  Bunsen  and  Stanley  and 
other  valued  friends  wrote  to  congratulate.  Bunsen  says : 
'  Early  this  morning  I  read  it  through  at  last,  and  joyfully 
and  heartily  utter  my  made  virtute.  Your  examples  and 
particularly  your  notes  will  help  and  please  the  English 
reader.  The  introduction  is  as  excellent  {ad  hominem  and 
yet  dignified)  as  the  end.'     The  end  is  perhaps  one  of  the 

^  Life  of  Alfred,  1851. 


1851]  Dr.  Bernays  127 

most    melodious    paragraphs  that    Max   Mliller   ever  wrote. 
The  article  has  never  been  reprinted.     It  ends  thus : — 

'  And  now  that  generations  after  generations  have  passed  away,  with 
their  languages — adoring  and  worshipping  the  name  of  God — preaching 
and  dying  in  the  name  of  God — thinking  and  meditating  on  the  name 
of  God — there  the  old  w'ord  stands  still,  breathing  to  us  the  pure  air  of 
the  dawn  of  humanity,  carrying  with  it  all  the  thoughts  and  sighs,  the 
doubts  and  tears,  of  our  bygone  brethren,  and  still  rising  up  to  heaven 
with  the  same  sound  from  the  basilicas  of  Rome  and  the  temples  of 
Benares,  as  if  embracing  by  its  simple  spell  millions  and  milHons  of 
hearts  in  their  longing  desire  to  give  utterance  to  the  unutterable,  to 
express  the  inexpressible.' 

In  October  Max  Miiller  received  a  visit  from  Dr.  Bernays, 
the  eminent  philologist,  later  Professor  at  Bonn,  'a  very- 
capable  and  delightful  man,'  and  a  very  close  friendship, 
as  we  shall  see  later  from  their  constant  correspondence, 
sprang  up  between  the  devout  Jew  and  the  young  Professor. 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  Oxford,  November  i6. 

'My  dear  Mother, — I  am  well  accustomed  to  decipher  MSS.,  but 
still  it  is  not  a  little  labour  to  read  your  letters,  especially  when,  like 
the  last,  they  are  written  with  more  water  than  ink.  If  I  could  send 
you  a  bottle  of  good  English  ink,  I  would  gladly  do  so.  But  I  think 
if  you  look  about  in  Dresden,  you  will  be  able  to  get  some  decent 
material  for  about  a  penny, 

'  I  am  not  worrying  my  head  with  plans  for  the  future,  but  let  it  go 
as  it  best  may.  I  have  not  at  all  made  up  my  mind  to  spend  the  rest 
of  my  life  in  Oxford,  though  I  quite  see  it  would  be  folly  to  turn  away 
from  the  prospects  opening  for  me  here.  But  one  misses  a  good  deal 
here  that  one  has  in  Germany,  especially  pleasant  intercourse  with 
learned  men :  for  there  is  litde  talk  here  of  literary  work.  If  all  is 
quiet,  I  thought  of  going  in  the  vacation  not  only  to  Germany  but 
to  Italy — but  this  will  be  only  if  I  condnue  to  lecture  in  Oxford. 
If  I  do  so,  I  must  learn  to  talk  Italian,  and  this  one  can  only  do 
in  the  country.  But  these  plans  are  all  vague — and  who  knows 
■what  may  happen  first?  .  .  .  We  stand  every  moment  in  God's 
hands,  and  He  knows  best  what  is  for  our  real  welfare. 

'  Trust  in  God  is  the  only  happiness  on  earth  :  without  that  our 
whole  life  is  but  anxiety  and  care.  ...  I  send  you  £5  to  buy  Christmas 
presents  for  yourself  and  the  Krugs.' 


128     Honorary  M.A.  and  Member  of  Ch.  Ch. 

On  December  4  Max  Mtiller  was  made  honorary  M.A., 
and  a  member  of  Christ  Church.  He  writes  at  once  to  tell 
his  friend  Dr.  Pauli,  and  through  him  the  Bunsens : 

Translation.  December,  1851. 

'  To-day  I  have  been  made  member  of  a  college,  no  less  than 
Christ  Church,  where  the  Common  Room  is  now  the  most  agreeable. 
The  old  Dean  performed  the  ceremony  in  the  pleasantest  way,  and 
feels  free  from  all  scruples,  because  he  has  found  a  precedent  in 
GraeviuSj  who  was  made  a  member  of  Christ  Church  some  hundreds 
of  years  ago.  Without  that  he  would  hardly  have  given  his  consent ! 
Happy  old  England  1  ...  I  can  hardly  help  laughing  when  the  black 
gown  flaps  about  my  legs.  But  one  gets  accustomed  to  everything, 
and  with  each  year  one  is  older  and  more  middle-aged — that  is  sad — 
but  one  cannot  escape  it  here  in  Oxford.' 

Of  Max  Miiller's  associates  in  Christ  Church  Common 
Room  in  the  early  fifties  very  few  are  left.  Mr.  Prout  re- 
calls Max's  freshness  and  originality,  which  made  him  a  very 
popular  member  of  Common  Room,  and  the  genuine  regret 
of  the  other  members  when  the  time  came  for  him  to  leave, 
on  his  election  as  a  Fellow  of  All  Souls.  And  Dean  Kitchin 
remembers  how  much  he  enlivened  the  party,  and  how  he 
was  '  always  brimming  over  with  good  things.'  The  Dean 
had,  however,  known  him  earher  in  his  career  in  Oxford,  and 
says :  '  Max  Miiller  left  on  me  an  enduring  picture  of  himself — 
the  young  eager  student,  with  his  handsome  face  and  sympa- 
thetic manner  and  bright,  expressive  eyes.  He  was  then 
seeing  his  Veda  through  the  Press.  I  remember  how  I  with 
my  German  sympathies  was  attracted  by  his  clever  piano- 
forte playing — the  Sanskrit  I  took  for  granted.' 


CHAPTER   VIII 

1852-1853 

Member  of  Bavarian  Academy.  Summer  in  Germany.  The  Butlers. 
Arrival  and  baptism  of  Dr.  Aufrecht.  Essay  on  Turanian  Languages 
for  Bunsen.  Visit  to  Scotland.  First  meeting  with  future  wife. 
Missionary  Alphabet. 

On  February  2,  1852,  Max  Miiller  writes  to  his  mother 
that  he  has  just  had  the  most  agreeable  surprise,  having  been 
elected  a  member  of  the  Royal  Bavarian  Academy  at  the 
same  time  as  Bunsen  and  Macaulay.  Max  had  only  just 
completed  his  twenty-eighth  year,  and  to  be  elected  with  two 
such  confreres,  men  whose  names  had  been  before  the  world 
when  he  was  a  mere  student,  was  no  slight  compliment.  He 
writes  to  Dr.  Pauli : — 

Translation.  Oxford,  1852. 

*  Dear  Pauli, — The  Diploma  from  Munich  has  arrived  safely ;  as 
I  knew  nothing  about  it,  I  was  very  much  surprised.  It  must  have 
been  Bunsen's  recommendation  :  I  should  like  to  know  this  that  I  may 
thank  him.  The  news  of  Eliot  Warburton's  death  touched  me  deeply, 
as  w'e  had  seen  him  so  lately,  and  w-ell  and  happy. 

His  lectures  during  the  first  two  terms  of  the  year  were 
on  the  'History  of  German  Literature  in  the  Seventeenth 
Century,'  and  were  well  attended.  These  early  lectures  and 
his  influence  over  his  audience  were  described  many  years 
later  by  one  of  his  hearers  : — 

'  There  has  seldom  been  any  one  less  like  the  typical  German 
workman  than  Professor  Max  Miiller.  He  is  a  marvellous  example  of 
how  a  foreigner  may  use  the  English  tongue  with  more  fluency  and 
elegance  than  even  the  ordinary  cultivated  native;  and  how  a  man 
trained  in  other  than  English  conditions  may  be  all  the  better  qualified 
to  stimulate  and  instruct  the  English  mind  when  he  speaks  its  own 
familiar  language.     It  is  now  more  than  half  a  century  since  he  began 

I  K 


130  The  George  Butlers  [ch.  vm 

to  act  as  a  fertilizing  agency  in  what  was  then  the  rather  arid  field  of 
English  scholarship.  His  quick  and  sensitive  intellect,  so  easily 
touched,  so  rapidly  assimilative,  had  been  moved  on  the  philological 
side  by  men  like  Burnouf,  on  the  philosophical  by  Schelling,  and  on 
the  religious  by  Bunsen.  And  this  combination  of  masters  saved  him 
from  falling  into  the  detached  specialism  which  has  been  the  note  of 
so  many  German  workmen,  and  supplied  the  sort  of  co-ordinating 
idealism  which  has  been  the  mark  of  all  his  work.  He  had  thus  the 
instincts  and  training  of  the  scholar,  and  also,  in  a  rarer  degree,  the 
genius  of  the  popular  expositor.  The  quick  and  sensitive  and  assimi- 
lative qualities  of  his  mind  made  him,  especially  in  the  earlier  part  of 
his  career,  all  the  more  stimulative  a  teacher.  He  was  a  kind  of 
prophet  of  the  dawn,  while  as  yet  it  was  dark — i.  e.  he  interpreted  to 
the  slow-paced  English  mind  things  especially  touching  language  and 
religion  which  had  never  entered  into  its  heart  to  conceive,  but  which 
had  been  exercising  the  higher  scholarship  and  the  newer  philosophy 
of  both  Germany  and  France.' 

One  of  the  great  pleasures  of  this  year  was  the  return  of 
his  old  friend  Mr.  George  Butler  with  his  brilliant  young  wife 
to  live  in  Oxford.  Mrs.  Butler  was  a  very  good  musician,  and 
the  possessor  of  a  fine  grand  pianoforte,  and  for  the  next  five 
years,  till  the  Butlers  left  Oxford,  Max  Muller  was  on  the  most 
intimate  terms  with  them.  Mrs.  Butler  recalls  his  gaiety,  his 
readiness  of  repartee,  his  brilliant  powers  of  conversation,  his 
fresh,  almost  boyish  enjoyment  of  everything:  whilst  the 
common  bond  of  music  drew  them  much  together.  Numerous 
were  the  excursions  and  picnics  in  which  Max  Miiller  took 
part  with  his  friends,  whose  house  was  constantly  full  of 
young  guests,  sisters  or  other  relatives  of  the  Butlers.  With 
the  exception  of  Professor  Donkin's  family,  and  the  Observer 
Manuel  Johnson,  there  was  no  house  in  those  days  where 
Max  felt  so  completely  at  home,  or  was  so  welcomed  and 
liked  by  all  the  inmates. 

Some  years  later  Mrs.  Mericoffre, Mrs.  Butler's  sister, wrote: — 

'I  recall  one  afternoon,  a  few  days  before  the  old  Duke  of 
Wellington's  funeral,  when  we  hunted  Max  Miiller  out  of  his  Sanskrit 
den,  and  made  him  take  a  long  walk  with  us.  He  bought  some  fresh 
eggs  at  a  farm-house,  and  put  them  in  the  tail  pockets  of  his  coat.  On 
returning  we  climbed  some  fences,  and  we  sat  upon  some  stiles,  and 
on  reaching  home  Muller  found  an  extensive  omelet  in  his  pocket.' 


1852]  Love  for  Dessau  131 

But  agreeable  and  bright  as  his  life  was  at  this  time,  which 
he  fully  recognized,  the  old  longing  for  Germany  constantly 
breaks  out.  '  I  long  so  often  to  be  back  in  Germany,'  he 
writes  to  his  mother,  '  that  if  any  sort  of  favourable  prospect 
offered,  I  would  willingly  exchange  my  pleasant  life  in  Oxford 
for  a  simple  German  mhiage! 

To  F.  Palgrave,  Esq. 

9,  Park  Place,  March  21,  1852. 
'  I  was  at  your  gate  on  Saturday  afternoon  as  I  had  written  to  you 
the  day  before.  I  was  very  sorry  to  have  missed  you,  and  still  more 
when  I  heard  the  sad  reason  ^  which  kept  you  at  home.  It  is  the 
hardest  trial  which  we  have  to  go  through,  I  think — at  least  there  is 
nothing  which  I  dread  so  much.  I  feel  for  you  and  with  you  more 
than  I  can  say ;  however,  nothing  strengthens  our  hope  of  meeting 
again  as  much  as  the  loss  of  those  we  love.  Oxford  has  been  very 
quiet,  and  I  have  been  hard  at  work  on  the  Veda  as  my  lectures  did 
not  give  me  much  trouble.  The  English  book  has  been  stopped,  but 
it  will  be  finished  before  the  Long.  In  summer  I  hope  to  go  to 
Germany,  but  I  have  a  good  deal  to  do  before  I  go.  .  .  .  Jowett  is  hard 
at  work,  and  has  finished  the  Romans.  Stanley  lives  with  Conington, 
and  writes  reports  in  the  tower  at  University.  Whenever  you  are 
back  at  Kneller  Hall,  I  hope  to  pay  you  a  visit,  unless  you  prefer  to 
come  to  Oxford.' 

Max  allowed  himself  only  a  day  or  two  of  holiday  in  the 
Easter  Vacation.  '  I  feel  that  every  day  I  waste  now,  I  lose 
a  day  of  my  summer  holiday,'  and  as  his  headaches  were  less 
frequent  and  also  less  severe  when  he  did  have  them,  he  could 
work  on  vigorously.  He  tells  his  mother  that  he  means  to 
be  thoroughly  idle  in  Germany  and  amuse  himself.  He  will 
not  visit  either  Leipzig  or  Berlin.     He  writes: — 

Tratislatioti.  April  18,  1852. 

'  I  am  nowhere  so  happy  as  in  Dessau.  You  will  laugh  at  this, 
but  had  you  been  living  for  six  or  seven  years  among  strangers  you 
would  understand  how  delightful  it  is  to  see  well-known  faces  and 
well-known  streets  and  houses  round  one.  If  I  had  independent 
means,  I  would  live  in  Dessau,  and  by  choice  in  my  grandfather's 
house  with  the  garden,  where  I  know  every  tree.  If  we  stay  some  time 
there  in  the  vacation,  I  had  rather  not  stay  the  whole  time  with  my 
uncle.     Perhaps  we  could  take  some  rooms,  or  live  in  the  hotel  ? ' 


^  His  mother's  dangerous  illness. 


K  a 


132  Goes  to  Germany  [ch.  vm 

In  June  he  writes  like  a  schoolboy  expecting  his  holidays : 
'the  joy  of  meeting  makes  up  for  the  long  separation,  and,  as 
old  Goethe  says,  it  is  not  necessary  to  be  always  together  to 
remain  united.'  He  had  to  take  his  part  in  the  Grand  Com- 
memoration of  that  year,  and  a  few  pages  of  Veda  to  finish, 
and  then  he  was  free.     On  June  14  he  writes  to  his  mother : — 

Translaiion. 

'  You  will  have  heard  the  sad  news  of  Burnouf's  death.  In  him 
I  have  lost  a  good  friend,  and  the  loss  to  literature  is  irreparable. 
Many  of  his  books  remain  unfinished,  and  as  there  is  no  good 
Sanskrit  scholar  in  Paris,  I  have  half  promised  his  friends  to  go  there 
to  advise  with  them  about  his  library  and  MSS.  It  may  be  this 
will  only  be  later,  when  the  Will  is  known.  He  leaves  a  widow 
and  four  daughters.  But  I  should  only  have  to  spend  a  day  or  two 
there,  and  should  be  glad  if  it  could  be  on  my  return  journey.' 

Early  in  July,  Max  Miiller  left  England,  joined  his  mother 
at  Dresden,  where  his  friend  Palgrave  met  him  for  a  time  but 
was  summoned  back  to  England  by  his  mother's  increased 
illness,  and  after  a  visit  to  his  sister  at  Chemnitz  took  his 
mother  to  Carlsbad,  and  from  there  he  made  an  excursion  to 
Munich  and  the  beautiful  scenery  of  the  Salzkammergut. 
From  Munich,  after  many  hours  in  the  Pinakothek,  he  writes 
to  his  mother: — 

Translation. 

*  I  am  more  than  ever  convinced  that  the  ItaHan,  Spanish,  and 
French  schools  together  are  not  so  fine,  and  true,  and  strengthening, 
as  the  old  German  and  Dutch  schools.  J.  van  Eyck,  Hans  Hemling, 
Rembrandt,  Diirer,  even  Holbein  and  Cranach,  were  very  fine.  The 
Raphaels,  Andrea  del  Sarto,  Palma  Vecchio,  Perugino,  .  .  .  Leonardo, 
«&.c.,  are  also  wonderful,  but  they  make  so  much  parade  of  their  art, 
and  they  are  more  bent  on  showing  how  beautifully  they  can  paint, 
whilst  the  Germans  just  paint  away  because  their  heart  is  in  it.' 

He  had  plenty  of  time  to  visit  all  the  beauties  of  Munich, 
as  he  was  detained  there  several  days  through  some  difficulty 
about  his  passport  for  Austria,  as  he  intended  to  visit  the 
Tyrol.  It  must  have  been  during  this  visit  to  the  Tyrol  that 
he  found  himself  in  great  danger.  After  a  long  lonely  day  on 
foot  he  arrived  late  at  a  most  forbidding-looking  little  inn, 
but  it  was  too  late  to  go  further.  The  people  of  the  inn  were 
rude  and  evil-looking,  and  he  was  thankful  to  be  able  to 


1852]  Tyrol  133 

barricade  his  door  with  a  heavy  piece  of  furniture.  The  door 
was  twice  attempted  in  the  night.  In  the  morning  he  found 
that  the  only  guide  to  be  had  over  a  lonely  road  was  a  surly- 
looking  man,  but  he  made  the  guide  keep  in  front  of  him  the 
whole  way,  and  was  himself  armed  with  a  strong  walking- 
stick.  He  always  said  that  had  he  shown  the  least  fear  the 
man  would  have  attacked  him.  It  must  be  remembered  that 
in  1852  the  Tyrol  was  less  explored  and  known  than  it  is  now. 
On  rejoining  his  mother  they  spent  some  happy  weeks 
together,  and  Max  returned  to  Oxford  by  Leipzig  and  Berlin, 
visiting  many  old  friends.  He  tells  his  mother  on  his  arrival 
in  Oxford  : — 

Translation. 

'  One  cannot  always  have  such  a  happy  time  as  I  spent  this  summer. 
I  cannot  tell  you  how  comfortable  I  was  this  time  at  home,  but  I  will 
not  complain,  but  only  hope  that  it  will  be  so  again  another  time,  if 
God  wills.  We  owe  to  Him  all  the  good  that  befalls  us,  and  what  He 
orders  is  best.  Take  care  of  yourself,  and  don't  be  unhappy,  all  goes 
with  us  so  much  better  than  we  deserve,  and  than  with  many  others. 
The  recollection  of  all  the  happiness  is  a  comfort  too,  and  never  has 
the  recollection  of  our  time  together  been  so  bright  and  undisturbed  as 
this  time.  You  were  so  good  to  me,  my  dear  mother.  I  would 
willingly  live  in  Dresden,  but  as  that  cannot  be,  you  must  come  to 
Oxford  when  the  weather  is  fine.' 

To  F.  Palgrave,  Esq. 

9,  Park  Place,  October  22,  1852. 
'  I  need  not  tell  you  how  I  felt  your  loss.  I  should  like  to  shake 
your  hand — but  these  losses  must  be  borne  in  silence.  Do  come 
to  Oxford  if  you  can,  and  let  us  talk  about  our  little  expedition  to 
Dresden.  I  had  such  a  pleasant  journey  afterwards  to  Carlsbad,  the 
Tyrol,  Salzburg,  Munich — how  I  wished  you  had  been  with  me.  As 
to  art,  Munich  beats  everything,  and  the  people  are  so  much  nicer, 
much  more  genial  than  at  Berlin.  Their  beer  is  excellent,  and  it 
makes  them  good-natured.  And  such  pictures,  particularly  from  the 
German  school  .  .  .  you  must  go  there  next  year,  I  am  sure  you  will 
be  delighted.  That  old  king  was  after  all  a  great  genius,  whatever 
Lola  may  say  of  him,  and  however  bad  his  poems  and  his  prose  may 
be.  Walrond  is  going  away ;  Conybeare  going  to  be  married ;  Morier 
going  to  Australia :  so  one  begins  to  feel  alone,  and  that  is  bad,  and 
the  only  thing  to  be  done  is  to  work.  Please  remember  me  kindly  to 
Temple.' 


134  Dr.  Aufrecht  [ch.  vin 

His  lectures  this  term  were  on  the  'Classification  of 
Languages,'  but  he  had  hardly  began  them  before  he  was 
again  laid  up  from  Oxford  fogs  and  damp. 

November,  1852. 

*  Dear  Mrs.  Butler, — It  is  very  kind  of  you  to  cheer  me  up  from 
time  to  time  with  kind  inquiries,  good  admonitions,  dear  messages, 
and  other  how-do-you-do  varieties.  I  wish  I  could  return  thanks 
myself,  but  in  this  weather  the  doctor  tells  me  I  must  not  go  out  for 
a  week.  I  am  quite  resigned  to  my  fate,  and  begin  to  understand 
what  it  means  that  you  are  nowhere  freer  than  in  prison.  I  read  and 
write,  and  get  a  good  deal  of  work  done,  which  has  been  weighing 
heavily  on  my  conscience  for  some  time.  I  need  not  go  out  and  eat 
many  dinners,  or  make  many  calls.  I  can  smoke  without  fear  of 
detection.  I  get  my  friends  one  by  one  to  see  me  and  talk  to  me, 
which  is  so  much  better  than  if  you  have  them  all  at  once.  I  need 
not  deliver  lectures ;  altogether  I  am  as  happy  as  mortal  man  can  be 
with  November  fogs  and  earthquakes  all  around  him,  not  to  mention 
gout,  rheumatism,  sore  throats,  and  divers  kinds  of  diseases  to  plague 
him. .  .  .  Thomson  asks  me  to  write  him  an  article  on  Indian  Logic 
for  the  third  edition  of  his  Laws  of  Thought,  which  I  am  doing  just 
now ; — and  here  I  was  interrupted  by  Miss  Grey's  visit,  and  could  not 
even  go  downstairs  to  speak  to  her,  for  I  am  so  thoroughly  Germanized 
in  appearance  that  I  must  not  show  myself  to  any  lady,  and  here  a 
visit,  so  I  must  give  it  up  for  to-day,  and  remain  yours  truly,  M.  M.' 

This  attack  of  illness  determined  him  to  follow  the  advice 
Bunsen  had  long  given  him,  and  take  an  assistant  for  the 
more  mechanical  part  of  his  Vedic  work.  Bunsen  seems  to 
have  mentioned  Dr.  Aufrecht  from  Berlin  to  him.  Max  Miiller 
entered  into  negotiations  with  Dr.  Aufrecht,  who  arrived  in 
Oxford  in  December.  Early  in  that  month  Max  writes  to 
Bunsen : — 

' .  .  .  I  expect  Aufrecht  daily.  You  have  always  advised  me  to  seek 
help,  and  I  could  no  longer  get  through  my  work  alone,  with  the  many 
interruptions  caused  by  my  health.  Aufrecht  is  a  very  conscientious 
scholar,  and  as  far  as  the  rest  goes  that  will  all  be  right.' 

Max  Miiller  writes  to  his  mother  telling  her  of  the  new 
arrangement : — 

Translation.  December  19. 

'  Dr.  Aufrecht  is  a  very  clever  man,  a  Sanskritist,  <Src.  We  work 
together,  and  he  helps  me  at  my  Veda,  for  which  I  pay  him  enough  to 


1852]  Dean  Church  135 

live  here.  We  shall  try  the  plan  at  first  for  six  months,  and  I  hope  it 
will  all  go  well.  It  is  very  pleasant  for  me  to  have  some  one  with 
whom  I  can  talk  about  literary  things,  and  my  time  is  so  filled  up  that 
I  am  very  glad  to  have  some  one  to  whom  I  can  leave  part  of  my 
work  :  but  I  must  wait  awhile  to  see  how  it  works,  and  whether  it 
brings  me  in  as  much  as  it  costs.  I  must  spend  Christmas  in  Oxford, 
as  I  cannot  well  leave  him  alone.  The  weather  is  dreadful,  and  I 
have  constant  headaches,  mostly  from  severe  colds.  Otherwise  I  have 
got  quite  accustomed  again  to  the  English  way  of  living,  and  if  I  would 
often  rather  find  myself  in  Germany,  you  know  it  is  not  my  way  to 
grumble.  We  must  take  life  as  God  sends  it,  and  it  would  be  un- 
grateful did  I  not  acknowledge  the  many  comforts  I  have  here,  and 
only  dwelt  on  what  I  miss.' 

Aufrecht  lived  in  the  same  house  with  his  employer. 
The  following  letter  alludes  to  the  book  known  as  Church's 
Essays   and  Reviews^   a    title    that    had    not    then    become 

notorious : — 

9,  Park  Place,  December  22,  1852. 
'My  dear  Palgrave, — I  thought  you  would  be  sure  to  come  to 
Oxford  for  the  Exeter  College  election,  else  I  should  have  written  to 
you  before  this,  and  asked  whether  you  would  put  your  name  to  a 
testimonial  which  we  intend  to  present  to  Church.  You  know  he 
is  going  to  leave  Oxford,  and  take  a  small  living  to  marry.  Some  of 
his  friends  are  going  to  ask  him  to  allow  them  to  print  a  selection  of 
his  articles — not  theological — and  to  make  him  a  present  of  the  whole 
edition.  We  have  already  a  large  subscription,  about  forty  names. 
The  subscription  will  be  £3.  Please  tell  me  whether  you  wish  your 
name  to  be  added.  Acland,  Donkin,  Butler,  Marriott,  &c.,  take  great 
interest  in  the  matter,  but  until  the  whole  expense  is  secured  by  sub- 
scription, it  must  not  be  talked  about.  If  you  can  get  some  of  your 
friends  to  join,  please  write  to  them.  Grant  and  Sellar  have  been 
written  to,  and  have  sent  their  subscriptions.  You  know  probably  that 
Sewell  is  going  to  leave  Oxford.  Why  do  you  never  write  ?  Have 
you  heard  from  Froude  ?  He  is  staying  at  his  father's,  and  very 
happy.' 

The  early  part  of  this  Christmas  Vacation  was  spent  by 
Max  Miiller  in  Oxford,  in  order  to  initiate  his  secretary 
Aufrecht  in  the  work  he  had  to  do.  The  great  floods  of 
1852  had  left  the  place  in  a  very  unhealthy  state,  and  before 
his  lectures  began  again  his  friends  the  George  Butlers,  who 
were  spending  the  vacation  with  their  father  Dean  Butler  at 


136  Visit  to  Dover  [ch.  vm 

Dover,  asked  him  to  pay  them  a  visit  there.    On  his  return  he 

writes : — 

To  Mrs.  Butler. 

9,  Park  V-lkc-e.,  January,  1853. 
*I  have  not  had  a  quiet  minute  since  I  came  back;  there  was 
a  friend  from  Germany  waiting  to  be  Honized  all  over  Oxford :  then 
all  sorts  of  people  who  came  to  vote,  and  at  the  same  time  to  walk 
and  talk :  then  Aufrecht  with  lots  of  questions :  then  dinner-parties 
again:  and  letters  to  answer,  and  proofs  to  correct.  I  really  wish 
I  could  sport  my  oak  like  an  undergraduate,  and  have  done  with  the 
world  altogether,  at  least  for  an  hour  or  two,  that  I  might  be  able  to 
tell  you  how  much  I  enjoyed  my  trip  to  Dover,  and  how  happy  I  felt 
among  people  who  seemed  all  to  be  so  very  happy  themselves.  Please 
to  translate  into  as  good  English  as  possible  my  best  thanks  to  the 
Dean  and  Mrs.  Butler.  I  am  glad  to  hear  that  you  have  had  a  few 
fine  days ;  the  weather  is  getting  better  at  Oxford  also.  As  to  the 
floods,  they  will  not  be  gone  before  March,  but  the  late  storms  have 
made  the  atmosphere  quite  healthy  again.  I  do  not  know  anything 
about  the  election  ;  in  fact,  I  have  not  seen  a  paper  since  I  came  back. 
Belle  is  in  the  most  flourishing  condition,  so  Oxford  cannot  be  such 
an  unhealthy  place  after  all.' 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  0\-BOViD,  January  30,  1853. 

'. , .  My  lectures  begin  next  week,  and  give  me  a  good  deal  of  work  ; 
and  then  I  was  away  for  a  week  at  Dover.  Dover  was  beautiful, 
especially  in  the  storms.  The  waves  almost  beat  on  my  windows. 
From  the  laiid  a  stormy  sea  looks  grand.  I  would  willingly  have 
stayed  on,  but  I  could  not  leave  my  house  companion  longer  alone. 
He  is  a  capable  man,  but  a  little  difficult  to  get  on  with.  At  present  he 
takes  up  a  good  deal  of  my  time,  as  I  must  tell  and  explain  everything 
to  him ;  but  I  think  later  he  will  be  an  advantage.  I  must  give  more 
time  to  my  lectures,  for  England  expects  every  man  to  do  his  duty. 
I  do  not  worry  about  money,  and  would  rather  live  more  economically 
than  let  my  work  suffer.  ...  I  often  feel  now  how  much  time  I  lost 
from  my  work  during  my  long  holiday  last  year — that  must  not  happen 
again,  life  is  not  long  enough  for  such  pauses — and  yet  when  I  am 
with  you  I  always  think,  "  You  can  make  up  the  time  afterwards  in  your 
work;  enjoy  the  time  together  as  long  as  you  can."  .  .  .  We  have  had 
a  great  business  here  with  the  Parliamentary  election.  Gladstone,  who 
was  elected,  and  is  now  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  was  here  on 
a  visit  a  few  days  ago.  I  have  seen  and  talked  with  him  several  times ; 
he  is  an  interesting  man,  and  a  very  good  speaker.' 


1853]  Work  with  Aujrecht  137 

To  Chevalier  Bunsen. 

Translation.  9,  Park  Place,  February  2,  1853. 

'I  get  on  better  with  Aufrecht,  but  not  so  very  well  yet.  He 
decidedly  desires  to  be  baptized,  but  he  does  not  feel  inclined  to  talk 
to  others  on  this  point  or  anything  connected  with  it. 

'  It  is  possible  that  when  he  has  once  taken  this  step  he  may  get  to 
feel  more  inner  satisfaction  and  confidence  in  friends,  which  is  prevented 
now  by  morbid  impressions  and  imaginations.  I  am  convinced  he  is 
a  true  and  honest  soul,  but  he  is  unsympathetic.  His  knowledge  is 
thoroughly  sound  and  comprehensive.  He  works  well,  and  he  seems 
to  like  his  position,  as  he  desires  to  stay  in  England.  But  there  can 
be  no  question  about  working  together,  for  as  soon  as  one  presses  him 
a  little  hard  he  draws  his  head  into  his  shell  like  a  tortoise,  and  one 
must  then  leave  him  alone.  But  I  still  hope  that  in  time  things  will 
take  a  better  shape,  as  they  are  already  far  better  than  they  were  at  first.' 

The  Deputy  Professor  u^as  to  lecture  this  term  on 
'Declension,'  and  so  popular  u^ere  his  lectures,  that  he  had 
a  large  proportion  of  ladies  among  his  audience,  a  greater 
proportion  than  was  convenient  in  a  small  lecture-room, 
and  on  being  asked  by  a  rather  pompous  Don  what  the 
title  of  his  lectures  meant  exactly,  he  was  ungallant  enough 
to  reply,  '  I  wish  it  might  mean  that  I  decline  ladies ! ' 
This  must  have  got  abroad,  to  judge  from  the  next  letter 
to  Bunsen  : 

Tramlatmi.  9,  Park  Place,  February  19,  1853? 

'. . .  I  am  very  well  now  and  very  happy.  Aufrecht  begins  to  "  thaw." 
My  time  is  almost  entirely  taken  up  with  my  lectures,  which  for  the 
first  time  give  me  great  pleasure.  I  have  fifty  hearers,  all  under- 
graduates, and  many  of  them  capable  and  industrious  men.  I  write 
nothing,  but  speak  extempore  to  them,  and  I  feel  that  I  can  be  really 
useful  to  them.  My  former  hearers  were  mostly  curious  and  suspicious 
Dons,  and  I  got  tired  of  writing  rhetorical  essays  to  be  read  to  them. 
Now  everything  gets  into  much  better  shape,  and  I  only  hope  that 
next  term  I  may  receive  my  definite  appointment.  I  have  now  got 
to  the  old  Latin  inscriptions,  Columna  Rostrata,  &c.,  and  it  is  incredible 
how  little  one  can  rely  upon  copies ;  in  almost  every  edition  you  find 
inaccuracies  and  variations.  If  only  somebody  would  at  last  give 
exact  facsimiles.' 

A  day  or  two  later  he  writes  again  to  Bunsen,  in  answer 
to  a  letter  advising  him  to  give  a  course  of  lectures  on  Greek 
Literature  : — 


138  Dr.  AufrecMs  Baptism  [ch.  vm 

Translation. 

'  I  shall  have  finished  my  lectures  in  about  a  fortnight.  The  holidays 
will  only  last  three  weeks,  then  lectures  begin  again.  I  dare  hardly 
venture  to  undertake  a  course  on  Greek  literature,  for  my  subject 
must  always  be  more  or  less  in  connexion  with  modern  languages. 
This  is  possible  with  tides  like  "  declension,"  "  conjugation,"  &c., 
including  a  few  words  about  modern  formations,  and  then  concen- 
trating on  Greek,  Latin,  and  Sanskrit.  But  "  history  of  Greek  literature  " 
would  hardly  fit  into  anything.  I  shall  hope  to  continue  next  term 
my  lectures  on  Declension,  and  to  prepare  lectures  on  Italian  Ethnology. 
One  has  to  read  up  what  is  fit  for  the  examination  ;  and  the  population 
of  Italy  according  to  Livy  and  Niebuhr  belongs  to  the  standing 
questions.  I  am  getting  on  better  and  better  with  Aufrecht,  and 
I  hope  in  time  we  shall  get  on  capitally.' 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  Oxford,  March  5,  1853. 

'  The  uncertain  weather  we  are  having  in  Oxford  is  very  unhealthy. 
And  yet  I  feel  better  than  I  have  felt  for  a  long  time,  and  my  work 
gets  on  well.  I  do  not  know  what  the  papers  have  been  saying  again 
about  me.  My  position  has  not  as  yet  changed  in  the  least,  but 
I  hope  to  get  my  full  salary  in  October.  The  uncertainty  is  un- 
pleasant, but  I  shall  not  starve,  and  everything  else  can  be  borne ! 
My  assistant  costs  a  good  deal,  but  that  will  in  time  be  repaid,  and 
his  company,  at  least  for  literary  discussion,  is  very  useful.  Of  course 
there  are  many  difficulties,  but  in  time  they  will  be  set  right.  I  corre- 
spond pretty  regularly  with  Bunsen ;  he  writes  one  book  after  another, 
but  writes  too  much  and  too  quickly.  The  events  in  Milan  are 
terrible.  But  how  can  the  Austrians  imagine  that  England  will 
interfere.?  That  England  will  never  give  up  a  poUtical  refugee  is 
well  understood.  England  has  always  been  a  refuge  for  dethroned 
kings  and  popular  leaders,  and  the  English  would  rather  go  to  war 
than  give  up  their  right.' 

In  accordance  with  Dr.  Aufrecht's  own  wishes  about  his 
baptism,  Bunsen  suggested  that  his  eldest  son,  the  Rev.  Henry 
Bunsen,  Rector  of  Lilleshall,  should  receive  him,  and  perform 
the  ceremony  in  his  own  parish  church.  This  scheme  was 
carried  out.     On  his  return  Max  Miiller  writes  : — 

Translation.  9,  Park  Place,  April  3,  1853. 

'Your  Excellency, — We  have  passed  the  Easter  holidays  most 
agreeably  at  Lilleshall,  and  I,  as  well  as  Aufrecht,  am  most  grateful  to 
you  for  the  great  help  you  have  given  us  in  this  somewhat  difficult 
matter.     Nowhere  could  the  act  have   been    performed  so   simply, 


1853]  Stands  for  Professorship  139 

so  solemnly,  and  so  undisturbedly  as  by  your  son  at  Lilleshall.  The 
friendly  welcome  we  received  has  not  missed  its  impression  upon 
Aufrecht,  and  I  hope  that  in  future  matters  will  improve  with  him 
more  and  more  .  .  .' 

To  his  mother  he  writes  : — 

Translation.  April. 

'I  would  gladly  go  with  you  to  Carlsbad,  but  after  careful  con- 
sideration I  see  that  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  leave  my  work  this 
year  for  the  whole  summer.  I  have  begun  several  things  which  have 
been  on  my  conscience  for  several  years,  and  I  owe  it  to  myself  to 
finish  them ;  and  this  I  can  only  do  here  in  England,  and  in  the  Long 
Vacation.  And  now  I  am  busy  with  my  lectures,  and  the  decision  as 
to  my  full  salary  occupies  my  time  too.  I  have  indeed  a  fair  prospect 
that  there  will  be  no  opposition ;  but  of  course  there  is  a  prejudice 
against  a  foreigner,  and  I  must  do  my  best  to  keep  all  straight.' 

On  May  12  Bunsen  wrote  to  urge  Max  Miiller  to  join  him 
at  St.  Leonards,  but  the  Taylorian  Professorship  was  vacant, 
and  it  was  necessary  to  be  on  the  spot. 

To  Chevalier  Bunsen. 

Translatio7i.         -  9,  Park  Place,  May  15,  1853. 

'  The  business  is  more  complicated  than  I  expected,  and  the  steering 
more  difficult  the  nearer  one  approaches  the  harbour.  I  am  prepared 
for  disappointment,  but  do  not  give  up  hope.  The  new  difficulties 
arise  from  the  fact  that  the  Curators  are  intending  to  raise  the  salary 
considerably :  this  would  be  delightful,  if  I  already  had  the  appointment, 
but  now  it  brings  other  interests  into  play,  and  entices  others  to  stand 
as  candidates.  But  still  my  prospects  are  good,  and  my  opponents 
have  but  one  card  to  play,  that  they  are  Englishmen,  I  not.  In 
Oxford  the  tables  won't  dance.  I  have  wasted  some  hours  in  trying 
my  hand  at  it,  but  the  whole  thing  seems  perfectly  useless,  especially 
as  it  is  purely  mechanical. 

'Aufrecht  is  going  on  all  right — he  does  not  wish  to  return  to 
Germany.' 

Bunsen  wrote  cheerily  in  reply,  and  says  he  had  written  to 
his  'brotherly  friend  Pusey'  (the  squire)  to  help  in  the 
canvass.  'I  know  few  men  so  able  to  give  good  advice; 
besides,  he  is  very  much  attached  to  you.' 

To  THE  Same. 
Translation.  9,  Park  Place,  May  28,  1853. 

'  Contrary  to  my  expectations,  my  affairs  get  more  hopeless  and 
involved.     The  Curators  have  at  last  had  a  meeting,  and  settled  to 


140  Uncertainty  as  to  Professorship     [ch.  vm 

postpone  the  election  till  after  the  Long  Vacation.  It  is  a  hard  trial  of 
one's  patience,  especially  as  it  is  still  uncertain  whether  my  election 
may  not  after  all  be  opposed,  and  1  should  then  have  lost  four  years' 
time  and  work.  For  three  years  I  have  laid  all  aside,  and  given  my 
whole  time  to  this  office.  I  felt  Spartam  nactus  es,  hanc  exorna,  and 
if  I  had  thus  provided  for  my  material  wants  for  the  rest  of  my  life, 
I  could  well  be  satisfied,  and  should  have  had  time  and  leisure  to 
make  up  what  I  had  lost.  Now  I  really  don't  know  what  to  do,  and 
whether  it  is  not  best  to  return  to  Germany  and  finish  up  and  publish 
what  I  have  already  done  on  the  Veda.  My  friends  advise  me  to  stay 
on  here,  and  they  assure  me  Convocation  would  veto  the  election  of 
any  one  else,  if  the  Curators  attempted  it.  For  myself,  I  am  almost 
indifferent.  I  shall  probably  have  another  year  of  this  uncertainty, 
of  which  I  have  had  enough  in  the  past  three  years.  However,  such 
is  the  world,  says  John  Bull,  and  tries  to  console  himself.  I  am  doing 
my  best  to  follow  his  good  advice.' 

To  this  Bunsen  replied  : — 

Translation.  May  30. 

'  It  is  a  great  trial  of  patience,  but  be  patient,  that  is  wise.  One  must 
never  allow  the  toilsome  labour  of  years  of  quiet  reflection  and  of 
utmost  exertion  for  the  attainment  of  one's  aim  to  be  destroyed  by  an 
unpropitious  event.  It  is  most  probably  the  best  for  you  that  the 
affair  should  not  now  be  hurried  through.  Your  claims  are  stronger 
every  quarter,  and  will  certainly  become  more  so  in  the  eyes  of  the 
English  through  good  temper  and  patience  under  trying  circum- 
stances. I  don't  for  a  moment  doubt  that  you  will  be  elected. 
Germany  would  suit  you  now  as  little  as  it  would  suit  me,  and  we 
both  should  not  suit  Germany.  So  patience,  my  dear  friend,  and  with 
a  good  will.' 

Early  in  May,  Bunsen  had  written  to  Max  Miiller  asking 
his  help  in  the  vv^ork  then  occupying  all  his  leisure  time  and 
thoughts,  '  The  Philosophy  of  Universal  History  applied  to 
Language  and  Religion,'  being  Volumes  III  and  IV  of 
Christianity  and  Mankind.     Bunsen  says  : — 

'  In  working  over  the  historical  part  I  put  aside  a  chapter,  "  The 
Primitive  Languages  in  India,"  but  find  out,  just  as  I  intended  to 
make  you  the  heros  eponymus,  that  you  only  dealt  in  your  lecture 
(before  the  British  Association)  with  Bengali.  .  .  .  Could  you  not  write 
a  little  article  on  this  for  my  book  ?  The  original  language  in  India 
must  have  been  Turanian,  not  Semitic ;  but  we  are  bound  in  honour 
to  prove  it.' 


1853]  Essay  on  Turanian  Languages  141 

This  invitation  led  to  the  pamphlet  On  the  Ttiranian 
Languages,  which  is  now  out  of  print  as  a  separate  publica- 
tion, but  it  forms,  under  the  title,  'Last  Results  of  the 
Turanian  Researches,'  the  second  half  of  the  third  volume 
of  Bunsen's  Christianity  and  Mankind,  and  though  not 
published  till  1854,  owing  to  incessant  delays  in  printing, 
was  almost  entirely  written  in  1853,  and  involved  a  constant 
correspondence  with  Bunsen  through  the  rest  of  this  year. 
It  is  many  years  since  Max  Miiller  gave  up  most  of  the 
views  enunciated  in  his  essay  on  the  Turanian  languages  of 
India,  views  which  were  disproved  as  these  languages  were 
more  fully  known  and  studied.  The  concluding  paragraph  is 
perhaps  worth  quoting  as  applicable  to  all  linguistic  studies  : — 

*  And  now,  if  we  gaze  from  our  native  shores  over  that  vast  ocean 
of  human  speech,  with  its  waves  rolling  on  from  continent  to  continent, 
rising  under  the  fresh  breezes  of  the  morning  of  history,  and  slowly 
heaving  in  our  own  more  sultry  atmosphere,  with  sails  gliding  over  its 
surface,  and  many  an  oar  ploughing  through  its  surf,  and  the  flags  of 
all  nations  waving  joyously  together,  with  its  rocks  and  wrecks,  its 
storms  and  battles,  yet  reflecting  serenely  all  that  is  beneath  and 
above  and  around  it ;  if  we  gaze  and  hearken  to  the  strange  sounds 
rushing  past  our  ears  in  unbroken  strains,  it  seems  no  longer  a  wild 
tumult,  but  we  feel  as  if  placed  within  some  ancient  cathedral,  listening 
to  a  chorus  of  innumerable  voices ;  and  the  more  intensely  we  listen, 
the  more  all  discords  melt  away  into  higher  harmonies,  till  at  last  we 
hear  but  one  majestic  trichord,  or  a  mighty  unison,  as  at  the  end  of 
a  sacred  symphony. 

'  Such  visions  will  float  through  the  study  of  the  grammarian,  and  in 
the  midst  of  toilsome  researches  his  heart  will  suddenly  beat,  as  he 
feels  the  conviction  growing  upon  him,  that  men  are  brethren  in  the 
simplest  sense  of  the  word — the  children  of  the  same  father — whatever 
their  country,  their  colour,  their  language,  and  their  faith.' 

This  was  the  year  of  Lord  Derby's  installation  as  Chancellor 
of  the  University,  and  Max  Miiller  resolved  to  take  refuge 
from  all  the  gaieties  with  Bunsen,  who  had  long  been  pressing 
him  to  come  to  Carlton  Terrace. 

Besides  the  treatise  on  the  Turanian  or  nomadic  languages 
of  India,  Bunsen  asked  his  help  in  tracing  the  relationship 
of  the  Vcdic  language  with  Zend,  urging  him  to  gather  the 
results  of  his  investigations  into  a  separate  chapter. 


142  Work  for  Bunsen  [ch.  vm 

To  Chevalier  Bunsen. 

Translation.  9,  Park  V-l.kq,^,  July  3,  1853. 

'  ^^'hen  you  spoke  to  me  in  London  about  printing  your  work  on 
Egypt,  you  told  me  that  you  expected  my  contribution  in  September. 
I  therefore  began  at  once  to  arrange  and  carry  out  the  part  with 
regard  to  the  comparison  of  Egyptian  and  Aryan  roots.  The  work 
requires  great  care,  and  if  the  essay  is  to  be  printed  just  as  I  write  it, 
and  under  my  responsibiHty,  I  cannot  really  promise  its  completion 
before  September.  The  relation  between  Egyptian  and  Aryan  is 
much  like  that  which  would  exist  between  Sanskrit  and  French,  did 
we  not  possess  the  connecting  links.  Mere,  pere,frere,  and  sceur,  set 
against  mdtar,  pdtar,  bhrdtar,  and  svasiar,  show  a  systematic 
parallelism  and  a  common  origin.  But  if  one  had  to  compare 
Sanskrit  asm  with  larme,  how  could  one  prove  their  identity  without 
the  connecting  links  ?  Well,  I  will  try,  but  it  is  quite  impossible  for 
me  to  solve  the  problem  so  quickly.  Also  in  the  matter  of  the 
relation  of  the  Zend  and  Vedic  peoples  I  will  gladly  formulate  and 
prove  the  conclusions  at  which  I  have  arrived,  but  I  am  a  slow  coach, 
and  fear  accidents  in  an  express  train.  I  hope,  especially  if  there  is 
no  war,  that  you  may  have  so  many  diplomatic  occupations,  that  I  may 
be  ready  before  Egypt  comes  to  be  printed.  I  work  every  day  at  the 
Bodleian  from  nine  till  four,  at  the  catalogue  of  the  Sanskrit  MSS. ; 
then  I  am  printing  the  preface  to  the  second  volume  of  the  Veda^ 
which  is  ready:  then  I  am  writing  a  treatise  on  the  burning  of 
bodies  in  the  Veda,  which  is  nearly  ready  (widows  were  not  burnt). 
Then  comes  the  essay  for  Lepsius  on  the  Indian  alphabet.  Then 
the  first  volume  of  the  Prolegomena  must  be  printed  before  the  end 
of  the  vacation  ;  and  lastly  comes  a  course  of  lectures  for  next 
term.  Where  am  I  to  find  time  without  robbery?  Professor 
Stenzler,  of  Breslau,  is  now  here,  a  very  capable  man  of  the  last 
generation,  but  who  advances  with  modern  progress,  and  has  taken 
refuge  from  Alexander's  India  in  Vedic  antiquity.  He  is  Weber's 
teacher.' 

To  Chevalier  Bunsen. 

Translation.  Park  Place,  7?//^  7,  1853. 

'  I  am  sorry  that  I  must  again  trouble  you  for  an  explanation  as  to 
the  extent,  as  well  as  the  sort  of  essay,  on  the  original  inhabitants  of 
India  and  the  Zend  emigrants.  You  write  that  it  is  for  your  philo- 
sophical work.  Is  that  "  The  Prophets  "  which  I  saw  when  I  was  in 
London,  or  is  it  an  addition  to  the  philosophical  Aphorisms  of  Hippo- 
lytus  ?  If  it  is  for  the  Aphorisms,  it  ought  to  fill  a  couple  of  pages  at 
most ;  but  if  it  is  for  the  great  work  on  the  "  History  of  the  World," 


1853]  Article  on  Zend  A  vest  a  143 

it  must  be  much  more  diffuse.     Or  is  it  another  book  at  which  you 
are  working  ? ' 

It  is  not  surprising  that  Max  Miiller  was  puzzled  by  the 
multiplicity  of  Bunsen's  works,  for  nearly  all  of  which  he 
asked  for  help  from  his  young  friend.  At  this  time  he  was 
expecting  immediately  three  separate  papers  from  Max 
Miiller — on  the  Zend  Avesta,  the  Rig-veda,  and  the  Turanian 
languages  of  India,  and  later  in  the  year  Bunsen  hoped  for 
a  linguistic  chapter  for  his  work  on  Egypt. 

On  July  II  Max  Miiller  sent  Bunsen  the  chapter  on  Persian 
Researches  which  will  be  found  on  p.  no  of  Volume  III, 
CJiristianity  and  Mankind^  and  which  was  reprinted  in  the 
original  edition  of  Chips,  Volume  I,  but  was  omitted  in  the  last 
edition  as  'not  up  to  date.'     On  July  13  Bunsen  writes : — 

' "  What  one  desired  in  youth  one  obtains  in  old  age."  I  felt  this 
as  I  read  your  chapter  yesterday.  It  is  exactly  what  I  first  wished  to 
know  myself  in  order  to  tell  it  to  my  readers.  You  have  done  it  after 
my  own  heart — only  a  little  too  briefly,  for  a  concluding  sentence  on 
the  connexion  of  the  language  of  the  Achaemenian  Inscriptions  with 
Zend  is  wanting.' 

On  July  30  he  writes  to  his  mother : — 

Translation. 

'  Sunday  is  my  best  day  for  letter-writing.  During  the  week  work 
goes  on  from  early  till  late,  and  my  head  is  so  full  of  Sanskrit  I  feel 
quite  stupified.  I  am  very  glad  I  stayed  here  this  summer.  I  had  so 
many  books  to  read  and  work  through,  for  which  I  have  no  time  in 
my  lectures,  and  yet  one  must  keep  up  with  literature,  or  one  would 
have  to  sing,  like  the  Austrian  militiamen,  "  Immer  langsam  voran." 
That  it  was  hard  to  give  up  my  plans  for  travelling,  you  can  believe ; 
but  one  must  remember  the  duties  as  well  as  the  enjoyments  of  life, 
and  so  we  will  look  forward  to  next  year,  when,  please  God,  we  shall 
be  together.     I  am  very  well,  and  the  harder  I  work  the  better  I  feel.' 

At  this  time,  when  his  old  friend  Carus  was  about  to  be 
married,  he  writes  to  his  mother,  who  was  always  exhorting 
him  to  follow  so  good  an  example,  *  I  have  not  yet  any  plans 
of  the  sort.  I  think  one  has  trouble  enough  in  making  one's 
own  way  through  the  world.  If  such  a  thing  presents  itself — 
well ;  but  I  have  no  wish  to  take  much  trouble  in  looking 
about.' 


144  Visit  to   Wales  [ch.  vm 

Max  Miiller  writes  to  Bunsen  for  his  birthday : — 
Translation.  9,  Park  Place,  August  24. 

'  First  of  all  I  wish  you  joy  of  this  day  with  all  my  heart.  May 
this  day  often  return  to  you  in  the  midst  of  all  your  dear  ones,  and 
in  the  full  tide  of  all  your  work  and  labour.  If  to  grow  a  year  older 
means  to  have  completed  a  new  work,  we  can  stand  the  growing 
older  very  well — it  is  not  then  a  growing  older ;  but  it  is  growing, 
working,  and  getting  young  again,  and  our  strength  grows  with  every 
year  that  has  been  made  use  of,  and  with  every  work  that  has  been 
completed.  A  fresh  and  powerful  Senatus  is  after  all  the  real  strength 
of  a  country,  the  real  support  of  the  res  publica  in  politics  as  well  as 
in  spirit.  The  Juventus  is  too  much  occupied  with  itself,  and  youth 
is  often  more  hindering  than  useful  when  it  comes  to  losing  sight  of 
oneself  as  much  as  possible.  Allow  me  to  continue  to  find  courage 
and  counsel  with  you,  and  have  patience  with  a  passenger  who  would 
like  best  to  sit  still  in  the  carriage  corner,  and  though  not  asleep 
would  fain  close  his  eyes  till  he  has  arrived  at  the  last  station.' 

The  sad  tone  of  the  last  sentence  is  fully  accounted  for  in 
the  next  letter  to  Bunsen,  written  the  end  of  August : — 

Translation,  August  28. 

'  I  feel  what  the  English  call  knocked  up,  and  I  must  get  some  fresh 
air  before  I  can  get  to  work  again.  You  shall  receive  an  essay  on 
Vedic  Antiquity  from  Wales,  where  I  go  to-morrow.  It  is  possible 
that  there  may  be,  among  the  Persians,  people  or  even  races  whose 
forefathers  were  Turanian  or  Semitic,  but  they  acquired  Persian  just 
as  the  Normans  acquired  Saxon,  and  the  Persian  language  has  always 
remained  the  same.  If  it  comes  to  classification  of  languages,  it  does 
not  depend  on  who  speaks  the  languages,  just  as  little  as  a  botanist 
troubles  himself  to  know  whether  a  potato  has  grown  in  Europe  or 
America.  I  always  use  the  term  Aryan  instead  of  Indo-European, 
Iranian  only  for  Persian  and  IMedian.  Both  together  I  take  as  the 
South-Aryan  branch,  in  contrast  to  all  the  rest  of  the  Aryans  who 
turned  to  the  north-west.  The  collection  of  Hymns  of  the  Rig-veda 
was  completed  towards  1000  b.c.  That  cannot  of  course  be  proved 
like  2  +  2  =  4,  hut  it  is  as  sure  as  all  our  knowledge  of  these  times  can 
be.  I  enclose  a  sample  translation  which  is  to  find  a  place  in  the 
Veda  article  :  do  you  know  of  a  poet  who  could  Miltonize  it  a  little 
more  ?  He  must  add  nothing  however,  for  so  far  the  translation  is 
literal,  as  far  as  this  is  possible  with  the  old  thoughts.' 

Max  Miiller  went  to  the  Froudes'  in  Wales,  but  his  enjoy- 
ment of  this  visit  was  spoilt  by  the  weather.  He  tells  his 
mother  it  rained  day  and  night,  and  the  mountains  were  too 


1853]  Visit  to  Scotland  145 

wet  for  any  expeditions.     On  his  return  to  Oxford  he  writes 
to  Bunsen : — 

Trafislatmi.  Oxford,  September  21,  1853, 

'I  returned  yesterday.  My  holiday  was  longer  than  I  expected, 
and  I  hasten  to  send  you  the  introduction  to  the  Aryan  chapter.  I 
went  first  to  Wales  to  Froude,  who  is  very  well,  and  hard  at  work. 
He  has  just  published  an  article  on  John  Knox  in  the  Weslminster. 
In  the  next  number  there  will  be  an  article  on  Job,  and  in  the 
Edinburgh  one  on  Spinoza.  From  Wales  I  went  to  Glasgow,  where 
I  stayed  in  Calder  Park  near  the  city  with  my  friend  Walrond,  With 
him  I  made  excursions  to  Oban  and  Ardtornish,  then  to  Inverary, 
Loch  Lomond,  the  Trossachs,  and  back  to  Glasgow,  then  to  Edin- 
burgh. The  scenery  was  beautiful,  and  the  fine  air  very  enjoyable, 
and  I  hope  my  work  will  go  on  all  the  better  for  it.' 

The  expedition  to  Ardtornish,  to  stay  with  the  parents  of 
their  old  friend  W.  Sellar,  nearly  proved  fatal  to  Max  Miiller 
and  Theodore  Walrond.  They  crossed  from  Oban,  and  a 
sudden  storm  coming  up,  the  row-boat  in  which  they  were 
was  in  great  danger.  The  crew,  who  only  spoke  Gaelic,  to 
quiet  their  fears,  imbibed  so  much  whisky  that  they  seemed 
incapable  of  managing  the  boat,  and  both  Max  and  his  friend 
had  to  lend  a  hand  at  the  oars.  But  they  were  well  repaid 
on  their  arrival  by  the  beauty  of  the  scenery  round  Ardtornish, 
and  the  next  morning,  the  sea  being  calm,  Max  Miiller,  who 
was  all  his  life  a  good  swimmer,  ran  down  to  the  beach  for 
a  dip.  Putting  his  things,  as  he  thought,  in  safety  under  some 
stones,  he  enjoyed  his  bath  to  the  full.  But  he  had  not 
calculated  on  the  force  of  the  wind,  and  on  emerging  from 
the  waves  he  found  his  clothes  scattered  far  and  wide,  and 
some  gone  for  ever.  The  stony  beach  was  covered  with 
a  sort  of  prickly  growth,  probably  a  sea-holly,  and  the  search 
was  long  and  painful,  and  resulted  in  the  recovery  of  only 
a  few  necessary  garments.  In  this  guise  he  had  to  make  his 
way  back  to  the  house,  the  hall  of  which  was  used  for  break- 
fast, and  where  the  family  were  already  assembling.  He  used 
to  say,  in  recounting  the  story,  that  the  horror  of  the  moment 
always  came  back  upon  him  in  full  force. 

On  September  24  Bunsen  writes  : — 

'  You  have  sent  me  the  most  beautiful  thing  you  have  yet  written. 
I  read  your   Veda  essay  yesterday,  first  to  myself  and   then  to  my 

I  L 


146  Taylorian  Professorship  [ch.  vm 

family  circle,  including  Lady  Raffles  your  great  friend  in  petto,  and 
we  were  all  enchanted  with  both  matter  and  form.' 

The  article  of  which  Bunsen  speaks  will  be  found  on  p.  128 
of  Volume  III,  CJiristianity  and  Mankind,  and  was  republished 
in  Chips,  Volume  I,  original  edition,  but  like  the  Persian 
chapter  was  omitted  in  the  last  edition.  In  diction  it  well 
deserves  the  praise  bestowed  on  it  by  Bunsen. 

We  constantly  at  this  time,  in  his  letters  to  Bunsen,  find 
Max  Miiller  complaining  of  the  dilatoriness  and  carelessness 
of  even  the  best  London  printers,  as  compared  with  the 
University  Press  at  Oxford.  In  the  latter  years  of  his  life  he 
would  consent  to  print  nowhere  else. 

The  lectures  this  term  were  on  'The  Origin  of  the  Romance 
Languages,'  and  he  tells  Bunsen  his  'audience  is  larger  than 
ever.'  How  he  managed  to  get  through  all  his  work  is 
a  marvel,  for  besides  his  lectures,  his  Vedic  work,  the 
Turanian  article  for  Bunsen,  and  a  new  work  forced  on 
him  by  his  indefatigable  friend,  of  which  we  shall  hear 
presently,  he  was  collecting  testimonials  for  the  Curators 
of  the  Taylor  Institution,  who  had  definitely  fixed  the 
election  to  the  Professorship  for  the  beginning  of  the  January 
Term.  Meantime  they  had  been  so  satisfied  with  the  result 
of  the  lectures,  that,  as  he  tells  his  mother,  he  is  already 
receiving  this  quarter  the  full  salary.  The  testimonials,  the 
originals  of  which  must  ever  be  a  precious  treasure  for  his 
children,  are  from  Humboldt,  Bunsen,  Bopp,  Lepsius,  Canon 
Jacobson  (later  Bishop  of  Chester),  W.  Thomson  (later  Arch- 
bishop of  York),  Mr.  Jowett,  Professors  Wilson  and  Donkin. 
Mr.  Jowett  says  of  him,  '  There  are  few  persons  in  whom  so 
much  judgement  is  combined  with  so  much  imagination.  It 
would  be  unnecessary  to  add,  except  to  those  who  do  not 
know  him,  that,  during  his  stay  at  Oxford,  he  has  been 
universally  beloved  and  respected.'  Mr.  Donkin  says,  '  He 
can  be  elementary  without  being  (in  the  bad  sense)  popular, 
and  scientific  without  ceasing  to  be  intelligible  and  interesting 
to  beginners.' 

And  now  we  come  to  an  event  that  was  to  alter  and 
influence  the  whole  remainder  of  Max  Miiller's  life,  though 
for  several   years   to   come  the  outer  tenor  of  it  may  have 


1853]  First  Meeting  with  his  Wife  147 

seemed  unchanged,  and  only  one  or  two  intimate  friends 
knew  the  influence  at  work  within  him.  On  November  26 
Max  and  his  future  wife  met  for  the  first  time  at  her  father's 
house.  Mr.  Froude,  her  uncle  by  marriage,  had  often  spoken 
of  his  clever  young  German  friend,  and  his  brother-in-law 
asked  him  to  bring  Max  Muller  for  a  Saturday  to  Monday 
visit.  Years  after,  he  told  her  that  as  soon  as  he  saw  her,  he 
felt,  '  That  is  my  fate.'  The  party  assembled  at  Ray  Lodge 
was  a  pleasant  one,  and  he  at  once  fascinated  all  present  by 
his  brilliant,  lively  conversation  and  exquisite  music.  He 
was  very  dark,  with  regular  features,  fine  bright  eyes,  and 
a  beautiful  countenance  full  of  animation,  and  it  was  difficult 
to  reconcile  his  youthful  appearance  with  his  already  great 
reputation.  Two  days  later  they  met  again,  this  time  at 
Oxford,  where  the  family  from  Ray  Lodge  went  for  a 
meeting  of  the  leading  Church  choirs  of  the  Diocese.  Max 
Miiller  was  their  constant  guide,  and  Magdalen,  Merton, 
Christ  Church,  the  Bodleian,  &c.,  were  visited  in  his  company. 
He  was  asked  to  spend  Christmas  at  Ray  Lodge,  but  fealty 
to  Bunsen  and  the  work  he  was  engaged  in  for  him  kept  him 
at  Oxford. 

To  Chevalier  Bunsen. 

Translaimi.  Oxford,  December  9,  1853. 

'  I  gladly  accept  your  invitation  for  next  Tuesday  (to  meet  Kings- 
ley),  and  I  hope  by  then  the  first  half  of  my  essay  will  be  printed. 
Aufrecht  is  very  busy.  A  week  ago  he  left  this  house  and  has  taken 
a  lodging  for  himself.  He  feels  more  independent,  and  I  too  feel 
more  free.  I  wish  one  could  find  a  secure  place  for  him.  He  has 
been  a  year  here,  and  I  have  never  seen  a  man  so  totally  changed, 
and  certainly  only  for  the  better.' 

It  was  almost  at  the  close  of  the  year  that  Bunsen  asked 
Max  Muller  to  help  him  in  a  scheme  which  was  occupying 
his  own  mind  a  good  deal,  i.e.  a  Uniform  Alphabet  to  be 
used  by  missionaries  in  reducing  languages  to  writing  for  the 
first  time.  Lepsius  had  been  occupied  with  this  problem  for 
some  time,  but  his  alphabet  seemed  too  complicated  for  cheap 
printing.  Max  Muller  at  once  took  up  the  subject,  and  so 
hard  did  he  work  that  his  pamphlet.  Proposals  for  a  Uniform 
Missionary   Alphabet,   was    ready    to    lay    before    the    first 

L  2 


148  Missionary  Alphabet 

conference  held  on  the  subject  at  Bunsen's  house  early  in 
January,  1854.  Max  Miiller's  alphabet  was  very  simple, 
employing  italics  for  the  modifications  of  the  usual  alphabet, 
whereas  Lepsius's  plans  represented  these  modifications  by 
signs,  in  some  cases  as  many  as  three,  over  each  letter. 
In  one  letter  to  Bunsen,  Max  Muller  says,  '  If  we  come  to 
a  common  understanding  with  regard  to  the  thirty-five 
definable  consonants,  and  the  twelve  to  fourteen  vowels, 
let  us  thank  God.'  And  again,  '  If  conferences  are  first  to 
be  held,  I  think  it  would  be  best  I  should  not  appear,  but 
ask  you  to  play  the  part  of  pleader.  I  have  spoilt  so  many 
things  through  undue  eagerness,  that  I  prefer  managing 
everything  by  writing.  But  I  await  your  orders.  If  my 
proposals  are  not  likely  to  be  accepted,  it  is  not  worth  the 
trouble  of  printing.  If  it  is  accepted,  I  am  ready  to  publish 
them  in  golden  letters  on  parchment !  I  promise  Lepsius 
that  if  his  alphabet  is  accepted,  I  will  not  print  a  word  but 
in  that,  even  if  each  letter  has  three  accents.'  So  carefully 
and  thoroughly  did  Max  Miiller  go  into  the  whole  question, 
that  he  spent  several  days  dissecting  throats  with  Dr.  Acland. 
'I  could  give  the  whole  alphabet  anatomically  drawn,'  he  says. 
In  the  Life  of  Baron  Bunsen  we  find  some  extracts  from 
the  diary  of  one  of  his  daughters : — 

'  To  breakfast  came  Sir  C.  Trevelyan,  Sir  J.  Herschell,  Mr.  Arthur, 
Professor  Owen,  afterwards  Mr.  Venn  and  several  missionaries  and 
men  of  learning,  to  take  part  in  the  long-planned  conference  on  the 
comparative  merits  of  two  systems  of  transcription  for  all  alphabets. 
According  to  that  of  Max  Muller,  italics  would  take  the  place  of  all 
accents,  lines,  dots,  used  by  Lepsius.  The  conference  lasted  uninter- 
ruptedly till  half-past  one  o'clock. 

'  Bishop  Thirlwall  dined  with  us,  and  the  conversation  was  ani- 
mated between  him  and  Lepsius  (who  arrived  on  the  27th)  and  Max 
Muller  and  my  father.  The  alphabetical  conferences  take  place  every 
day. 

'  Lepsius  has  returned  to  Berlin.  The  last  conference  to-day  leaves 
the  matter  undecided.' 

And  so  it  remained,  after  all  the  labour  and  time  Bunsen 
and  Max  Miiller  had  expended.  The  English  missionary 
societies  now  mostly  follow  a  system  used  by  the  Bible 
Society,  but  there  is  not  entire  unanimity. 


CHAPTER    IX 

1854-1855 

Professor  of  Modem  Languages.  Second  volume  of  j??z>-7/<?<y<2.  Death  of 
Bumouf.  Crimean  War.  Languages  of  the  Scat  of  War.  Bunsen's 
resignation.  Nehemiah  Goreh.  Visit  to  Gerrnany.  Froude.  Kingsley. 
Macaulay.  Visit  to  Malvern.  Indian  Civil  Service  Examinations. 
Paris.     Dresden.     M.A.  by  decree.     Renan. 

The  year  opened  darkly  with  rumours  of  war.  Writing  to 
Bunsen  for  the  New  Year,  Max  Miiller  says  :— 

Translation.  9,  Park  Vh^c^,  January  i. 

'  Above  all,  my  best  congratulations  for  the  New  Year  :  may  it  be 
a  calm  and  blessed  one  for  you  and  yours  ;  and  may  it  above  all 
things  teach  the  Russians  and  the  Russophiles,  that  Europe  will  not 
be  Cossacked  nor  Kossuthed,  and  that  she  would  prefer  to  see  the 
Crescent  at  Petersburg  to  the  Russian  Cross  at  Constantinople. 

*  My  best  thanks  for  your  kind  testimonial,  which  arrived  just  at  the 
right  time  ;  I  hope  it  will  have  had  its  good  effect  in  about  a  fortnight 
or  three  weeks'  time ;  if  not,  I  am  just  as  ready  to  go  to  India  as 
Botticher  is,' 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  Oxso^ii,  January  26,  1854. 

'  Since  Christmas  I  have  not  had  a  quiet  moment,  though  it  is  our 
vacation.  ...  I  have  had  to  go  constantly  to  London  to  talk  to 
missionaries  and  others.  The  alphabet  is  now  printed,  and  yesterday 
we  had  a  general  conference  at  Bunsen's,  where  all  missionary 
societies  were  represented.  There  are  many  difficulties,  and  I  am 
tired  of  the  whole  thing,  for  it  takes  up  so  much  of  my  time,  and  it  is 
difficult  to  fit  all  missionaries  with  the  same  cap  !  I  was  quite  alone 
here  in  Oxford  at  Christmas,  to  write  my  treatise  on  the  alphabet, 
which  had  to  be  printed  before  the  New  Year.  Since  then  I  have 
been  living  between  Oxford  and  London,  and  have  thus  met  many 
interesting  people,  which  is  always  a  good  thing.    Bunsen  now  begins 


150  Loss  of  MSS.  [cH.  IX 

to  believe  in  war,  but  always  says,  if  the  Russians  can  find  a  back 
door,  they  will  yield.  But  England  begins  to  feel  it  has  had  enough, 
and  when  they  once  begin  war  here,  diplomacy  can  do  nothing ;  for  it 
is  the  people  that  make  war  here,  not  the  sovereign  and  ministers.  It 
was  very  cold  early  in  January  and  I  had  some  skating.  How  curious 
that  you  should  just  have  been  at  Jessnitz  when  the  old  grandmother 
died  !  One  need  not  lament  her  death,  for  her  soul  must  have  longed 
to  be  free  from  its  old  body.  No  doubt  the  soul  must  find  it  difficult 
in  childhood  to  accustom  itself  to  the  human  body,  and  it  takes  many 
years  before  it  is  quite  at  home.  Then  for  a  time  all  goes  well,  and 
the  soul  hardly  knows  it  is  hidden  in  a  strange  garment,  till  the  body 
begins  to  be  weakly,  and  can  no  longer  do  all  the  soul  wishes,  and 
presses  it  everywhere,  so  that  the  soul  appears  to  lose  all  outward 
freedom  and  movement.  Then  one  can  well  understand  that  we  long 
to  be  gone,  and  death  is  a  true  deliverance.  God  always  knows  best, 
when  the  right  time  comes.  I  have  just  been  reading  Riickert's 
poems ;  they  are  very  beautiful  in  spite  of  a  certain  weakness,  and  his 
latest  home  poems  are  full  of  natural  feeling.' 

Though  much  time  and  thought  had  been  given  to  the 
missionary  alphabet,  Max  MUller's  real  interest  was  with  the 
second  volume  of  the  Rig-veda,  which  was  published  early  in 
this  year.  The  preface  is  dated  Christmas,  1853,  and  the 
printing  had  been  finished  by  that  date,  but  there  was  always 
some  delay  about  the  binding  and  publishing,  which  were  not 
in  Max  Muller's  hands.  With  the  text  of  the  Hymns  in  this 
volume  there  had  not  been  much  difficulty,  but  the  MSS.  of 
Sayana's  Commentary  were  most  defective.  Max  MUller, 
before  finishing  the  first  volume,  had  written  to  India  to  obtain, 
at  his  own  expense,  new  MSS.  for  the  second.  After  long 
delay  he  heard  that  the  MSS.  which  Dr.  Roer  had  secured  for 
him  in  Calcutta  had  been  lost  by  shipwreck.  Fortunately, 
Professor  Wilson  received  just  at  this  time  a  complete  copy  of 
the  Commentary  from  Benares,  the  most  ancient  copy  of  Sayana 
that  had  then  come  to  Europe.  This  he  generously  gave  to 
his  young  friend.  It  contained  many  emendations  and  correc- 
tions, which  greatly  simplified  the  editor's  labour.  The  task 
had  been  further  lightened  by  the  work  of  other  Vedic  scholars, 
who,  since  Max  Miiller  had  begun  his  edition,  had  published 
many  of  the  works  alluded  to  by  Sayana,  which,  for  his  first 
volume.  Max  had  had  to  copy  and  collate  for  himself,  before  he 


1854]  Death  of  Burnoiif  151 

could  verify  the  innumerable  quotations.  The  Sdma-veda  had 
been  published  by  Benfey,  and  the  Yajitr-veda  by  Weber, 
whilst  Stenzler,  Roth,  and  Whitney  had  all  been  active  in  this 
field  of  Sanskrit  literature.  To  all  these  writers  Max  MUller 
acknowledges  his  indebtedness,  and  also  gratefully  men- 
tions the  assistance  and  active  co-operation  of  his  secretary, 
Dr.  Aufrecht,  in  the  latter  part  of  Vol.  II — '  my  learned 
friend,'  as  he  calls  him,  and  adds,  *  The  benefit  of  his  services 
cannot  be  too  highly  valued.'  The  preface  ends  with  an 
eloquent  tribute  to  his  master  and  friend,  Eugene  Burnouf, 
whose  death  in  1852  had  been  an  almost  irreparable  personal 
loss  to  Max  Miiller,  as  well  as  to  all  Sanskrit  students : — 

'  In  losing  Burnouf  we  have  lost,  not  only  an  indefatigable  fellow 
labourer,  not  only  a  disinterested  teacher,  but  a  most  respected  judge; 
in  his  approval  valued  by  all,  in  his  censure  feared,  in  his  verdict 
distinguished  unfailingly  by  fairness  and  by  truth.  .  .  .  When  I  heard 
of  his  death  I  felt — and  I  believe  that  many  engaged  in  similar  studies 
shared  the  feeling — as  if  our  work  had  lost  much  of  its  charm  and 
its  purpose.  "  What  will  Burnouf  say  ?  "  was  my  earliest  thought  on 
completing  the  first  volume  of  the  Rig-veda.  And  now  as  I  finish 
the  second,  in  its  turn  submitted  to  the  judgement  of  so  many  scholars 
whose  friendship  I  value,  and  whose  learning  I  admire,  my  thoughts 
turn  again  to  him  who  is  no  longer  among  us,  and  I  think,  not 
without  sadness,  of  what  his  judgement  would  have  been.' 

Early  in  February  the  long  uncertainty  about  the  Taylorian 
Professorship  was  brought  to  a  close  by  Max  MUller's  nomi- 
nation by  the  Curators,  confirmed  by  Convocation  on  February 
21.  The  Vice-Chancellor,  Dr.  Cotton,  in  writing  to  announce 
the  unanimous  election  by  the  Curators,  adds,  '  I  feel  great 
satisfaction  in  the  consideration  that  so  eminent  and  talented 
a  Professor  has  been  elected.'  He  hastens  to  announce 
his  success : — 

To  F.  Palgrave,  Esq. 

February  8,  1854. 

'  The  Professorship  has  been  settled  at  last,  and  I  got  it.  I  cannot 
tell  you  how  happy  I  feel,  after  the  long  suspense,  to  have  at  last 
a  TToC  aju)  for  the  rest  of  this  life,  and  to  be  able  to  look  on  quietly 
till  the  moving  panorama  comes  to  an  end.  I  feel  now  more  than 
ever  that  it  is  owing  to  the  kindness  of  those  who  first  received  me  at 
Oxford  that  I  owe  my  further  success  and  my  present  position — ce 


T52  Full  Professorship  [ch.  ix 

n'est  que  le  premier  pas  qui  cofite,  aud  after  I  was  once  in  the  right 
boat,  I  was  sure  to  get  into  harbour  sooner  or  later.  I  shall  write  to 
old  Joe.  I  wish  we  could  all  meet  again  and  have  a  jolly  party,  as  we 
used  to  have  five  or  six  years  ago,  when  I  little  thought  of  what  was 
looming  in  the  future.  I  hope  we  shall  manage  a  little  gathering 
after  Froude  is  able  to  come.  He  has  taken  a  cottage  at  Babbicombe 
for  the  next  year.  I  was  in  London  for  a  week,  kept  from  day  to 
day  by  alphabetic  conferences,  where  I  had  to  act  as  secretary  and 
to  write  generally  till  3  o'clock  in  the  morning.  I  had  not  an  hour 
to  myself,  and  after  it  was  over  I  had  to  go  to  Oxford  in  order  to  see 
that  all  was  going  right  about  the  ship.  Now  it  is  launched,  and 
I  hope  to  have  a  pleasant  cruise  in  it. 

'  Ever  yours,  M.  M.' 

Bunsen  wrote  at  once  to  congratulate : — 

Translation.  February  8. 

' .  .  .  Your  position  in  Hfe  now  rests  on  a  firm  foundation,  .  .  .  and 
that  in  this  heaven-blest,  secure,  free  island,  and  at  a  moment  when  it 
is  hard  to  say  whether  the  thrones  of  princes  or  the  freedom  of  nations 
is  in  greatest  danger.     With  true  affection,  yours.' 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  Oxford,  March  10. 

'  I  am  living  in  such  a  turmoil  that  I  can  settle  to  nothing,  and 
have  hardly  time  to  write  a  letter.  I  have  been  made  full  Professor 
this  term,  and  so  there  have  been  endless  invitations  and  parties  of  all 
sorts.  I  am  rather  tired  of  it  all,  and  wish  I  lived  some  miles  out  of 
Oxford,  so  as  to  have  my  time  to  myself.  You  can  imagine  I  was  not 
a  little  pleased  when  everything  was  definitely  settled,  but  when  one 
waits  so  long  for  a  thing  it  does  not  give  one  the  same  pleasure  as 
when  it  comes  unexpectedly.  But  I  heartily  thank  God  that  my 
future  is  now  entirely  secured,  as  far  as  food  and  raiment  are  con- 
cerned !  At  present  I  shall  stay  where  I  am,  and  I  shall  be  very  sorry 
to  leave,  but  I  know  I  must  take  a  larger  house  in  time.  I  shall  stay 
here  till  the  Summer  Vacation,  and  then  when  I  come  back  I  will 
furnish  a  small  house,  in  which  you  can  perhaps  help  me.  Or 
perhaps  you  will  pay  me  a  visit  in  the  vacation  here,  instead  of  my 
going  to  Dresden }  I  have  still  a  good  deal  of  correspondence  with 
missionaries,  who  are  not  always  easy  to  deal  with.  Aufrecht  is  still 
working  for  me,  but  he  lives  in  another  house  for  himself,  and  gives 
private  lessons.  He  is  happy  here,  and  very  useful  to  me,  but  it  is 
rather  expensive.  I  shall  not  want  for  money,  when  I  think  with  how 
little  I  managed  once.  I  enclose  a  little  proof  of  my  Professorship ; 
you  will  know  what  use  to  make  of  it.     If  you  want  to  buy  a  book, 


1854]         Languages  of  the  Seat  of  War  153 

I  would  recommend  Tauler's  Sermons ;  they  are  very  beautiful,  but 
you  must  get  an  edition  in  modernized  German.  We  already  begin 
to  feel  the  war.  Everything  is  dearer,  and  the  taxes  will  be  doubled. 
It  can't  be  helped,  and  there  is  no  doubt  as  to  the  result.' 

On  March  2J,  three  days  before  war  was  declared  against 
Russia,  Max  Mliller  received  a  letter  from  Sir  Charles 
Trevelyan,  then  Assistant-Secretary  to  the  Treasury,  begging 
officially  for  his  help  in  directing  the  officers  proceeding  to  the 
East  how  to  study  the  languages  of  the  northern  division  of 
the  Turkish  Empire  and  the  adjoining  provinces  of  Russia. 
Some  private  letters  had  already  passed  between  Sir  Charles 
and  the  Professor  of  Modern  European  Languages,  and 
Max  Miiller  had  written  : 

'  That  corner  of  Europe  between  the  North  of  Italy  and  Turkey  and 
along  the  Danube  is  a  real  linguistic  rookery.  All  the  lost  daughters 
of  the  European  families  of  languages  have  taken  refuge  there ;  and 
they  exhibit,  each,  the  lowest  degradation  and  corruption  of  grammar 
that  can  be  imagined.  In  the  Albanian  we  recognize  the  noble 
features  of  Greek  ;  in  Wallachian,  those  of  Latin  ;  in  Bulgarian,  those 
of  the  Old  Slavonic  language ;  but  all  sadly  distorted  and  disfigured. 
Very  little  has  been  done  toward  a  literary  culture  of  these  dialects, 
and  even  grammars  are  scarce ;  there  are  certainly  none  in  English, 
as  far  as  I  am  aware.' 

He  had  prepared  a  list  of  elementary  grammars  and  a  few 
simple  instructions,  which  Sir  Charles  had  imparted  to  all  the 
commissariat  officers.  But  the  letter,  dated  March  20,  states 
that  something  more  than  this  should  be  attempted,  and  adds, 
'  If  you  agree  with  me  in  this,  you  will  at  once  feel  that  there 
is  a  call  upon  you  to  help  in  this  good  work  ' ;  and  Sir  Charles 
entreats  Max  Mliller  to  prepare  at  once  a  treatise,  showing 
what  languages  are  spoken  in  that  part  of  the  world,  their 
general  structure,  and  the  alphabets  used,  and  what  would  be 
the  most  useful  books  on  the  respective  languages.  Sir  Charles 
concludes  thus  :  '  I  have  only  two  further  suggestions  to  make, 
(i)  That  whatever  you  do  should  be  done  quickly.  Every 
part  of  this  great  effort  is  under  war  pressure.  (2)  That  you 
should  tell  us  at  once  what  you  know  now^  leaving  the  rest  to 
be  perfected  hereafter.'  So  heartily  did  Max  Mliller  respond 
to  the  call,  that  by  May  16  he  was  able  to  send  Sir  Charles 


154  Oriental  Studies  [ch.  ix 

his  Suggestions  for  the  Assistance  of  Officers  in  learning  the 
Languages  of  the  Seat  of  War  in  the  East.  A  second  edition 
was  required  within  a  year. 

In  his  introductory  letter  to  Sir  Charles  he  first  called 
attention  to  a  subject  that  continued  to  occupy  his  thoughts 
almost  to  the  end  of  his  life.     He  writes  :  — 

'  It  is  undoubtedly  high  time  that  something  should  be  done  to 
encourage  the  study  of  Oriental  languages  in  England.  At  the  very 
outset  of  this  war,  it  has  been  felt  how  much  this  branch  of  studies — 
in  emergencies  hke  the  present  so  requisite — has  been  neglected  in 
the  system  of  our  education.  In  all  other  countries  which  have  any 
political,  commercial,  or  religious  connexions  with  the  East,  provision 
has  been  made,  by  Government  or  otherwise,  to  encourage  young 
men  to  devote  themselves  to  this  branch  of  studies.  Russia  has  always 
been  a  most  liberal  patron  of  Oriental  philology.  In  the  Academy 
of  St.  Petersburg  there  is  a  chair  for  every  branch  of  Oriental 
literature.  The  French  Government  has  founded  a  school,  '  L'&ole 
pour  les  langues  orientales  vivantes.'  At  Vienna  there  is  an  Oriental 
seminary.  Prussia  finds  it  expedient  to  give  encouragement  to  young 
Oriental  scholars,  employed  afterwards  with  advantage  as  consuls  and 
interpreters.  In  England  alone,  where  the  most  vital  interests  are 
involved  in  a  free  intercourse  with  the  East,  hardly  anything  is  done 
to  foster  Oriental  studies.' 

Just  before  the  publication  of  his  book,  Max  writes  to 
Bunsen : — 

Translation.  Park  Place,  1854. 

*  I  am  busy  with  my  lectures,  and  am  printing  my  book  on  the 
Languages  of  the  Seat  of  War,  100  pages,  with  a  very  fine  map  by 
Petermann,  so  that  I  never  get  to  bed  before  2  a.m.' 

To  his  mother  he  writes  :  — 

Translation.  Park  Place,  April  ji. 

'  I  am  so  engrossed  with  work,  that  I  have  hardly  a  free  minute, 
and  that  will  go  on  till  vacation.  I  cannot  feel  certain  about  my 
plans  for  travelling.  I  must  spend  part  of  the  vacation  in  Paris, 
as  I  must  work  at  a  IMS.  in  the  library  there.  The  only  thing 
that  draws  me  to  Germany  is  Auguste,  who  cannot  well  leave 
Chemnitz,  otherwise  life  in  Dresden  or  Dessau  is  not  very  attractive, 
and  we  might  all  meet  nicely  in  Paris,  if  Emilia  would  come  there. 
Time  becomes  more  precious  every  year,  and  a  quarter  of  a  year 
is  now  as  important  to  one  as  a  year  was  formerly.     This  shows  one 


r854]  Btmsen's  Resignation  155 

is  no  longer  young.  One  becomes  economical  with  one's  time,  and  life 
is  so  serious  just  now,  one  has  no  right  to  think  of  pleasure,  when  so 
many  men  are  suffering.  And  yet  it  is  a  war  that  could  not  be 
avoided.  The  Russian  lust  of  conquest  and  the  whole  influence  of 
Russia  in  Europe,  especially  in  Germany,  must  be  thrown  back  on 
its  own  borders,  or  we  should  have  to  fight  the  battles  which  are  now 
being  fought  on  the  Danube,  on  the  Elbe  or  Rhine.  It  will  be 
a  terrible  war,  but  one  cannot  doubt  the  issue,  for  England,  when  war 
once  begins,  puts  forth  her  whole  strength,  and  the  feeling  that  you 
are  fighting  for  a  just  cause  keeps  up  the  courage  even  in  disaster.' 

But  whilst  realizing  the  necessity  of  the  war.  Max  MUller 
was  to  be  indirectly  one  of  the  many  sufferers  from  it.  His 
friend  and  patron,  Bunsen,  could  not  approve  the  attitude  of 
Prussia,  and  it  was  widely  known  that  his  recall  from  England 
was  imminent.  George  Bunsen,  Max  MUUer's  most  intimate 
friend  of  all  Bunsen's  sons,  writes  to  him  : 

Carlton  Terrace,  April  14. 

'  Dearest  Friend, — So  it  is.  My  father  has  not  up  to  this  moment 
received  a  recall.  On  the  other  hand,  we  expect  to-morrow  the  reply 
to  an  answer  sent  by  my  father  to  a  renewed  and  very  impetuous 
offer  of  leave  of  absence.  In  this  answer  my  father  made  his  accepting 
leave  of  absence  dependent  on  certain  conditions  guaranteeing  his  poli- 
tical honour.  If  the  reply  to-morrow  does  not  contain  those  con- 
ditions, nothing  remains  but  for  my  father  to  send  in  his  resignation.' 

To  F.  Palgrave,  Esq. 

9,  Park  Place,  April  i8,  1854. 

' .  .  .  I  should  like  to  have  seen  you  when  you  heard  of  Scott's 
appointment.  I  am  afraid  you  did  not  use  quite  parliamentary 
language  on  the  occasion;  I  neither,  particularly  as,  up  to  the  last, 
Jowett's  chances  seemed  as  clear  and  certain  as  could  be,  without 
downright  bargaining.  I  am  sorry  to  see  that  Jowett  feels  it  very 
much,  and  I  think  just  now  some  testimonial  from  his  friends,  like 
the  one  you  contemplated  some  time  ago,  would  be  very  opportune. 
Could  you  persuade  Richmond  to  do  his  portrait  ?  I  think  it  might  be 
done  for  about  £100,  and  I  am  sure  we  could  get  as  much  from  his 
friends.  What  do  you  say  ?  Vacation  is  nearly  over,  and  I  have  not 
yet  been  away,  though  I  intended  to  go  to  the  seaside  and  get  fresh 
air.  But  I  have  to  do  some  work  for  the  Government,  and  have  been 
at  it  day  and  night,  working  against  time.  I  hope  we  shall  hear 
something  from  the  Black  Sea  soon.    The  slowness  of  these  people 


156  Work  for  Bunsen  [ch.  ix 

is  intolerable ;  they  are  always  a  day  too  late.  I  congratulate  Bunsen 
on  having  got  out  of  the  claws  of  the  Black  Eagle.  I  dare  say  he  will 
get  the  next  vacant  seat  on  the  Episcopal  bench  in  England  ! 

'  Ever  yours,  M.  M.' 

Besides  the  work  for  the  Government,  Max  Miiller  was  busy- 
in  printing  his  essay  on  the  Turanian  languages  for  Bunsen's 
book,  which  had  grown  under  his  hands,  and  had  had  to  be 
put  aside  whilst  the  missionary  alphabet  was  printing.  The 
dilatoriness  of  the  printers  in  London  caused  him  and  Bunsen 
much  trouble,  as  the  work  had  to  be  finished  before  Bunsen 
left  England,  and  though  Max  Miiller  worked  through  half 
the  night  whenever  a  proof-sheet  appeared,  his  letters  are  full 
of  despair.  Bunsen  writes  on  May  10,  '  The  work  presses,' 
but  did  not  seem  to  realize  that  the  delay  was  not  with  Max 
nor  in  Oxford.  In  the  same  letter  the  Minister,  writing  for 
the  last  time  from  Carlton  Terrace,  says,  '  The  house  is 
deserted,  but  the  heart  rejoices,  and  the  soul  already  spreads 

its  wings.' 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  Oxford,  May  12. 

'  Bunsen's  resignation  is  a  real  loss  to  me.  I  saw  him  in  London — 
the  house  is  now  empty.  Yet  one  can  only  congratulate  him  on 
having  saved  his  good  name,  at  the  right  moment.  His  leaving  gave 
me  a  great  deal  of  work  and  disturbance.  He  is  just  bringing  out 
a  new  book  in  seven  volumes.  I  had  various  things  to  write  for  him, 
and  as  it  had  to  be  ready  by  the  twentieth,  I  never  got  to  bed  be  ore 
two.  Now  I  have  undertaken  a  work  for  Government,  which  is  just 
printed.  Then  came  the  lectures,  and  the  Veda  above  all,  so  that 
I  really  have  not  a  moment  to  think  of  or  do  anything  else,  and  can 
say  nothing  about  my  plans  for  summer.' 

To  Chevalier  Bunsen. 
Translation.  Oxford,  May  22. 

'  I  cannot  believe  that  you  think  of  leaving  England.  Surely  the 
Prussian  crisis  cannot  last  much  longer,  and  when  it  is  over,  you  will 
have  to  return  to  Carlton  Terrace.  Whilst  writing  the  word  believe, 
I  think  of  a  question  I  meant  to  ask.  To  believe,  as  far  as  I  know, 
means  "to  be  " — lieben  ;  Lat.  liber e  and  lubereJ 

To  THE  Same. 
Translation.  Oxford,  June  8. 

'  Are  you  really  leaving  as  soon  as  Acland  tells  me  ?  If  this  is  so, 
I  must  go  to  London  on  Saturday  or  Sunday,  the  only  days  I  can  get 


1854]  Bunsen  leaves  England  157 

away,  as  I  am  giving  my  lectures.  I  still  wait,  and  still  hope,  a  new 
Prussia  will  arise,  which  cannot  do  without  you  here  in  England. 
England  begins  to  feel  like  a  strange  land  to  me,  when  I  think  that 
you  are  really  going.  Will  you  not  wait  till  Hippolytus  is  out  ? 
The  printer  does  not  seem  in  any  hurry.' 

On  June  12  Bunsen,  writing  to  his  wife,  who  had  gone  to 
Heidelberg  to  settle  his  future  home,  mentions  that  he  had 
had  'a  delightful  day  with  Max  Miiller.'  Five  days  later, 
this  faithful  friend  left  England,  and  Max  felt  as  if  stranded 
in  a  foreign  land.  Too  much  occupied  at  this  time  with  his 
work  to  write  more  than  very  short  letters  to  his  mother,  in 
all  of  them  he  expresses  his  sense  of  loss.  Bunsen's  house  in 
London  had  been  a  second  home  to  him,  where  he  was  always 
sure  of  a  welcome,  always  sure  of  encouragement  and  sym- 
pathy, of  intellectual  intercourse,  and  of  that  intelligent  interest 
in  his  work  and  the  far-reaching  problems  which  it  unfolded, 
which  he  missed  so  sorely  in  his  daily  life  in  Oxford,  where 
hardly  any  one  understood  the  work  on  which  he  was  engaged, 
or  took  a  real  interest  in  it,  or  were  capable  of  discussing  it 
with  him  scientifically. 

'  In  all  my  researches,'  he  writes  in  ihe  Autobiography,  'no  one  took 
a  livelier  interest  or  encouraged  me  more  than  Bunsen.  When  some 
of  my  translations  of  the  Vedic  Hymns  seemed  fairly  satisfactory,  I  used 
to  take  them  to  him,  and  he  was  always  delighted  at  seeing  a  little 
more  of  that  ancient  Aryan  torso,  though  ...  he  was  more  especially 
interested  in  Egyptian  chronology  and  archaeology.  Often  when 
I  was  alone  with  him,  we  discussed  the  chronological  and  psycho- 
logical dates  of  Egyptian  and  Aryan  antiquity.' 

The  last  left  of  the  daughters  of  that  large  and  happy  family 
writes : — 

To  Mrs.  Max  MiJller. 

Carlsruhe,  December  13,  1901. 

'  My  memory  now  only  recalls  impressmis  of  your  dear  husband. 
The  charm  of  his  whole  being,  his  beautiful,  almost  Greek  profile,  his 
wonderful  playing,  specially  of  Mendelssohn  and  Chopin,  and  delightful 
power  of  interesting  and  fascinating  one  by  his  conversation,  all  that 
is  still  very  clear  and  warm  in  my  recollection ;  and  we  girls  all  fully 
understood  my  father's  admiration,  and  fatherly  love,  and  interest  in 
him.  .  .  .  He  did  not  live  in  Carlton  Terrace  with  us,  only  came 
in  and  out,  and  of  course  was  chiefly  closeted  with  my  father  in  his 


158  Nehemiah  Nilkanth  [ch.  ix 

library  below ;  and  we  only  saw  him  at  meals,  or  when  he  had  time 
to  look  us  up  in  the  drawing-rooms,  and  there,  I  well  remember,  we 
tried  as  soon  as  possible  to  get  him  to  sit  at  the  pianoforte  and  play 
to  us.  'Very  truly  yours, 

'Emilia  von  Bunsen.' 


It  was  soon  after  the  parting  with  his  friend  and  patron  that 
Max  Miiller  heard  from  Sir  Charles  Trevelyan  that  he  was 
thoroughly  satisfied  with  his  treatise :  '  I  cannot  bestow  higher 
praise  upon  it  than  by  saying  that  it  appears  to  me  com- 
pletely to  answer  the  important  object  for  which  it  was 
written.'  Bunsen,  too,  wrote  :  '  I  read  your  book  .  .  .  with  real 
delight  and  sincere  admiration.' 

The  following  letter  from  Dr.  John  Muir,  the  editor  of 
Original  Sanskrit  Texts,  or  the  Origin  and  History  of  the 
People  of  India,  and  later  the  munificent  founder  of  the  San- 
skrit Professorship  in  Edinburgh,  then  just  returned  from 
twenty-five  years'  service  in  India,  contains  the  first  mention 
of  a  man  of  whom  Max  Miiller  always  spoke  with  reverential 
affection  : — 

33,  Sussex  Gardens, /z^«(?  26,  1854. 

'  My  dear  Sir, — It  may  interest  you  to  know  that  there  is  at  present 
in  London  a  Pundit  from  Benares,  though  he  has  become  a  Christian. 
He  has  come  to  England  with  the  Maharaja  Duleep  Singh,  as  a  sort 
of  tutor  or  companion  to  His  Highness.  His  name  is  Nehemiah 
Nilkanth,  the  former  appellative  having  been  adopted  by  him  according 
to  his  own  wish  on  the  occasion  of  his  baptism.  He  was  not  a  pro- 
fessed Pundit  in  the  sense  of  being  a  teacher  of  Sanskrit  Grammar, 
or  of  any  of  the  Six  Darsanas  or  any  other  branch,  but  he  is  a  Sanskrit 
scholar,  being  able  to  write  the  language  accurately  and  fluently,  and 
having  a  general  knowledge  of  the  philosophical  schools.  At  the 
commencement  of  his  inquiries  into  Christianity,  he  wrote  an  answer 
to  one  of  my  tracts  (a  former  edition  of  the  Mataparikshd),  composed 
in  Sanskrit  verse.  After  long  and  painful  inquiries  and  struggles,  he 
became  convinced  of  the  truth  of  Christianity,  which  he  accordingly 
embraced.  He  has  latterly  been  employed  as  a  catechist ;  and  when 
Dr.  Login  (who  has  charge  of  the  Maharaja)  was  leaving  India,  he 
brought  Nilkanth  along  with  him. 

'  If,  therefore,  you  are  curious  to  see  a  specimen  of  a  Pundit  without 
going  beyond  London,  your  wish  can  be  gratified,  and  if  you  desire 


1854]  Visit  to  Germany  159 

it,  I  shall  be  glad  to  go  with  you  to  Dr.  Login  at  Mivart's  in  Brook 
Street,  if  you  are  likely  to  be  soon  in  London.  Nilkanth,  since  his 
conversion,  has  written  a  tract  in  Hindoo  against  the  Vcddnla, 
which  is  interesting  as  an  exposition  of  what  he  considers  the  doctrine 
of  that  school.  He  knew  some  English  when  I  last  saw  him,  and 
is  probably  improved  in  his  knowledge  of  it  now. 

'  Believe  me,  yours  very  faithfully, 

'  John  Muir.' 

Nehemiah  Goreh  came  to  Oxford  to  see  Max  MUller,  and 
they  became,  after  a  short  time,  very  intimate.  Nehemiah 
had  suffered  cruelly  for  his  change  of  religion,  and  on  his 
return  to  India  his  mind  seems  to  have  lost  its  balance,  and 
after  some  years  of  asceticism  and  complete  renunciation  of 
the  world,  he  joined  the  branch  of  the  Cowley  Fathers  estab- 
lished in  India.  Up  to  that  time,  he  had  written  to  and  heard 
from  Max  Mliller  from  time  to  time.  When  he  revisited 
England  and  Oxford  many  years  later,  he  was  so  completely 
under  the  discipline  of  the  Brotherhood,  that  it  was  only  the 
very  day  that  he  left  Oxford,  where  he  had  spent  many  weeks, 
that  he  was  allowed  to  visit  his  old  friend  for  a  few  moments, 
and  the  visit  gave  little  pleasure  to  either.  '  He  was  steeped 
in  the  Christianity  of  the  Church,'  which  Max  always  distin- 
guished from  '  the  Christianity  of  Christ.' 

In  July  Max  MUller  went  to  Germany,  and  with  his  mother 
revisited  his  sister  and  many  other  relations. 

To  Chevalier  Bunsen. 

Translation.  CnEumTZ,  July  30,  1854. 

'I  received  your  last  friendly  letter  from  Heidelberg,  just  as  I  had 
struck  my  tent  in  Oxford,  and  was  on  my  way  to  Germany.  Since 
then  I  have  been  always  on  the  move  from  place  to  place,  and  never 
had  any  rest  or  a  moment  for  writing.  Now  I  have  finished  my  visits, 
and  am  going  on  a  few  longer  expeditions,  and  your  kind  invitation 
draws  me  westward  to  Heidelberg,  and  thence  I  hope  to  go  to 
Switzerland,  North  Italy,  Venice,  and  Vienna.  My  plan  is  to  start 
in  a  few  days  with  my  mother,  to  pay  a  few  visits  on  the  way,  to  see 
Riickert  and  reach  Heidelberg  about  the  middle  of  August.  I  hope 
to  stay  there  with  my  mother  for  a  fortnight,  and  as  it  is  not  so  far 
from  Heidelberg  to  your  house  as  from  the  City  to  the  West  End, 
I  hope  to  renew  the  happy  hours  which,  only  a  short  time   ago, 


i6o  Visit  to  Heidelberg  [ch.  ix 

I  could  spend  with  you  in  Carlton  Terrace.  I  do  not  know  Heidel- 
berg, and  your  account  has  made  me  long  to  see  the  Academia 
Nicorina.  Then  I  hope  we  shall  be  reconciled  about  Aryans  or 
Iranians,  about  which  I  do  not  care  to  speak  from  Chemnitz,  as  no 
philological  wind  blows  here.  The  middle  of  August  I  expect  some 
friends  in  Heidelberg,  perhaps  Jowett,  and  we  may  go  on  together 
to  Italy  and  Vienna.  Unfortunately  I  must  be  back  by  October  i, 
as  the  Election  takes  place  then.  I  have  not  yet  heard  whether  the 
Bill  has  been  sent  back  to  the  Commons,  and  what  changes  have  been 
made  in  it,  but  I  fear  I  must  be  at  my  post  by  the  beginning  of  term. 
The  parties  are  nearly  equal,  and  each  vote  tells.  Dissenters  are 
admitted,  but  Gladstone  has  done  much  harm,  and  the  Commissioners 
are  very  much  restricted  in  carrying  out  the  needed  reforms,  at  least 
in  what  concerns  the  colleges.  The  advance  of  public  opinion  in 
Oxford  is  remarkable,  when  one  thinks  how  quickly  it  has  come.' 

After  a  pleasant  time  in  Heidelberg,  where  he  was  able  to 
introduce  to  his  friends  his  dearly  loved  mother,  of  whom 
Bunsen  writes  later  as  '  your  remarkable  mother,'  Max  Miiller 
joined  his  old  friend  Baron  Hagedorn,  and  with  him  visited 
Worms,  Speyer,  Baden-Baden,  and  the  Black  Forest,  and 
went  on  alone  to  spend  a  week  at  Vienna  with  his  friend 
Robert  Morier,  then  secretary  at  the  English  Embassy.  Italy 
had  to  be  given  up  on  account  of  cholera.  From  Vienna  he 
went  again  for  a  time  to  his  mother  in  Dresden,  and  finally 
returned  to  Oxford  early  in  October,  where  he  tells  his  mother 
he  had  a  rapturous  welcome  from  his  little  dog  Belle.  He 
writes  on  his  return  that  he  is  feeling  so  very  well  that  he  has  no 
qualms  of  conscience  over  his  three  months'  idleness,  and  adds, 
'  If  we  can  be  together  three  months  in  the  year,  free  from  all 
cares,  we  can  bear  the  other  nine  months,  and  if  the  parting 
is  always  very  painful,  it  is  made  up  for  by  the  joy  of  meeting.' 

During  the  summer.  Max  MUller  received  from  time  to  time, 
through  Sir  Charles  Trevelyan,  letters  from  officers,  consuls, 
and  others  on  his  Languages  of  the  Seat  of  War,  many  of 
them  containing  valuable  corrections  which  he  embodied  in 
the  second  edition.  The  consul  at  Mitylene  wrote,  '  I  have 
received  Miiller's  admirable  memoir,  and  must  thank  him  for 
the  pleasure  and  instruction  it  has  afforded  me.  It  is  like 
letting  in  broad  daylight  on  a  subject  which  had  been 
hitherto  explored  by  a  farthing  rushlight.' 


1854]  Fronde  and  Kingsley  161 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  November  ii,  1854. 

'  I  tried  on  your  birthday  to  play  a  little,  but  I  have  no  time  now 
for  such  things.  I  have  a  great  deal  of  work  in  prospect,  and  however 
great  the  delight  I  feel  in  music  and  art,  my  work  comes  before 
everything  else.  My  free  time  I  must  give  to  walking,  which  is  most 
necessary;  and  to  get  stronger  exercise  I  play  racquets,  which  makes 
one  perspire  even  more  than  camomile  tea.  When  one  is  nearly 
thirty-one,  one  must  be  economical  of  one's  time,  and  give  up  many 
things  that  are  a  pleasure,  but  for  which  one's  time  is  loo  precious. 
How  many  things  I  would  like  to  read,  but  there  is  no  time,  and 
I  must  be  content.  One's  delight  in  music  always  lasts,  and  I  owe 
the  old  instrument  so  much — not  only  the  enjoyment  one  has  had, 
and  the  use  my  music  has  been  as  an  introduction  in  a  foreign  place, 
but  also  the  happy  frame  of  mind  which  music  unconsciously  produces 
in  one,  and  it  smooths  many  little  roughnesses  which  one  often  sees  in 
those  who  have  no  taste  for  music.  People  who  cannot  sing  are 
almost  as  badly  off  as  people  who  cannot  cry,  but  one  does  not 
always  want  to  cry,  nor  always  to  sing ;  if  we  know  that  we  can,  it  is 
enough.' 

In  this  same  letter  he  mentions  that  the  cholera  had  been 
so  bad  in  Oxford — worse  than  anywhere  else  in  England — 
that  the  lectures  had,  many  of  them,  been  postponed. 

To  THE  Same. 
Translation.  Oxford,  December  10. 

'  I  must  thank  you  for  all  your  love,  which  is  the  best  of  birthday 
gifts.  As  I  took  up  your  birthday  letter,  I  wondered  where  the  smell 
of  violets  came  from,  and  when  I  opened  it  and  found  them,  the  scent 
was  as  fresh  as  if  they  were  just  picked ;  and  even  now,  as  your  letter 
lies  on  my  table,  they  have  not  lost  it.  Your  letter  too  is  full  of  love 
and  goodness,  which  remains  ever  fresh.  But  I  must  tell  you  I  was ' 
not  in  Oxford  on  my  birthday,  but  in  Bideford.  I  was  first  with 
Froude,  who  lives  at  Torquay,  and  then  I  went  with  him  to  Bideford 
to  stay  with  Kingsley.  He  is  a  well-known  writer,  and  his  last  novel 
Hypatia  has  made  a  great  sensation.  He  is  married  to  a  sister  of 
Fronde's  wife,  and  they  are  both  charming.  I  played  to  them  on  my 
birthday,  and  thought  of  you.  ...  I  shall  probably  be  quietly  in 
Oxford  at  Christmas,  unless  I  go  to  George  Bunsen's  wedding;  he  is 
engaged  to  an  English  lady.  .  .  .  Here  one  hears  of  nothing  but  the 
war  .  .  .  the  losses  are  very  great.  Taxes  are  very  high,  six  per  cent, 
now,  and  we  are  to  be  prepared  for  ten  per  cent.' 

I  M 


i62  Macaiday  [ch.  ix 

To  THE  Same. 
Translatiott.  Oxford,  December  28. 

'  I  spent  Christmas  quietly  here,  for  I  had  wasted  so  much  time  that 
it  was  high  time  to  begin  my  work  again.  On  Monday,  as  I  was 
drinking  my  coffee,  came  your  letter,  and  soon  after  I  received  your 
picture,  which  I  like  very  much.  ...  I  made  acquaintance  this  time  in 
London  with  Macaulay,  and  had  a  long  conversation  with  him  on  the 
teaching  necessary  for  the  young  men  who  are  sent  out  to  India.  He 
is  very  clear  headed,  and  extraordinarily  eloquent.' 

This  must  be  the  interview  so  humorously  described  in 
Auld  Lang  Syne  ^  vv^here  the  young  Professor,  primed  with  every 
possible  argument  in  favour  of  Oriental  studies,  had  to  sit 
silent  for  an  hour  whilst  the  historian  poured  forth  his  dia- 
metrically opposite  views,  and  then  dismissed  his  visitor,  who 
had  tried  in  vain  to  utter  a  single  word.  '  I  went  back  to 
Oxford,'  says  Max  MUller,  'a  sadder,  and,  I  hope,  a  wiser 
man.' 

The  New  Year  found  Max  Miiller  quietly  at  work  in  Oxford. 
He  had  been  to  London,  intending  to  accompany  his  friend 
George  Bunsen  to  Norfolk  for  his  wedding,  but  serious  illness 
in  the  bride's  family  prevented  any  but  the  nearest  relatives 
from  being  present.  Max's  mother  had  been  urging  him  to 
follow  his  friend's  example — a  favourite  them.e  with  her — and 
she  amused  herself  from  time  to  time  in  recommending  him 
a  wife. 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  Oxford,  January. 

'  That  you  are  so  anxious  to  find  me  a  wife  is  very  good  of  you ! 
But  I  am  afraid  there  are  difficulties,  and  in  such  things  we  must  take 
life  as  God  sends  it.  A  happy  marriage  must  be  a  great  blessing, 
but  how  few  marriages  are  happy.  I  have  no  opportunity  of  really 
knowing  and  observing  young  girls,  as  one  can  if  one  lives  at  home, 
and  where  families  know  each  other,  and  live  much  together.  I  should 
not  fall  in  love  with  a  merely  pretty  face,  and  for  a  mariage  de 
convenance  there  is  plenty  of  time.  Elise,  who  delighted  you  so 
much  in  Carlsbad,  seemed  to  me  pleasant  enough  ;  but,  as  I  had  no 
opportunity  of  knowing  her  better,  I  have  never  thought  more  about 
her.  If  you  are  writing,  greet  her  kindly,  but  don't  make  any  pro- 
posals for  her  hand  !  Perhaps  if  Krug  sends  you  this  year  to  Carlsbad, 
you  can  tell  me  if  she  is  the  sort  of  daughter-in-law  you  would  like. 


1855]  Reforms  in  Oxford  163 

Sunday  is  my  best  day  for  writing  letters,  as  I  get  up  early,  and  go 
at  eight  o'clock  to  our  chapel,  and  have  the  whole  day  then  to  myself. 
Getting  up  so  early  at  this  time  of  the  year  is  not  pleasant ;  but  the 
chapels  here  in  the  colleges  are  so  beautiful,  so  warm,  and  so  well 
arranged  that  one  is  far  more  comfortable  in  them  than  in  our  large 
cold  churches.' 

Bunsen  had  written  to  him  earlier  in  the  month  to  express 
his  pleasure  that  Max  Miiller  '  would  undertake  to  bring  the 
last  sevenfold  child  of  my  English  love '  {Christianity  and 
Mankind^  in  seven  volumes)  '  into  public  notice.  You  know 
better  than  any  one  what  is  the  unity  of  the  seven  volumes, 
and  what  is  the  aim  and  result.  Your  own  is  certainly  an 
important  and  independent  part  of  it.  But  you  have,  with 
old  affection,  worked  and  thought  yourself  into  the  whole, 
even  when  the  particulars  were  of  less  interest  to  you.'  To 
this  the  following  answer  was  sent : — 

Translation.  9,  Park  Place,  OxYom),  January  14,  1855. 

'Philip  Pusey  seems  quite  unexpectedly  better.  Acland  had  very 
little  hope,  but  thinks  it  quite  possible  now  that  his  life  will  be  spared. 
He  is  living  still  with  his  brother  in  Oxford,  and  as  I  have  had  little 
intercourse  with  the  latter,  I  cannot  call  there  to  inquire.  His  brother 
has  engaged  a  tutor  for  Sidney,  who  now  reads  with  him,  but  his  chief 
studies  are  Pusey's  folios,  the  Patres  and  the  Haeretici.  Oxford  is  in 
a  sad  condition ;  the  reform  has  done  nothing,  and  we  are  worse  off 
than  before.  Balliol  has  declared  that  Dissenters  will  not  be  admitted ; 
but  the  minority  has  appealed  to  the  Bishop  of  Lincoln,  who  has 
cancelled  the  resolution.  Gladstone's  Bill  has  introduced  a  com- 
plicated and  impractical  system,  which  suffocates  all  proposals  for  the 
better.  There  is  only  one  chance  of  salvation  for  Oxford — fellowships 
open  to  all  and  no  clerical  restrictions.  If  this  were  done  we  should 
have  a  very  different  Oxford  in  about  twenty  years.  At  present  lay- 
fellows  are  only  admitted  as  fellows  for  a  certain  period — if  they  are 
admitted  to  an  open  fellowship  at  all.  What  remains  therefore  is 
nothing  but  the  coffee-grounds  which  nobody  desires  to  have — clergy- 
men without  a  parish  and  scholars  without  scholarships  !  I  often  long 
to  get  away.  I  cannot,  especially  as  a  German,  take  part  in  these 
things ;  my  old  friends  leave,  and  I  have  no  wish  to  make  new  ones, 
and  so  the  MSS.  of  the  Veda  are  my  one  consolation. 

T  have  written  a  review  on  the  philological  part  of  your  work;  I  told 
Dasent  ^  about  it  a  fortnight  ago,  but  I  have  had  no  answer  so  far. 

*  Editor  of  the  Times. 
M  Q, 


164  Dr.  Pusey  [ch.  ix 

'Aufrecht  has  at  last  made  up  his  mind  to  go  to  London. 
I  have  written  to  Dr.  Jelf,  who  may  probably  secure  for  him  the 
Sanskrit  Professorship  at  King's  College,  I  shall  look  out  for  some- 
body later  on,  who  will  do  the  mechanical  work  of  copying  and 
compiling,  so  that  I  shall  only  have  the  constructing  of  the  text  to  do. 
Aufrecht  was  too  good  for  this  mechanical  work.  I  do  hope  he  will 
succeed  better  in  London  than  here.  ...  I  think  of  going  to  Paris 
in  the  summer,  to  study  there,  and  to  get  acquainted  with  the  people, 
if  only  there  were  no  Exhibition.  And  what  about  the  war  ? — I  hope 
there  will  be  no  peace  till  Sebastopol  has  fallen.' 

(Continuation  on  Mojiday.) 

*I  received  your  letter  this  morning,  which  made  me  reflect,  Alea 
iada  est,  but  where  and  how  ?  The  old  Prussia  is  lost,  and  a  new  one 
can  only  rise  from  a  Protestant,  constitutional  Germany.  The  hour 
for  that  must  soon  be  at  hand,  for  I  do  not  believe  in  the  peace 
negotiations.  If  once  the  struggle  becomes  widespread,  it  will  be  the 
voice  of  the  people  that  will  secure  the  welfare  of  the  Fatherland.  In 
war  and  in  peace,  in  death  and  in  life,  the  people  must  have  a  voice, 
and  it  could  never  wait  for  the  word  of  command  to  emanate  from  one 
family.     Peace  now  would  be  a  great  disaster. 

'  I  wish  the  notice  of  your  book  had  fallen  into  better  hands.  Dasent 
told  me  that  the  second  part  of  his  review  of  the  first  edition  had  not 
passed  the  censor  \  and  so  had  never  been  printed.  After  hearing 
this,  I  did  what  I  could,  i.e.  I  explained  the  connexion  of  the  whole — 
but  it  is  for  the  Times,  and  the  times  are  bad ! ' 

It  will  be  observed  that  in  the  beginning  of  this  letter 
Max  Miiller  speaks  of  having  had  little  intercourse  with 
Dr.  Pusey.  When  he  was  made  an  M.A.  of  Christ  Church, 
he  attended  chapel  regularly,  and  Dr.  Pusey  at  once  an- 
nounced that  he  would  never  administer  the  Holy  Communion 
to  him,  as  he  had  only  been  confirmed  in  the  Lutheran  Church 
— not  by  a  bishop  !  The  Dean,  Dr.  Gaisford,  at  once  said  that 
he  had  no  scruples  of  the  sort.  This,  of  course,  made  a  feel- 
ing of  estrangement  for  some  years  between  Dr.  Pusey  and 
the  young  Professor ;  but  it  passed  away  gradually,  and  in 
i860,  at  the  time  of  the  election  to  the  Sanskrit  Professorship, 
it  IS  well  known  that  Max  MUller  had  no  warmer  supporter 
or  more  energetic  canvasser   than    Dr.   Pusey,  who  sat  up 

^  Mr.  Walter,  proprietor  of  the   Times,  saw  almost  all   articles  that 
touched  on  religious  subjects. 


1855]  Dr.  Piisey  165 

many  nights  writing  letters  in  his  favour.  Max  always 
remembered  and  alluded  to  this  with  gratitude.  His  feelings 
about  Pusey  form  some  of  the  most  interesting  passages  in 
the  AiitobiograpJiy.  Their  religious  views  were  far  asunder. 
Max  Muller,  who,  as  he  tells  us,  had  learnt  his  practical 
religion  from  his  mother,  which  remained  unshaken  amidst  all 
storms,  could  not  sympathize  with  the  utter  terror  with  which 
Dr.  Pusey  looked  back  on  his  own  religious  difficulties,  as  if 
they  were  in  themselves  a  crime.  Max  always  felt  that 
'  religion,  in  order  to  be  real  religion,  a  man's  own  religion, 
must  be  searched  for,  must  be  discovered,  must  be  conquered. 
If  it  is  simply  inherited,  or  accepted  as  a  matter  of  course,  it 
often  happens  that  in  later  years  it  falls  away,  and  has  either 
to  be  reconquered,  or  to  be  replaced  by  another  religion.' 

How  completely  all  distrust  of  Max  Muller  had  passed 
from  Dr.  Pusey's  mind,  is  shown  by  the  following  extract  from 
a  letter  from  his  daughter,  Mrs.  Brine : — 

' .  .  ,  I  remember  well  the  happy  walks  my  father  and  I  used  to  have 
through  the  Parks  up  to  your  house,  when  he  wanted  to  consult 
Professor  ]\Iax  Muller  on  some  abstruse  questions.  You  know  the 
very  high  esteem  in  which  my  father  held  the  Professor.' 

In  February  Bunsen  writes  to  Max  MUller: — 

Translation. 

'I  am  delighted  to  hear  that  your  Veda  gets  on.  If  you  would  only 
not  allow  yourself  to  be  frightened  from  the  attempt  to  let  others  work 
for  you  in  mere  handicraft.  You  have  now  fixed  your  impress  on  the 
work,  and  any  one  with  the  will,  and  with  the  necessary  knowledge  of 
the  tools,  could  not  go  far  wrong  under  your  eye.  I  should  so  like  to 
see  you  free  for  other  work.  Only  do  not  leave  Oxford.  You  would 
not  like  Germany,  and  Germany  could  offer  you  no  sphere  of  activity 
that  could  be  compared  ever  so  distantly  with  your  present  position. 
So  do  not  be  low-spirited,  my  dear  M.,  or  impatient.  It  is  not  so 
much  the  fault  of  England,  as  of  yourself,  that  you  do  not  feel  settled 
and  at  home.  You  have  now  as  good  a  position  as  a  young  man 
of  intellect,  and  with  a  future  before  him,  could  possibly  have  anywhere, 
either  in  England  or  Germany.  Make  a  home  for  yourself.  Since 
I  saw  your  remarkable  mother,  I  have  been  convinced  that,  unlike 
many  mothers,  she  would  not  stand  in  the  way  of  your  domestic 
happiness,  even  were  it  contrary  to  her  own  views.' 


t66  Crimean  Winter  [ch.  ix 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  February  25,  1855. 

'  There  has  not  been  such  a  winter  in  England  for  twenty  years — 
even  the  Thames  is  frozen  over,  and  here  in  Oxford  the  cold  was  un- 
bearable, for  the  open  fires  are  not  as  warm  as  a  German  stove.  The 
one  pleasure  is  the  skating,  which  one  generally  gets  for  a  couple  of 
days  only — this  frost  has  lasted  for  weeks.  You  must  have  felt  the  cold, 
if  you  have  carried  out  your  stove-economies,  and  used  a  lamp  instead 
of  fire.  I  am  very  busy  with  my  lectures,  and  am  printing  a  second 
edition  of  my  Languages  of  the  Seat  of  War,  and  there  are  many  other 
things  which  fill  up  my  time.  The  war  becomes  more  complicated, 
but  we  must  hope  that  they  will  not  make  peace  hurriedly,  so  that  the 
victims  will  have  fallen  in  vain.  Here  people  are  very  much  excited, 
chiefly  from  the  constant  change  of  Ministers  and  the  incapacity  of 
the  highest  officials.  It  is  a  real  revolution,  only  such  crises  pass  over 
quietly  here,  but  the  effect  is  the  same.  The  aristocratic  party  must 
yield  before  it  comes  to  street  fighting.  I  have  made  no  plans  for  the 
summer.  I  must  stay  here  during  vacation,  unless  I  go  to  Paris  for 
work.  If  you  have  really  meanwhile  found  a  wife  for  me,  that  may 
make  a  difference,  but  I  am  not  at  all  inclined  for  one ! ' 

In  March,  Max  MUller  tells  his  mother  of  a  visit  to  London, 
where  he  had  made  acquaintance  with  Lord  Ashburton,  '  one 
of  the  richest  peers  in  England,  and  a  patron  of  literature.' 
He  stayed  with  his  friend  George  Bunsen,  and  laments  that  his 
pleasant,  amiable,  and  rich  wife  has  no  sister  to  take  the  place 
of  Elise  of  Carlsbad,  who  was  going  to  be  married,  much  to 
his  mother's  disappointment !  True  to  his  determination  to 
spare  his  mother  all  anxiety,  he  never  betrayed  what  his 
real  feelings  were. 

To  Chevalier  Bunsen. 

Translation.  9,  Park  Place,  Oxford,  April  15,  1855. 

' .  .  .  I  chiefly  work  at  the  Veda  now,  and  have  just  sent  an  essay  on 
Vedic  burials  to  the  German  Oriental  fournal.  It  is  always  the  same 
story  with  Aufrecht,  and,  alas,  no  position  seems  to  turn  up  for  him. 
Jowett  has  been  in  London  for  the  whole  term ;  his  Commentary  is 
printed  and  is  to  appear  soon.  I  expect  few  facts,  but  free  and  open 
treatment  of  the  matter.  Tischendorff"  appeared  here  in  Oxford  with 
all  his  various  Orders  and  MSS.  I  hope  to  get  the  latter  accepted  by 
the  Bodleian.  Are  they  really  worth  £800  after  having  been  collated 
and  edited  ? ' 


1855]  Kosmos  of  Language  167 

On  April  17  Bunsen  wrote  to  thank  Max  Muller  for  an 
article  on  his  Outlines : — 

Tra7islati07i. 

'  You  have  so  thoroughly  adopted  the  English  disguise  that  it  will 
not  be  easy  for  any  one  to  suspect  you  of  having  written  this  "  curious 
article."  It  especially  dehghts  me  to  see  how  ingeniously  you  contrive 
to  say  what  you  announce  you  do  not  wish  to  discuss,  i.e.  the  purport 
of  the  theology.  In  short,  we  are  all  of  opinion  that  your  cousin  was 
right  when  she  said  of  you  in  Paris  to  Neukomm,  that  you  ought  to 
be  in  the  diplomatic  service  ! ' 

The  letter  goes  on  to  sketch  out  a  new  work  in  which 
Bunsen  was  anxious  for  Max  MUller's  co-operation,  The 
Kosmos  of  Language,  in  four  volumes — the  second  and  fourth 
volumes  to  be  entirely  the  work  of  Max  Miiller,  and  half  of 
volume  three — and  Bunsen  asks  his  friend  to  Heidelberg,  or 
to  Nice  in  the  winter,  to  discuss  the  whole  scheme. 

Translation.  9,  Park  Place,  Oxford,  April  26,  1855. 

'  Alas !  I  cannot  send  any  definite  answer  to  your  kind  proposals. 
My  news  from  home  are  bad.  My  mother  has  been  very  ill  and  her 
recovery  is  very  slow.  She  is  ordered  to  go  to  Carlsbad  in  the 
summer,  and  wishes  me  to  go  with  her,  and  this  seems  almost  im- 
possible. Last  year  even  I  meant  to  go  to  Paris  to  study  there, 
and  to  occupy  myself  with  the  collation  and  copying  of  various  MSS. 
I  have  been  hindered  for  several  years  in  concluding  and  finishing 
various  works  of  mine  by  not  knowing  these  said  MSS.  My  plan 
therefore  is  to  spend  the  summer  in  Paris,  and  to  give  some  years 
entirely  to  the  close  study  of  the  Veda,  and  therefore  meanwhile  to  let 
the  Science  0/  Language  alone.  The  second  part  of  the  review  in  the 
Times  has  after  all  appeared  amidst  cries  and  wailing.  Nobody  seems 
to  know  in  the  least  who  is  the  writer  of  the  article,  and  I  have  already 
assisted  in  various  Common  Rooms  to  abuse  it,  without  betraying 
myself  by  the  movement  of  a  muscle.  The  gloom  here  is  widespread. 
As  it  was  said  of  France  in  1847,  "La  France  s'ennuie,"  so  it  may 
be  said  here  now,  John  Bull  is  sulky.  He  has  still  thought  it  possible 
that  men  like  Aberdeen,  Clarendon,  Palmerston,  &c.,  could  at  least 
have  brought  Austria  round.  But  as  he  sees  that  even  that  could  not 
be  managed,  he  turns  disagreeable.  Parliament  will  have  to  be 
dissolved,  and  a  numerous  national  party  will  choose  statesmen  like 
Layard,  Lowe,  Bright,  Cobden,  &c.     Whigs  and  Tories  are  done  for.' 

It  was  in  this  spring  that  Max  Miiller  joined  in  a  delightful 
geological   excursion  to  Malvern,  which  he  often  mentioned 


i68  Geology  round  Malvern  [ch.  ix 

later  with  unfeigned  delight.     The  following  account  is  from 
one  of  the  party,  Canon  Farrar : — 

'  It  was  in  1855  that  I  had  the  opportunity  of  knowing  Max  Miiller 
more  closely,  and  seeing  his  mind  employed  on  a  new  subject, 
Geology,  in  an  interesting  excursion  to  the  Malvern  Hills  under  the 
guidance  of  Professor  Phillips,  who  wisely  proposed  to  utilize  the  three 
days'  vacation  which  at  that  time  separated  the  two  summer  terms 
at  Whitsuntide,  by  taking  a  party  to  visit  the  igneous  formations  of 
the  Malvern  Hills.  The  party  was  of  graduates,  except  one  gentleman 
commoner.  The  only  survivor  besides  myself  is  the  Rev.  H.  F.  Tozer. 
We  hired  a  country  hotel  at  IVIalvern  Wells,  and  thence  made 
excursions  under  the  Professor's  guidance.  Miiller  was  one  of  the 
party.  He  had  only  lately  taken  up  the  subject  of  Geology ;  the 
practical  application  of  it  in  field  work  was  new  to  him,  and  therefore 
he  afforded  unintentionally  to  us  the  means  of  watching  the  workings 
of  his  mind,  both  in  observation  and  reflection.  I  recall  at  the  interval 
of  forty-six  years  his  looks  of  surprise  and  of  intelligent  delight.  He 
was  amazed  by  the  mineralogical  transformations,  but  what  struck 
him  most  was  the  odd  fragments  which  were  indications  of  obliterated 
rock  formations.  He  was  fascinated  by  the  inferences  which  Phillips 
drew.  I  cannot  but  suspect  that  there  was  in  his  mind  the  perception 
of  the  close  analogy  offered  by  his  own  favourite  study  of  the  history 
of  language.  These  fragments  of  early  strata  were  parallel  to  the 
presence  of  roots  or  old  forms  of  words  embedded  in  later  linguistic 
strata.  The  second  day  of  our  stay  was  Sunday :  most  of  the  party 
gave  themselves  a  holiday,  and  did  not  go  to  church.  But  Phillips 
and  Miiller  accompanied  me  and  some  others  to  the  Abbey  Church  of 
Great  Malvern.  I  hope  that  I  am  not  lifting  indelicately  the  veil 
from  sacred  acts,  if  I  say  that  it  being  Whit- Sunday,  and  there  being 
Communion,  to  my  surprise  both  Miiller  and  Phillips  stopped  to 
partake  of  the  Communion.  I  name  this,  for  the  reason  that  I  suppose 
that  in  Oxford  it  would  have  been  thought  that  the  two  men  just 
named  were,  though  Christians  in  life,  most  indefinite  in  their  religious 
views,  and  probably  suspected  of  excessive  broadness.  The  sight  of 
these  two  laymen,  whose  stay  at  the  Eucharist  must  of  course  have 
been  prompted  solely  by  sincere  religious  principle,  impressed  me 
much  ;  it  was  a  rebuke  to  many  of  us  clergymen,  and  led  me  to  a  life- 
long conviction  that  a  depth  of  Christian  purpose  without  formal 
profession  exists  in  many  a  heart,  undiscovered  by  man,  and  I  often 
thought  of  this  occurrence,  when  Miiller,  at  the  time  of  his  rejection 
for  the  Sanskrit  chair,  was  unfairly  charged  with  the  irrelevant  question 
of  Rationalism.     After  the  service,  our  small  party  mounted  to  the 


1855]      Examiner  for  Indian  Civil  Service        169 

top  of  the  hills  and  listened  to  PhiUips  pointing  out  not  only  the 
physical  and  topographical  geography  of  the  vast  panorama,  but 
explaining  the  reasons  by  which  he  reproduced  the  probable  con- 
figuration of  the  country,  of  land  and  sea,  at  the  distant  period  of 
the  elevation  of  the  hills.  This  again  seemed  to  impress  Miiller 
deeply.  While  he  revelled  in  the  beauty  of  the  scene,  he  had  never 
before  heard  physical  geography  in  a  large  landscape  connected  with 
geology,  with  the  extinct  flora  and  fauna  made  to  live  again  in 
Phillips'  description.  Our  next  day,  Monday,  was  spent  in  a  fatiguing 
walk  along  the  southern  half  of  the  hills.  Here  MuUer  had  for  the 
first  time  the  opportunity  of  seeing  two  British  camps ;  one  of  them, 
the  Herefordshire  beacon,  of  gigantic  size  and  remarkable  construc- 
tion, to  which  ancient  German  camps  offer  hardly  any  parallel. 
IMiiller  showed  an  equal  interest  in  archaeological  as  in  geological 
history.' 

For  the  May  Term  of  this  year  Max  Miiller  announced 
for  the  first  time  a  course  of  reading  and  working  lectures, 
'  sine  ulla  solennitate,'  and  from  this  time  onwards  gave  one 
such  course  each  year.  This  first  class  was  for  reading  extracts 
from  German  classics  to  illustrate  the  history  of  German 
literature.  His  lectures  continued  to  be  well  attended  ;  there 
are  above  seventy  names  of  undergraduates  in  one  term  for 
certificates  of  attendance,  and  the  more  private  classes  were 
also  very  popular.  The  wide  range  of  investigation  which 
Max  Miiller  contrived  to  bring  within  the  scope  of  modern 
languages  and  literature  and  the  vivacity  and  picturesqueness 
with  which  every  subject  was  treated  were  totally  unlike  the 
usual  professorial  lecture,  and  he  continued  to  attract  large 
audiences  till  tutorial  teaching  gradually  destroyed  the 
attendance  at  Professors'  lectures. 

Early  in  June,  Max  Miiller  was  placed  on  the  commission 
for  the  examination  of  the  candidates  for  the  Civil  Service 
of  India,  and  appointed  examiner  in  Sanskrit.  The  pre- 
liminary meetings  he  found  very  interesting,  and  the  constant 
visits  to  London  gave  him  opportunities  of  seeing  many  old 
friends.  He  was  busy  with  the  examination  in  July,  and 
wa^  then  asked  to  undertake  the  German  and  French 
examinations  for  commissions  in  the  Engineers  and  Artillery, 
which  included  the  history  and  literature  as  well  as  the 
grammar  of  both  languages. 


lyo  Visit  to  Paris  [ch.  ix 

The  middle  of  August  Max  Miiller  settled  himself  in  Paris, 
glad  to  have  the  change  from  England  and  all  the  work  he 
had  been  doing.  He  found  Gathy  and  other  old  friends 
there,  and  began  to  work  at  collating  and  copying  the  MSS. 
he  had  specially  come  to  see.  His  mother,  however,  when 
she  knew  that  the  sea  no  longer  separated  them,  became 
impatient  to  see  him,  and  the  end  of  the  month  he  started 
for  Dresden,  where  he  stayed  a  fortnight. 

On  his  return  from  Dresden  he  found  Paris  so  full  for  the 
Exhibition  that  it  was  with  difficulty  he  secured  a  room  for 
himself,  and  an  apartment  for  his  cousin  Emilie  and  her 
husband  Prince  Wilhelm.  Princess  Friedrich  of  Anhalt- 
Dessau  and  her  two  daughters  were  also  in  Paris,  and,  as 
Max  Miiller  soon  found,  he  was  expected  to  act  as  cicerone 
to  the  whole  party  ;  so  he  gave  up  all  idea  of  work,  and  spent 
the  short  time  that  remained  before  his  return  to  England 
in  a  round  of  amusements.  He  tells  his  mother  he  was  never 
quiet  from  morning  till  night,  and  that  he  had  explored  Paris 
again  from  end  to  end.  There  were  delightful  excursions  to 
Fontainebleau  and  Versailles,  constant  visits  to  the  Exhibition, 
whilst  almost  every  evening  was  spent  at  the  theatre.  The 
princesses,  accustomed  to  a  stiff  little  German  court,  were 
delighted  with  the  freedom  of  the  life,  the  dinners  at  the 
cafes,  and  the  gaiety  of  the  city,  and  were  very  pleasant  and 
amused  at  everything.  Max  Miiller,  however,  was  not  sorry 
when  the  arrival  of  the  old  family  friend,  Baron  Hagedorn, 
set  him  free  to  return  to  his  busy,  yet  quiet,  life  in  England. 

To  his  mother  he  writes  before  leaving  Paris  : — 

Translation. 

'  It  is  tiresome,  though,  that  my  plans  for  work  were  all  upset,  but 
it  can't  be  helped ;  one  must  take  life  as  it  comes,  and  do  one's  duty 
by  others,  when  it  is  necessary.  The  summer  has  been  a  happy  one, 
and  I  am  quite  satisfied.  We  had  a  happy  time  together  in  Dresden 
— happier  than  I  had  dared  to  hope  for.' 

On  his  return  home,  Max  Miiller  found  himself  involved  in 
a  controversy  on  the  examinations  for  the  Indian  Civil 
Service.  He  entirely  agreed  that  the  first  examination 
should  be  a  test  of  that  liberal  education  which  can  be 
obtained   at  our  schools  and    universities,  and  that  a  small 


i855]  Death  of  Belle  171 

number  of  marks  should  then  be  given  for  Arabic  or  Sanskrit. 
But  in  the  second  examination  he  was  anxious  that  high 
marks  should  be  given  for  Sanskrit  as  the  origin  of  nearly- 
all  the  spoken  languages  of  India,  and  that  the  vernaculars 
should  be  studied  in  India,  when  a  man  knew  in  which 
presidency  his  life  would  be  passed,  and  which  vernaculars 
he  would  really  require.  In  Mr.  Lowe's  reconstruction  of 
Macaulay's  scheme,  Sanskrit  had  been  set  aside  in  favour 
of  vernaculars.  Max  Miiller  wished  to  see  1,000  marks  for 
Oriental  languages  divided  into  800  for  Sanskrit  and  2co  for 
one  vernacular. 

The  lectures  this  term  were  on  'The  History  of  the  Lan- 
guages of  Europe,'  with  again  a  good  attendance.  Great  part 
of  the  term  was  spent  in  looking  for  a  house,  as  the  lodgings 
where  he  had  lived  since  the  autumn  of  1848  were  now  too 
small  for  his  rapidly  growing  library,  though  it  had  not  yet 
attained  the  dimensions  of  later  years,  some  13,000  volumes. 
The  choice  of  houses  was  very  limited  in  those  days :  none 
of  those  to  the  north  of  St.  Giles'  Church  then  existed,  except 
some  half-dozen  in  Park  Town,  which  was  considered  an 
impossible  distance  from  Oxford  for  a  Professor! 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  Oxford,  November  9. 

*  Everything  goes  on  again  as  usual.  Lectures,  work,  parties,  and  one 
day  follows  another  without  anything  special  to  mark  it.  But  a  holiday 
does  one  good,  and  one's  work  goes  on  all  the  better  after  a  time 
of  thorough  idleness.  Only  think,  my  poor  Belle  has  been  very  ill  ever 
since  I  came  home,  and  cannot  die ;  she  is  a  perfect  skeleton.  The 
people  say  I  ought  to  give  her  poison,  but  I  can't  do  it,  though  she  is 
hopelessly  ill. ...  I  have  long  had  fires,  and  the  weather  is  cold  and 
disagreeable,  just  like  England,  and  then  every  night  I  must  make 
myself  wretched  with  a  heavy  English  dinner,  whilst  in  Paris  one 
never  felt  one  had  eaten  anything.  Yet  Emilie  will  tell  you  we  did 
not  live  so  badly  there ! ' 

The  end  of  November  his  faithful  little  companion  for  seven 
years,  little  Belle  the  terrier,  so  well  known  to  his  old  friends, 
died.  Max  tells  his  mother  that  it  had  made  him  very 
unhappy,  and  he  missed  the  little  creature  terribly. 

Max  MUller,  who  had  been  made  an  honorary  M.A.,  as  we 


I 


172  M.A.  by  Decree  [ch. 


IX 


have  seen,  in  December,  1851,  was  made  M.A.  by  Decree  of 
Convocation  on  December  13  of  this  year. 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translatmi.  9,  Park  Place,  December  28. 

'  There  is  little  to  tell  you  about  my  Christmas.  Oxford  is  nearly 
empty  in  the  vacation,  so  one  does  not  see  much  festivity.  But  the 
week  before  Christmas  I  enjoyed  myself  very  much.  I  went  to  a 
friend  (Augustus  Vansittart)  in  Cambridge,  which  I  had  not  yet  seen, 
and  most  beautiful  it  is,  in  some  points  more  beautiful  than  Oxford, 
which  is  saying  a  great  deal.  Everybody  was  very  hospitable,  and  for 
a  whole  week  I  had  to  eat  four  dinners  daily,  for  breakfast,  luncheon, 
dinner,  and  supper  were  all  like  a  gala  dinner  in  Germany.  Four  times 
a  day  roast  pheasant,  and  never  in  bed  before  2  o'clock.  It  was  real 
feasting,  and  I  am  only  surprised  that  I  could  eat  my  way  through 
without  headaches.  I  came  back  through  London,  and  dined  with 
one  of  the  Ministers,  where  I  met . .  .  Sir  Colin  Campbell,  the  English 
general  from  the  Crimea ;  and  then  I  went  to  the  Latin  Play  by  the 
scholars  of  Westminster  School.  So  you  see  one  can  amuse  oneself 
here,  if  not  at  Christmas,  but  beforehand.' 

Towards  the  close  of  this  year  Renan  wrote  a  sharp  attack 
on  Max  Muller's  Turanian  article  in  Bunsen's  Christianity 
and  Mankind.  The  attack  appeared  in  Renan's  Histoire 
gi^nerale  des  langues  shnitiqnes.  Max  Miiller  complained 
bitterly  of  the  passage  in  a  letter  to  Stanislas  Julien,  which 
he,  with  childlike  innocence,  showed  to  Renan,  who  wrote 
a  long  explanatory  letter  to  Max  Miiller,  in  which  he  re- 
peated the  very  point  that  was  really  the  cause  of  offence, 
i.  e.  that  in  that  essay  Max  had  been  under  the  influence  of 
Bunsen,  and  had  written  it  more  to  command  than  from  con- 
viction. Owing  to  the  indiscretion  of  Stanislas  Julien,  the 
quarrel  threatened  to  become  serious,  as  Max  Miiller  could 
not  but  feel  that  his  honour  as  a  writer  had  been  called  in 
question.  He  wrote  a  review  of  Renan's  Gravimaire  Simitiqtie 
which  amounted  to  a  fierce  attack  upon  the  book.  Bunsen 
wrote  to  Max  Miiller : — 

Translation.  December  2,  1855. 

'  I  send  you  these  lines  ...  to  stop  if  possible  your  wrath  against 
Renan.  He  confesses  in  his  letter  "  Ma  plume  m'a  trahi" ;  he  has  partly 
said  what  he  thinks,  and  partly  said  what  he  does  not  think But  his 


1855]  Controversy  with  Renan  173 

note  is  not  that  of  an  enemy.     You  must  deal  gently  with  him.     You 
will  do  it,  will  you  not,  for  my  sake  ? ' 

Renan,  too,  wrote :  '  Pardonnez-moi.  Je  n'ai  pas  compris 
ce  que  vous  vouliez  dire.'  On  this  Max  Miiller  suppressed 
the  pamphlet,  though  already  printed,  and  they  gradually 
became  great  friends. 

To  Chevalier  Bunsen. 
Translation.  December  25,  1855. 

' . . .  Your  next  work,  God  in  History,  will  be  a  joy  to  read,  for  the 
beginning  of  the  God-consciousness  in  the  Veda  has  much  occupied 
me  of  late,  and  has  made  me  enter  into  depths  of  human  consciousness 
hitherto  unknown  to  me.      The  Veda  alone  of  all  works  I  know  treats 
of  a  genesis  of  God-consciousness,  compared  to  which  the  Theogony 
of  Hesiod  is  like  a  worn-out  creature.     We  see  it  grow  slowly  and 
gradually  with  all  its  contradictions,  its  sudden  terrors,  its  amazements, 
and  its  triumphs.     As  God  reveals  His  Being  in  nature,  in  her  order, 
her  wisdom,  her  indestructibility,  in  the  eternal  victory  of  light  over 
darkness,  of  spring  over  winter,  in  the  eternally  returning  course  of 
the  sun  and  the  stars,  so  man  has  gradually  spelt  out  of  nature  the 
Being  of  God,  and  after  trying  a  thousand  names  for  God  in  vain, 
we  find  him  in  the  Veda  already  saying :  They  call  Him  Indra,  Mitra, 
Varun(2;   then  they  call  Him  the  Heavenly,  the  bird  with  beautiful 
wings; — that  which  is  One  they  call  in  various  ways;    they  call  it 
Agni,  Sama,  IMatarisvan.     The  belief  in  Immortality  is  only  the  other 
side  as  it  were  of  the  God-consciousness,  and  both  are  originally 
natural  to  the  Aryan  race.     "  As  the  sun  sets,  yet  never  dies,  but  "h*  j 
returns,"  says  the  old  Aryan,  "  neither  shall  I  go  into  non-existence,  I 

but  I  shall  live  with  the  sun."  The  non-existence  he  denies  as  often 
as  he  can,  and  in  the  Veda  the  a  sat  is  the  night  of  nature,  which  is 
nothing,  though  it  frightens  man  and  torments  him,  but  just  on 
account  of  that  very  thing  makes  him  most  sensitive  to  belief  in  and 
to  hope  of  the  ever-returning  light.  The  Veda  is  inexhaustible,  and 
the  more  I  long  to  get  to  a  close,  the  more  I  feel  how  much  there 
remains  still  to  be  done,  and  yet  I  feel  it  a  great  blessing  that  such 
work  has  been  given  to  me  to  do  as  the  daily  occupation  of  my  life — 
and  then  everything  seems  to  become  indifferent,  even  if  Monsieur 
Renan  reviles  me ! 

'  In  Oxford  everything  proceeds  slowly  but  well.  Liddell  has  been 
made  Dean  ;  he  has  a  difficult  position,  but  he  is  surely  planted, 
and  nobody  will  succeed  in  moving  him  away  again.  It  is  said  that 
the  Prince  of  Wales  will  be  with  him,  but  that  may  only  be  a  report. 
Secondly,  Jowett  is  established,  and  Pusey  gets  angry  about  him,  and 


174 


Sir  B.  Brodie 


is  sure  to  accuse  him  of  heresy,  and  so  secure  him  much  greater 
influence.  Pusey  is  very  dangerous,  and  his  influence  is  again  on  the 
increase.  He  seems  to  have  designs  on  me,  and  I  am  on  my  guard. 
Then  there  is  Thomson,  Provost  of  Queen's,  honest  and  friendly. 
Vaughan  is  also  to  come  to  Oxford.  Brodie  has  been  made  Professor 
without  signing  the  Articles,  my  own  case  preceding  his,  but  he  had 
a  stronger  case,  being  an  Englishman.  Everything  was  tried  against 
him,  even  secret  surprises  at  the  voting,  after  making  it  known  that  no 
contest  would  take  place.  Everybody  was  afraid  of  a  sudden  attack 
at  nightfall ;  the  guards  were  called  out,  and  the  ambuscade  found  itself 
confronted  by  a  picket  which  towered  above  them.  Everything  cannot 
go  exactly  as  we  wish,  but  the  avalanche  rolls  in  the  right  direction. 

'  What  a  beautiful  speech  Prince  Albert  made  in  Birmingham ! 
He  ought  not  to  show  his  cards  too  readily ;  he  has  to  play  the  Brutus 
with  the  EngHsh,  or  else  he  will  be  treated  as  was  Aristides.  Excuse 
this  long  letter,  but  it  is  so  rarely  that  one  can  speak  to  anybody  about 
one's  thoughts  and  feelings,  that  when  I  write  to  you  my  pen  runs 
away  with  me.' 

Bunsen  later  thanked  Max  Miiller  for  his  just,  but  sharply 
expressed  and  nohly  suppressed,  essay  against  Renan. 


CHAPTER   X 

1856-1857 

Comparative  Mythology.  Commemoration.  His  mother  in  England. 
Volume  III  of  Veda.  Curator  of  Bodleian.  Christmas  at  Glasgow. 
Deiitsche  Liebe.  Buddhist  pilgrims.  Examination  at  Exeter. 
Visit  to  Froude.     Germany.     Manchester  Exhibition. 

In  the  last  days  of  the  old  year,  Max  Miiller  had  found 
a  house,  ^S,  St.  John's  Street,  and  so  hard  did  he  work  that  he 
was  settled  before  term  began,  as  the  notice  of  his  lectures 
is  dated  from  his  new  house.  His  course  was  on  the  '  History 
of  the  German  Language,  and  its  relation  to  Greek  and 
Latin.'  He  writes  to  tell  his  mother  how  comfortably  he 
is  settled,  and  how  much  he  hopes  she  will  visit  him  in  the 
summer,  to  see  his  home  and  life  in  England,  though  at 
the  same  time  he  cautions  her  not  to  expect  much  amuse- 
ment, as  he  is  far  too  busy  to  travel  about  with  her,  or  give 
up  much  time  to  her,  as  he  has  daily  work  at  the  Bodleian, 
besides  all  his  work  at  home.     To  Bunsen  he  writes : — 

Translation.  55,  St.  John's  Street,  March  14. 

*  Everything  progresses  well  in  Oxford ;  it  seems  to  me  there  is  no 
other  country  in  the  world  so  pliable  as  England.  At  the  right  time 
we  shall  get  everything  in  Oxford  that  we  wished  for,  and  the  whole 
academical  phraseology  changes  visibly.  Of  course  Jowett  is  preached 
against  every  Sunday ;  it  does  not  hurt  him  in  the  least,  however,  and 
he  is  occupied  with  a  second  edition  \  The  essay  in  the  Quarterly  is 
by  Conybeare;  I  have  not  read  it,  for  that  sort  of  thing  does  not 
matter.  When  we  grow  older  here  in  England  we  leave  the  talking  and 
writing  to  others,  and  we  occupy  ourselves  with  the  "  doing  " ;  and  as 
I  am  now  a  member  of  Convocation  and  Congregation  the  committee- 
work  and  report-writing  begin  to  occupy  all  my  time.     So  I  retire  as 

^  Commentary  on  the  Thessalonians,  &c. 


I 


176        Article  on  Comparative  Mythology      [ch.  x 

much  as  possible  and  rejoice  when  something  is  really  accomplished. 
It  looks  disgraceful  in  Prussia;  the  whole  morality  begins  to  be 
bankrupt. 

'  I  am  so  glad  to  know  that  your  great  work  ^  is  to  be  concluded 
before  the  great  war  breaks  out.  I  should  have  liked  to  send  you 
my  little  contribution  about  the  Veda,  but  Easter  approaches,  and  till 
then  I  am  actually  glued  to  my  table  day  after  day,  as  I  have  promised 
Brockhaus,  by  contract,  to  hand  over  to  him  the  MS.  at  the  end 
of  ]\Iarch.  I  am  sending  him  a  Vedic  grammar  as  introduction  to 
the  first  volume  of  the  German  edition  of  the  Rig-veda.  The  text 
was  printed  some  time  ago,  and  therefore  he  presses  me  to  send  him 
the  preface.  So  you  see  it  is  absolutely  impossible  to  answer  your 
questions  now. 

'  The  Flood-legend  does  not  occur  in  the  Hymns  of  the  Veda,  but 
in  the  Brahmanas.  Burnouf  considers  it  borrowed,  and  he  may  be 
right,  as  it  only  occurs  in  a  modern  Brahmana.  The  Fall  is  hinted 
at,  not  morally  but  only  metaphysically.  .  .  .  The  keynote  which 
runs  through  the  whole  always  is :  We  do  not  know ;  who  looked  on 
when  God  made  the  world  ?  To  whom  did  he  mention  it  ?  I  mean 
to  stay  here  for  the  summer,  and  expect  my  mother  to  pay  me  a 
visit.' 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  Oxford,  March  23. 

'  You  must  lead  a  very  quiet  life,  and  not  anger  and  excite  yourself. 
The  things  that  annoy  us  in  life  are  after  all  very  trifling  things,  if 
we  always  bear  in  mind  for  what  purpose  we  are  here.  And  even  in 
the  heavier  trials,  one  knows,  or  one  should  know,  that  all  is  sent  by  a 
higher  Power,  and  in  the  end  must  be  for  our  best  interests.  It  is 
true  we  cannot  understand  it,  but  we  can  understand  that  God  rules 
in  the  world  in  the  smallest  and  in  the  largest  events,  and  he  who 
keeps  that  ever  in  mind  has  the  peace  of  God,  and  enjoys  his  Hfe  as 
long  as  it  lasts.  I  am  sure  that  a  quiet,  contented  mind  is  better  than  all 
medicine  and  Carlsbad.  I  dare  say  a  change  of  air  will  be  good  for 
you,  and  life  in  England  is  very  healthy,  if  you  will  hve  quietly.  We 
cannot  travel  about  much,  for  it  is  too  expensive  and  requires  younger 
legs,  but  Oxford  itself  is  sure  to  please  you,  and  you  will  see  what  my 
hfe  here  is.' 

This  spring  Max  Miiller's  article  on  Comparative  Mytho- 
logy appeared  in  the  Oxford  Essays.  It  has  been  reprinted 
in  both  editions  of  the  Chips.  A  contemporary  writer  speaks 
of  the  '  great  impression  made  by  Max  Muller's  essay  on 

1  EgypL 


1856]  Indian  Chronology  177 

Comparative  Mythology,  published  in  the  Oxford  Essays,  in 
which  he  applied  the  rules  of  comparative  philology  to  the 
elucidation  of  Aryan  myths,  in  a  manner  at  once  scientific 
and  popular.'  '  Max  Miiller,'  says  Professor  Macdonell  in  his 
obituary  notice  in  the  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society, 

'  was  a  pioneer  in  this  country  of  the  Science  of  Comparative  Mytho- 
logy, founded  by  Adalbert  Kuhn.  .  .  .  Beginning  with  his  essay  on 
Comparative  Mythology,  which  appeared  in  1856,  he  wrote  a  number 
of  papers  on  mythological  subjects. . .  .  His  mythological  method,  based 
on  linguistic  equations,  has  but  few  adherents  in  the  present  day, 
for  most  of  his  identifications  .  .  .  have  been  rejected  owing  to  the 
more  stringent  application  of  phonetic  laws  which  now  prevails  in 
Comparative  Philology.  .  .  .  Nevertheless,  his  writings  have  proved 
valuable  in  this  field  also  by  stimulating  mythological  investigations 
even  beyond  the  range  of  Aryan-speaking  nations.' 

Of  this  essay  a  friend  wrote  many  years  later  to  Max 
Miiller  :— 

'  When  I  was  young  I  remember  you  were  my  ideal  hero — the 
magician  who  admitted  me  into  a  gorgeous  fairy-land.  I  can 
remember  as  if  it  were  yesterday,  in  the  early  sixties,  how  I  read  tAe 
Oxford  essay  in  the  British  Museum,  and  walked  home  to  Clapham 
westward  facing  a  glorious  sunset,  hardly  conscious  that  I  was 
a  creature  of  this  planet !  And  later  on  a  new  book  of  yours  was  an 
event  in  my  life  ! ' 

Bunsen  was  busying  himself  at  this  time  with  questions  of 
Indian  chronology,  in  which  Max  Miiller  could  not  sympathize, 
feeling  the  ground  too  insecure  for  any  real  historical  treat- 
ment.    In  one  letter  he  says: — 

Translation.  April,  1856. 

'  I  only  recognize  one  chronology  for  India,  the  four  literary 
periods  of  the  Veda,  which  bring  us  to  at  least  1 500  b.  c.,  and  even  at 
that  time  show  us  a  formulated  system  of  divinities  and  even  priest- 
craft. Before  this  time  the  schism  of  Brahmans  and  Zoroastrians 
had  taken  place.  And  long  before  this,  even,  the  schism  between  the 
Aryans  tracking  north-eastward  and  those  tracking  southwards  took 
place ;  and  before  the  nomadic  Greeks  separated  from  the  nomadic 
Indians,  centuries  must  have  passed.  There  seems  no  doubt  that 
the  South  Aryans  (later  on  divided  into  Indians  and  Zoroastrians)  had 
settled  together  in  Bactria.  .  .  .  The  alphabet  on  the  Aryan  coins  in 
the  north  of  India  is  no  doubt  Semitic.     The  Sanskrit  alphabet  has 

I  N 


178  Megasthenes  [ch.  x 

its  origin  from  elsewhere,  and  I  believe  I  shall  be  able  to  trace  it  to 
the  Himyaritic.  When  it  reached  India  is  the  great  question,  and 
that  I  am  unable  to  answer.  "  Ophir  "  proves  how  old  the  commerce 
between  India  and  Phoenicia  must  have  been ;  for  "  Ophir "  is 
Abhiva  on  the  Indus.  So  you  see  the  oldest  date  of  the  name 
Ophir  occurring  in  the  Bible  is  the  latest  time  in  which  the  Aryans 
were  already  settled  by  the  sea,  and  at  the  time  of  the  Veda  they  had 
not  yet  settled  there.  Could  it  be  proved  that  Solomon  knew  the 
name  Ophir,  it  would  of  course  be  a  terminus  a  quo.  His  lion-throne 
made  of  ivory  reminds  one  of  the  Sanskrit  lion-seat,  i.  e.  throne. 
Lassen  has  established  the  Sanskrit  etymology  of  the  products  of 
Ophir.  I  am  now  printing  my  old  Vedic  grammar — ^just  think  that 
400  B.C.  each  syllable  of  the  Rig-veda  had  been  counted,  each 
lengthened  syllable  had  been  carefully  marked,  and  each  metrical 
inaccuracy  had  been  carefully  registered.  But  it  is  an  awful  work, 
and  I  long  to  return  to  my  mythology.' 

This  letter  crossed  one  from  Bunsen,  in  which  he  tells 
Max  Miiller,  '  It  would  be  a  great  pleasure  to  you,  my  dear 
friend,  if  you  could  see  the  enthusiasm  of  my  reawakened 
love  for  India,  which  possessed  me  in  181 1-4,  and  which 
now  daily  overpowers  me.'  The  letter  ends,  '  Send  me  a 
letter,  only  without "  Your  Excellency."  I  beg  you  will  always 
write  to  me  as  friend  to  friend.' 

To  this  friendly  invitation  Max  Miiller  replies  : — 

Translation.  55,  St.  John  Street,  Oxford,  April  25,  1856. 

'  Your  Excellency, — Allow  me  to  continue  to  call  you  so ;  it  is 
an  old  habit,  and  reminds  me  of  the  time  when  first  I  entered  your 
study  to  have  my  passport  to  Germany  vise'^d,  in  a  despairing  mood 
as  I  was  then,  without  an  aim,  without  means  to  carry  out  the  one 
scheme  which  I  had  clearly  planned  for  myself!  How  much  has 
happened  since  then !  Oh,  when  I  think  how  I  have  to  thank  you, 
your  encouragement,  your  sympathy,  for  the  whole  turn  of  my  fate, 
if  I  consider  that,  I  know  of  no  other  word  which  would  better 
express  my  veneration  for  you,  my  love  and  my  gratitude,  than  the 
one  by  which  I  addressed  you  with  German  awkwardness  at  the  first 
visit  I  paid  you,  a  word  which,  like  many  another  one,  has  been  much 
misused,  but  has  nevertheless  not  yet  lost  its  true  meaning ! 

'  With  regard  to  Megasthenes  \  I  do  not  know  how  I  can  help  you. 
As  far  as  I  have  occupied  myself  with  the  chronological  question, 

^  Greek  envoy  from  Seleucus  Nicator  (306-298  B.C.)  to  Chandra-gupta 
(Sandrocottus).     He  wrote  a  work  on  India. 


1856]  Froude's  History  179 

which  has  never  been  a  passion  with  me,  I  do  not  see  in  the  least  how 
Megasthenes  cozild  know  more  than  Wilford  or  Sir  W.  Jones.  Mega- 
sthenes  could  not  know  anything  but  what  we  know,  for  though  we 
know  nothing  of  Indian  history,  we  know  the  history  of  Indian  litera- 
ture sufficiently  well  to  be  able  to  ascertain  that  no  annals  have  ever 
been  lost,  simply  because  none  ever  existed.  We  have  the  most 
distinct  traces  in  the  Rig-veda  of  the  schism  between  the  Brahmans 
and  the  followers  of  the  Zend-Avesta. 

'  I  intend  very  soon  to  publish  something  about  this,  perhaps  in  the 
Long  Vacation,  when  Mrs.  Liddell,  &c.,  will  have  no  more  music 
parties,  when  there  are  no  more  examinations  in  London  and  no 
more  lectures  in  Oxford,  and  when  the  third  volume  of  the  Veda  has 
been  published.  Now  I  feel  so  hunted  that  I  can  accomplish  nothing. 
I  have  so  many  claims  on  my  time  during  term,  that  I  often  have  to 
do  the  most  necessary  work  in  the  middle  of  the  night.  Froude's 
History  is  out ;  I  have  devoured  the  first  volume,  and  have  put  the 
second  on  one  side  for  later  on.  It  seems  to  me  very  good.  Jowett 
has  not  yet  been  burnt ;  instead  of  that  he  thinks  of  publishing  Plato's 
Republic.  Examinations,  education,  are  the  ordre  du  jour  \  in  a  very 
short  time  all  positions  will  be  open  for  competition.  What  a  social 
revolution  that  is !  It  would  have  drawn  blood  in  other  lands.  Much 
of  it  is  due  to  Trevelyan.  Gladstone  made  a  manful  speech  last 
night — how  much  that  means.     Ever  yours.' 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  Oxford,  May  6. 

'  I  have  been  in  London  again  for  a  week  and  have  made  many 
interesting  acquaintances.  Life  in  England  is  so  grand,  and  I  wish 
you  could  see  me  at  such  a  dinner  as  lately  at  Lord  Denbigh's — such 
pictures  all  round  the  room  !  I  am  in  no  want  of  work  to  do,  and 
with  all  the  interruptions  here,  I  can  hardly  get  on.  ...  I  hear  occa- 
sionally from  Bunsen.  I  do  'not  believe  he  means  to  return  to 
England.  As  to  your  journey  here,  you  must  inquire  whether  any 
acquaintances  are  coming  to  England.  I  shall  certainly  stay  in 
Oxford  this  summer,  as  I  have  a  good  deal  of  work  before  me.  Oxford 
in  summer  during  the  vacation  is  delightful.  In  a  fortnight  I  must 
go  again  to  London.  I  shall  be  staying  with  friends  in  one  of 
the  best  houses — very  pleasant,  and  cheap.  Then  I  shall  hear 
Jenny  Lind,  and  in  a  month  she  is  coming  to  Oxford  to  give  two 
concerts,  and  we  shall  have  grand  festivities ;  Peace  festival,  &c.' 

To  Chevalier  Bunsen. 

Translation.  55,  St.  John  Street,  Oxford,  May  4,  1856. 

'Your  Excellency, — Your  last  letter  awaited  me  in  Oxford,  as 

N  a 


i8o  Meets  his  Wife  again  [ch.  x 

I  spent  all  last  week  in  London  to  examine  there.  The  more  I  see 
how  deeply  you  penetrate  into  Indian  chronology,  the  more  I  regret 
that  I  cannot  follow  you  as  I  did  formerly.  It  would  indeed  be  a 
great  work  if  you  could  find  a  secure  historical  foundation  for  the 
Indian  traditions.  I  am  still  at  the  previous  question — i.e.  Could 
Megasthenes  make  any  discovery  besides  that  which  we  have  made 
from  Sanskrit  literature  ?  This  question  must  be  answered,  and  there 
I  am  afraid  Megasthenes  with  his  total  ignorance  of  Sanskrit  will  have 
the  worst  of  it,  as  compared  with  Manetho  and  his  knowledge  of 
hieroglyphics,  and  Berosus  with  his  knowledge  of  cuneiform.  How- 
ever, I  am  ignorant,  and  therefore  unprejudiced,  and  I  am  willing  to 
learn  and  to  believe.  My  passion  is  now  Mythology ;  and  I  see  you 
cannot  serve  two  masters,  for  at  present  I  cannot  get  away  from  it, 
though  so  many  other  things  claim  my  attention.  I  long  for  the 
Long  Vacation,  and  I  expect  a  visit  from  my  mother,  and  therefore 
I  shall  not  go  to  Germany.  I  hope  to  write  something  more  about 
Mythology.  I  find  that  John  Bull  has  taken  a  bite  and  asks  for  more. 
At  present  I  am  working  at  my  grammar,  and  I  am  also  working  at 
a  German  Historical  Reader,  which  I  could  not  refuse  on  account  of 
my  Professorship.  Forgive  me,  therefore,  that  I  do  not  throw  myself 
into  Indian  chronology,  but  I  can  do  nothing  unless  I  can  do  it  with 
all  my  heart.  Confident  of  your  kind  indulgence,  I  always  remain, 
much  honoured  friend,  master  and  benefactor,  your  faithful  1\I.M.' 

In  April  of  this  year  Max  MUller  had  again  met  his  future 
wife,  and  during  six  weeks  they  saw  each  other  constantly  at 
her  home,  and  in  London,  and  at  the  Grand  Commemoration 
and  Peace  festivities  in  Oxford ;  little  foreseeing  the  painful 
three  years  of  total  silence  and  separation  that  they  had  to 
go  through  before  their  marriage  was  allowed.  In  the  first 
days  of  July  Max's  mother  arrived,  accompanied  by  Emilie 
von  Stolzenberg,  and  the  faithful  family  friend  Baron  Hage- 
dorn.  They  spent  two  or  three  weeks  in  London,  seeing  all 
the  sights,  going  to  the  Opera,  dining  at  Richmond.  The 
mother,  cousin,  and  Hagedorn  went  from  London  to  the  Isle 
of  Wight  without  Max,  who  returned  to  Oxford.  After  the 
visit  to  the  Isle  of  Wight,  Hagedorn  returned  to  Germany,  the 
mother  and  cousin  going  to  Oxford.  From  there  the  Baroness 
visited  Scotland,  and  the  whole  party  then  returned  to  London, 
and  devoted  themselves  to  sight-seeing,  till  Emilie  went  to 
Germany  towards  the  end  of  August,  leaving  the  mother  to 
enjoy  her  son  to  herself  for  two  months  longer. 


1856]         Visit  of  his  Cousin  and  Mother  181 

On  July  17  Bunsen  writes  to  congratulate  Max  Muller  on 
the  visit  of  his  mother  and  cousin  : — 

Translation. 

'  You  know  it  was  a  letter  of  the  la//er  which  first  told  me  o/jou, 
and  made  me  wish  to  see  you.  And  then  you  came jyourse//,  and  all 
that  I  prophesied  of  you  after  the  first  conversation  in  London,  and 
your  first  visit  to  us  in  the  country,  has  been  richly  fulfilled — yes,  beyond 
my  boldest  hopes.  You  have  won  an  honourable  position  in  the  first 
English  University,  not  only  for  yourself,  but  for  the  Fatherland,  and 
you  have  richly  returned  the  love  which  I  felt  for  you  from  the  first 
moment,  and  have  faithfully  reciprocated  a  friendship  which  con- 
stitutes an  essential  portion  of  my  happiness.' 

On  August  25  Max  Muller  sent  his  usual  birthday  con- 
gratulations to  Bunsen.  It  must  be  remembered  that  birth- 
days are  much  more  observed  in  Germany  than  in  England, 
hence  the  constant  references  in  Max  Miiller's  letters  to  his 
own  birthday  or  those  of  his  mother  and  sister.  In  after- 
years  the  birthdays  in  his  own  home  circle  were  specially 
marked  and  joyful  days. 

To  Chevalier  Bunsen. 

Translation.        55,  St.  John  Street,  Oxford,  August  25,  1856. 

'  I  have  thought  of  you  with  much  feeling  to-day,  and  send  forth  my 
hearty  congratulations,  as  I  think  of  the  beautiful  old  age,  vigorous  in 
mind  and  body,  with  which  Heaven  has  blest  you.  May  this  day 
return  many  a  time,  and  find  you  surrounded  by  all  dear  to  you  ;  and 
may  your  Hfe,  perfect  as  it  has  been,  be  a  pattern  and  comfort  to  the 
world  at  large.  I  am  looking  forward  to  the  concluding  part  of 
Egypt,  especially  to  the  mythological  part  of  it.  I  can  well  imagine 
that  you  have  found  a  more  comprehensive  form  of  mythological 
consciousness.  I  had  only  just  knocked  at  the  door  with  my  essay. 
I  intended  to  prove  that  the  mythical  form  was  unavoidable.  In  the 
great  regions  of  God-consciousness  we  ourselves  still  think  and  feel 
mythically,  that  is,  language  runs  away  with  our  thoughts.  I\Iy  essay 
has  called  forth  some  opposition,  which  makes  me  glad ;  for  I  thought 
the  matter  so  evident,  that  nothing  further  could  be  said  about  it ; 
instead  of  which  I  perceive  that  not  only  has  a  hole  to  be  made 
through  the  wall,  but  that  the  whole  wall  has  to  be  pulled  down  and 
each  barricade  to  be  got  rid  of.  Whether  /  shall  be  able  to  do  this  is 
doubtful,  for  with  all  my  love  for  antiquity  and  the  past,  my  dreams 
for  the  future  return  again  and  again,  and  I  feel  somewhat  drawn  to 
India — a  desire  difficult  to  resist  in  the  end.    Only  I  do  not  know  how 


i82  IVtsk  to  go  to  India  [ch.  x 

to  get  there ;  but  my  life  here  seems  so  aimless  and  unfruitful  that 
I  shall  not  be  able  to  bear  it  for  very  much  longer.  I  thought  the 
other  day  whether  I  could  not  manage  to  go  to  India  with  the 
Maharajah  Dhulip  Singh.  He  is  very  well  spoken  of,  and  he  returns 
next  year  after  having  learnt  in  England  what  good  things  he  may 
do  some  day  for  his  Fatherland  in  India.  It  seems  to  me  it  would  form 
the  natural  nucleus  of  a  small  Indo-Christian  colony,  and  it  is  only 
necessary  to  create  such  a  centre  in  order  to  exercise  one's  power  of 
attraction  on  all  sides.  After  the  last  annexation  the  territorial  con- 
quest of  India  ceases — what  follows  next  is  the  struggle  in  the  realm 
of  religion  and  of  spirit,  in  which,  of  course,  centres  the  interests  of  the 
nations.  India  is  much  riper  for  Christianity  than  Rome  or  Greece 
were  at  the  time  of  St.  Paul.  The  rotten  tree  has  for  some  time  had 
artificial  supports,  because  its  fall  would  have  been  inconvenient  for 
the  Government.  But  if  the  Englishman  comes  to  see  that  the  tree 
piust  fall,  sooner  or  later,  then  the  thing  is  done,  and  he  will  mind  no 
sacrifice  either  of  blood  or  of  land.  For  the  good  of  this  struggle 
I  should  like  to  lay  down  my  life,  or  at  least  to  lend  my  hand  to  bring 
about  this  struggle,  Dhulip  Singh  is  much  at  Court,  and  is  evidendy 
destined  to  play  a  political  part  in  India.  I  wish  I  could  get  in  touch 
with  him  in  some  qtiite  natural  way.  Could  it  be  managed  with  the 
help  of  Prince  Albert,  or  would  you  help  me  to  it  ?  I  do  not  at  all 
like  to  go  to  India  as  a  missionary,  that  makes  one  dependent  on  the 
parsons  ;  nor  do  I  care  to  go  as  a  Civil  Servant,  as  that  would  make  me 
dependent  on  the  Government.  I  should  like  to  live  for  ten  years 
quite  quietly  and  learn  the  language,  try  to  make  friends,  and  then  see 
whether  I  was  fit  to  take  part  in  a  work,  by  means  of  which  the  old 
mischief  of  Indian  priestcraft  could  be  overthrown  and  the  way 
opened  for  the  entrance  of  simple  Christian  teaching,  that  entrance 
which  this  teaching  finds  into  every  human  heart,  which  is  freed  from 
the  ensnaring  powers  of  priests  and  from  the  obscuring  influence  of 
philosophers.  Whatever  finds  root  in  India  soon  overshadows  the 
whole  of  Asia,  and  nowhere  could  the  vital  power  of  Christianity  more 
gloriously  realize  itself  than  if  the  world  saw  it  spring  up  there  for 
a  second  time,  in  a  very  different  form  from  that  in  the  West,  but  still 
essentially  the  same. 

*  Much  more  could  be  said  about  this ;  a  wide  world  opens  before 
one,  for  which  it  is  well  worth  while  to  give  one's  life.  And  what  is 
to  be  done  here  ?  here  in  England  ?  here  in  Oxford  ? — nothing  but  to 
help  polish  up  a  few  ornaments  on  a  cathedral  which  is  rotten  at  the 
base.  But  enough  for  to-day  !  My  mother  and  my  cousin  have  been 
with  me  for  about  eight  weeks,  and  some  other  friends.  With  the 
exception  of  my  mother,  who  is  going  to  stay  on  with  me,  they  left 


1856]  Third  Volume  of  Rig-veda  183 

a  few  days  ago,  and  I  have  set  to  work  again ;  my  work  was  inter- 
rupted for  so  long.  I  long  for  Germany;  and  how  I  should  like  to 
come  to  you  to  Heidelberg,  but  that  is  impossible  this  year,  and  next 
year  I  hope  to  see  you  in  England.     In  faithful  friendship,  yours.' 

The  poor  mother  who  in  her  Diary  speaks  of  the  quiet 
time  in  Oxford  alone  with  her  son  as  '  unclouded  happiness,' 
had  little  idea  of  all  these  thoughts  poured  out  to  his  fatherly 
friend ! 

Meantime  the  third  volume  of  the  Rig-veda  had  been 
published,  the  last  volume  that  was  brought  out  under  the 
auspices  of  the  old  East  India  Company,  and  dedicated  to 
them.  There  had  been  in  the  previous  year  some  doubt  whether 
it  would  be  possible  to  finish  this  great  work.  The  first 
calculation  of  the  extent  of  the  work,  and  therefore  of  its 
cost,  had  been  based  on  defective  MSS.,  consequently  when 
the  third  volume  was  ready  for  printing,  it  was  found  that 
this  only  completed  half  of  the  work,  whilst  exhausting  a  great 
deal  more  than  half  of  the  money  voted  for  the  whole,  and 
it  was  with  some  difficulty  and  after  many  anxious  months 
that,  owing  to  the  influence  which  Professor  Wilson  possessed 
over  the  Board  of  Directors,  the  additional  funds  were  voted. 
The  preface  to  this  volume  therefore  ends  with  an  expression 
of  the  editor's  gratitude  to  the  Directors  'for  having  sanctioned 
the  continuation  of  the  work  and  granted  funds  necessary  for 
its  completion ;  an  act  of  enlightened  liberality  which  will  be 
applauded  by  all  persons  interested  in  the  history  of  India, 
and  in  the  history  of  mankind,  and  by  which  one  of  the  most 
important  monuments  of  antiquity  will  be  rescued  from 
oblivion  and  restored  in  its  integrity.'  Max  Miiller  was  able 
in  his  preface  to  speak  of  the  growing  interest  the  work  was 
exciting  among  scholars,  as  being — 

*  found  to  shed  the  most  unexpected  light  on  the  darkest  periods  in  the 
history  of  the  most  prominent  nations  of  antiquity.  Thus,  though  not 
yet  known  in  its  completeness,  the  Veda  has  assumed  an  importance 
which  no  other  literary  production  of  India  could  ever  have  claimed  ; 
and  we  may  rest  convinced  that  as  long  as  a  man  cherishes  the  records 
of  his  family,  in  the  widest  sense  of  the  word,  these  simple  songs  will 
maintain  their  place  among  the  most  natural  annals  of  ancient  history. 
One  class  of  readers  may  have  been  disappointed  [in  the  Veda]  :  men 
who  study  ancient  literature  less  on  account  of  its  historical  than  its 


1 1 


184  His  Mother  leaves  him  [ch.  x 

practical  value.  But  the  true  historian  values  facts  ancient  and 
genuine,  and  a  corroded  copper  As  of  the  Roman  Republic  is  of  greater 
value  to  him  than  an  imperial  gold  medal  of  the  most  exquisite  work- 
manship. ...  I  must  confess  that  I  could  have  wished  that  the  ancient 
poets  of  the  Veda  and  their  Indian  commentators  had  been  less  diffuse; 
for  though  I  believe  that  no  edition  of  any  author  in  Sanskrit,  or  any 
other  language,  for  which  MSS.  had  first  to  be  copied,  others  to  be 
collated,  innumerable  references  to  be  verified,  and  an  index  to  be 
made  of  every  word,  has  ever  been  brought  out  so  rapidly  as  this 
edition  of  the  Rig-veda ;  yet  I  feel  that  ten  years  of  my  life  are  gone, 
and  I  know  not  whether  I  shall  have  suflftcient  time  left  to  finish 
a  work  which  I  once  undertook  perhaps  with  too  m-uch  confidence. 
Yet  even  if  I  should  not  see  the  completion  of  this  work,  I  should  not 
be  sorry  for  the  time  I  have  spent  on  it ;  and  nothing  will  ever  induce 
me  to  change  the  principles  which  I  have  hitherto  followed,  and  to 
give  a  hasty  copy  of  a  MS.  instead  of  a  critical  edition  of  the  text  and 
commentary  of  the  Rig-veda^ 

Max  Miiller  again  acknowledges  the  valuable  assistance 
of  his  learned  friend  Dr.  Aufrecht,  and  his  sincere  '  regret 
that  he  should  no  longer^  enjoy  this  advantage,  as  much 
of  the  correctness  and  accuracy  of  the  last  volumes  was  due 
to  his  conscientious  co-operation.' 

The  lectures  this  term  were  on  '  The  History  of  German 
Civilization  and  Literature,  from  the  earliest  times  to  the 
reign  of  Charlemagne.' 

On  October  30  Max  parted  with  his  mother,  who  left 
under  care  of  a  friend,  going  by  boat  from  London  to  Antwerp, 
and  so  to  Chemnitz  to  her  daughter. 

That  afternoon  Max  writes  to  his  mother : — 

Translatio7i. 

'  Our  happy  time  is  over,  and  the  winter  will  not  bring  me  much 
pleasure.  But  I  beg  you  to  enjoy  your  time  in  Chemnitz,  . .  .  and  you 
must  tell  them  how  happy  we  have  been  here  together.  I  cannot 
thank  God  enough  for  the  happiness  that  I  had  in  your  visit,  even  if 
I  did  not  talk  much  about  it.  You  know  that  one  feels  most  when 
one  says  least.' 

In  several  of  his  letters  to  Bunsen,  Max  Miiller  refers  to 
Mr.  Jowett,  whose  orthodoxy  was  at  this  time  suspected  by 

^  See  p.  164. 


1856]  M.  M.'s  Orthodoxy  questioned  185 

many  of  the  leading  people  in  Oxford,  and  his  intimacy  with 
whom  brought  Max  himself  into  ill  odour  with  several  of 
his  more  narrow-minded  friends.  He  received  early  in  the 
autumn  a  letter  from  a  friend  Avhose  good  opinion  and 
affection  he  highly  valued — a  letter  questioning  the  orthodoxy 
of  his  religious  views.     He  answered  it  thus  : — 

To .. 


55,  St.  John  Street,  October  4,  1856. 
'Your  letter  has  been  in  my  hands  for  some  time,  and  I  have 
thought  about  it  many  times,  and  I  have  tried  to  make  it  clear  to 
myself  why  you  should  have  written  that  letter — but  at  last  I  felt  con- 
vinced that,  though  you  must  have  known  that  it  would  give  me  much 
pain,  you  wrote  it  from  the  kindest  motives,  and  with  that  anxiety 
which  we  feel  for  a  friend  only.  I  see  clearly  that  in  your  own  heart 
you  do  not  believe  the  charge  which  somebody  unknown  to  me  has 
brought  against  me.  For  if  you  did,  you  would  not  have  written  to 
me,  you  would  not  have  asked  me.  For  how  can  I  defend  myself 
against  such  a  charge,  except  by  telling  you  it  is  not  true,  and  if  you 
believe  in  me,  do  not  believe  it  ?  If  I  have  said  or  written  anything 
that  has  given  offence  to  your  friend,  let  me  know  it,  and  I  shall  then 
be  able  to  defend  myself  But  if  some  one,  without  giving  any  proof, 
without  giving  even  his  name,  tells  you  that  I  am  an  unbeliever,  that 
I  do  not  believe  in  the  Bible,  that  I  do  not  believe  in  Christ  our  Lord 
and  Saviour,  I  need  not  fear  him.  I  know  that  there  are  not  a  few 
who  treat  our  faith  as  such  a  light  matter  that  they  think  nothing  of 
charging  a  man  with  infidelity,  though  they  would  shrink  from  charging 
him  with  dishonesty.  And  some  of  them  are  honourable  men,  who 
act  from  pure  and  high  motives,  and  whose  only  fault  is  too  much 
confidence  in  themselves  and  too  little  confidence  in  others.  But, 
I  say  again,  I  need  not  fear  them.  I  have  many  friends  who  know 
me,  and  know  my  religious  convictions;  and  though  I  have  always 
avoided  theological  controversy,  I  have  never  avoided  expressing  my 
faith  in  the  doctrines  of  Christianity,  when  I  felt  called  upon  to  do  so. 
I  am  not  a  theologian,  and  though  I  have  been  occupied  for  many 
years  with  the  study  of  the  ancient  forms  of  religion,  and  though 
I  have  followed  with  a  deep  interest  the  histor}'  of  our  own  Church 
from  the  earliest  times,  I  do  not  feel  competent  to  lay  down  the  law, 
or  even  to  express  an  opinion  on  all  points,  where  even  the  best  and 
wisest  have  stumbled,  because  thev  endeavoured  to  fathom  with  their 
human  reason  the  depths  of  a  Divine  mystery.  If  you  read  the  history 
of  the  Church,  you  will  find  that  this  has  been  the  source  of  all  heresy, 
and  that  all  divisions  and  persecutions  in  the  Church  have  arisen  from 


i86  Visit  from  Fontane  [ch.  x 

the  attempts  of  theologians  to  substitute  their  own  thoughts  and  their 
own  expressions  for  the  simple  language  in  which  Christianity  has  been 
revealed  to  us  in  the  Bible.     And  if  we  know  the  dangers  of  religious 
controversy,  if  we  see  how  it  is  opposed  to  the  very  spirit  of  Chris- 
tianity, how  it  appeals  to  the  worst  passions  and  destroys  every  feeling 
of  charity,    we   ought   to   pity   the   priest  or   theologian  who,    like 
a  physician,  must  enter  into  this  pest-house ;  but  surely  we  have  a  right 
to  refuse  to  follow  him,  and  to  be  dragged  into  it  against  our  will. 
And  if  he  tells  us  that  we  are  ourselves  infected  with  heresy,  it  is 
a  serious  charge  indeed,  but  we  may  appeal  to  our  friends  and  to 
a  higher  tribunal,  and  we  may  at  least  remind  our  accuser  of  one  of 
the  last  commandments ;  nay,  we  may  tell  him  that  at  a  time  when 
Christianity  was  a  crime,  Roman  Emperors  who  had  no  scruple  in 
making  martyrs  of  all  who  professed  the  name  of  Christ,  thought  it 
fair  to  pass  a  law  by  which  informers  who  could  not  substantiate  their 
charge  of  Christianity  against  a  Roman  citizen  were  liable  to  a  severe, 
even  capital,  punishment.     I  must  say  no  more,  for  I  do  not  wish  to 
offend  you  by  saying  anything  harsh  against  one  who  is  your  friend, 
and  who  may  have  been  induced  by  a  feeling  of  kindness  towards  you 
to  disregard  a  duty  which,  as  Christians,  we  owe  to  all  men,  even  to 
a  mere  stranger.  .  .  .  Whatever  our  hearts  may  feel,  and  whatever  our 
fleeting  passions  may  say  against  it,  there  is  no  true,  no  lasting  love, 
unless  it  has  its  source  and  life  in  God.  .  .  .  Through  my  whole  life 
I  have  learnt  this  one  lesson,  that  nothing  can  happen  to  us  unless  it 
be  the  will  of  God,  and  this  I  believe  now  more  than  ever.     My  life 
has  been  a  happy  one,  and  seeing  that  all  I  wanted,  and  much  more, 
was  given  me,  I  began  to  think  that  there  could  be  no  disappointment 
in  life.     I  have  learnt  better,  and  yet  I  feel  again  that  there  can  be  no 
disappointment  in  life,  if  we  but  learn  to  submit  our  will  to  the  will  of 
God.  .  .  .  We  ought  to  remember  also  that  our  faith  is  not  our  faith, 
but  that,  like  everything  else,  it  is  given  us.     Therefore  we  should 
not  glory  in  our  faith,  or  look  down  upon  others  whom  we  think  poor 
in  faith,  or  who  may  seem  to  differ  from  us.     Let  us  wait  for  a  little 
while — and  to  those  whose  eyes  are  turned  to  God  and  eternity  the 
longest  life  is  but  a  little  while — let  us  wait  then  in  faith,  hope,  and 
charity ;  these  three  abide,  but  the  greatest  of  these  is  charity.' 

Soon  after  his  mother  had  left  him.  Max  Miiller  was 
cheered  by  a  visit  from  his  old  friend  Fontane,  who  had 
been  wandering  about  England,  collecting  materials  for  two 
works  which  he  afterwards  published  under  the  titles,  England, 
Studies  in  English  Art,  &c.,  and  Beyond  the  Tweed.  Fontane 
writes  of  this  visit : — 


1856-7]  Curator  of  Bodleian  187 

Translation. 

'In  the  autumn  of  1856  I  paid  a  visit  to  Miiller.  I  wanted  to  see 
the  "  heart  of  England,"  the  midland  counties,  .  .  .  and  Oxford  was  to 
be  my  first  halting-place.  I  was  with  him  for  two  days,  and  count 
these  days  among  the  pleasantest  in  my  memory,  for  the  sake  of 
Miiller  and  the  place  itself  I  have  seen  a  large  number  of  the  cities 
of  Western  Europe,  but  none  have  made  so  powerful,  so  enchanting  an 
impression  on  me.  It  is  difficult  to  say  in  what  the  superiority  of 
Oxford  consists.  It  is  not  merely  its  architecture.  .  .  .  But  in  a  peculiar 
mingling  ...  of  beautiful  architecture,  beautiful  landscape,  and  rich 
historical  recollections  it  stands  alone.  Since  the  day  I  left  Oxford 
I  have  not  seen  Miiller  again  in  England.' 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  London,  December  6. 

'  I  cannot  write  much  to-day,  as  I  am  not  quietly  at  home,  but  am 
staying  with  Walrond,  and  I  have  but  a  minute  to  tell  you  that  I  have 
entered  my  new  year  well,  and  of  good  courage.  God  has  helped  me 
hitherto,  and  will  surely  further  help  me  and  all  of  us,  and  whatever 
happens  to  us  is  always  the  best  for  us,  even  if  we  do  not  at  once 
understand  and  perceive  it.' 

Max  Miiller  was  appointed  a  Curator  of  the  Bodleian  in 
this  year,  and  always  took  great  interest  in  the  Curators' 
meetings.  He  was  a  keen  advocate  for  more  liberal  arrange- 
ments in  lending  out  MSS.  under  proper  precautions,  a  privi- 
lege accorded  by  so  many  of  the  leading  foreign  libraries. 

Christmas  was  spent  at  Calder  Park,  near  Glasgow,  with 
the  parents  of  his  friend  Walrond.  Max  Miiller  writes  from 
there  to  thank  his  mother  for  her  beautiful  Christmas  gift, 
the  fine  bust  of  Goethe,  which  his  friends  will  remember 
always  stood  on  the  top  of  the  bookcase  opposite  the  writing- 
table  at  which  he  spent  so  many  hours  of  his  life,  and  he 
would  often  look  up  at  it  as  if  to  imbibe  fresh  courage  for  his 
work  from  the  strong  and  noble  features  of  the  mighty  master. 

The  year  1857  was  devoted  by  Max  Miiller  to  the  Rig-veda, 
and  to  the  preparation  of  his  German  Classics.  He  was  far 
from  well  the  whole  year,  and  out  of  spirits,  and  though 
forced  to  enter  into  society  by  his  many  kind  friends,  it  is 
evident  from  his  Diary,  resumed  this  year,  that  it  was  mere 
weariness  to  him,  and  he  buried  himself  as  much  as  possible 
in  his  work.     The  correspondence  with  Bunsen  was  not  very 


1 88  Bunsen's  God  in  History  [ch.  x 

constant,  and  his  general  correspondence  not  as  voluminous 
as  usual  throughout  this  year. 

To  Chevalier  Bunsen. 

Translation.  55,  St.  John  ^tke^t,  January  24,  1857. 

'  I  have  through  this  week  been  in  such  constant  intercourse  with 
you,  have  heard  and  learnt  so  much  from  you,  and  have  so  often 
thought  of  the  happy  time  when  your  real  presence  made  a  home  for 
me  in  a  strange  land,  that  although  I  have  nothing  to  tell  you,  or 
to  complain  of,  I  must  at  least  thank  you  for  the  mental  enjoyment 
your  book  God  in  History  has  brought  me.  Your  book  is  a  fact,  and 
as  such  must  produce  an  effect,  if  there  is  any  life  left  in  mankind,  if 
the  retrospective  look  does  not  blind  the  spirit,  and  the  eyes  of  the 
present  generation  are  not  obstinately  closed  to  all  glimpses  into  the 
future.  You  have  said  afresh  what  is  old,  unveiled  what  is  hidden, 
and  made  dead  things  live.  You  have  placed  the  Bible  within  the 
focus  of  history,  so  that  men  can  perceive  its  real  greatness,  whilst  to 
most  people  this  book  stands  so  close  they  cannot  see  it,  or  so  far  they 
cannot  reach  it.  I  can  form  no  judgement  on  many  single  points, 
and  I  am  glad  of  this  for  the  present,  as  the  whole  has  therefore 
a  greater  effect  on  me.  But  if  I  find  that  my  strength  lasts  out,  I  too 
must  enter  on  this  study,  when  my  other  work  is  finished,  which  I  have 
undertaken,  and  must  carry  out.  But  in  that  too  lies  many  a  problem, 
which  must  be  solved,  and  I  cannot  reconcile  it  to  myself,  to  draw  the 
limits  of  God-inspired  mankind  so  narrowly  as  you  do  in  many  passages 
in  your  last  work.  The  men  in  India  were  not  forsaken  by  God,  and 
if  we  cannot  join  in  their  prayers,  the  fault  is  ours.  The  heart  is  too 
narrow,  the  spirit  too  proud.  I  do  not  yet  despair  of  discovering  the 
chord  by  which  the  dissonance  of  the  Veda  and  Zend-Avesta  and  the 
Chinese  Kings  will  be  brought  into  unison  with  the  key-note  of  the 
Bible.  There  can  be  nothing  accidental,  nothing  inharmonious  on 
earth  and  in  history ;  the  unresolved  discords  in  the  East  must  find 
their  solution,  and  we  dare  not  leave  off  till  we  have  discovered  the 
why  and  the  wherefore.  You  will  come  to  treat  of  this  in  your 
second  volume,  where  the  Greek  dissonance  resolves  itself  in  the 
Apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  and  it  is  a  pity  your  completed  work  has  not 
appeared  at  once.  This  must  at  all  events  be  the  case  in  England. 
I  had  already  read  the  book  before  I  received  the  copy  you  have 
yourself  sent  me,  and  for  which  I  send  my  warmest  thanks.  Of  my 
useless  life  here  I  have  nothing  to  tell  you.  I  am  weary  and  worn  out, 
perhaps  things  may  yet  go  better.  I  remain,  in  true  affection  and 
gratitude,  yours  ever,  '  M.  IM.' 

To  this  his  fatherly  friend  replied : — 


1857]  Music  189 

Translation.  January  29. 

*  I  am  not  at  all  easy  at  what  you  tell  me  about  yourself  and  your 
feelings.  But  why  are  you  unhappy  ?  You  have  gained  for  yourself 
a  delightful  position  in  life.  You  are  getting  on  with  your  gigantic 
work.  You  (like  me)  have  won  a  Fatherland  in  England  without  losing 
your  German  home,  the  ever  excellent.  You  have  a  beautiful  future 
before  you.  You  can  at  any  moment  give  yourself  a  comfortable  and 
soul-satisfying  family  circle.  If  many  around  you  are  philistines,  you 
know  that  already ;  still  they  are  worth  something  in  their  own  line. 
Only  step  boldly  forward  into  life.' 

Max  Miiller  seems  to  have  given  more  time  again  to  music 
this  year,  and  he  tells  his  mother  early  in  February,  '  The  two 
Miss  Jelfs  are  here,  and  we  have  had  a  great  deal  of  music, 
and  have  studied  and  sung  Mendelssohn's  Forty-second  Psahn 
with  chorus.  It  went  very  well,  but  I  had  a  good  deal  to 
do  in  practising  the  choir.  We  were  sixteen  voices.'  Mrs. 
Thomson  ^  writes  of  these  parties  : — 

'  Your  husband  kindly  conducted  my  concerts  in  the  Hall  at  Queen's, 
where  we  got  up  the  Lobgesang  and  the  Forty-second  Psalm  by 
Mendelssohn,  sung  by  amateurs.  Thanks  to  his  kindness,  they  were 
a  very  great  success,  and  sounded  so  well  in  the  Hall,  which  was 
furnished  as  a  drawing-room,  with  palms  and  sofas  and  rugs.  He 
seemed  much  pleased  with  the  result.' 

There  is  a  photograph  taken  by  Professor  Maskelyne  and 
Dr.  Thomson  of  Max  Miiller  and  several  members  of  his 
choir;  all  gone  now,  except  Mrs.  Thomson  and  one  other 
friend.  Max  Miiller  tells  us  in  the  Autobiography  that 
Mendelssohn's  music  was  still  despised  by  some  of  the 
old  school,  and  that  one  evening  Dr.  Elwes,  the  old  organist 
of  New  College,  who  had  been  listening  to  the  Hymn  of 
Praise^  'walked  up  to  me — to  thank  me,  as  I  thought — but  no, 
he  burst  out  into  a  torrent  of  real  and  somewhat  coarse  abuse 
of  me  for  venturing  to  introduce  such  flimsy  music  into  Oxford.' 

It  was  in  the  February  of  this  year  that  Deutsche  Liebe 
was  published  by  Brockhaus  in  Leipzig.  It  had  been  written 
in  the  autumn,  whilst  Max  Miiller 's  mother  was  still  with 
him.  So  much  has  been  written  and  said  about  this  prose 
idyll,  so  many  people  have  declared  it  to  be  autobiographical, 
that  it  is  perhaps  well  once  for  all  to  say  that  it  is  pure  fiction 
^  Her  husband  was  then  Provost  of  Queen's. 


igo  Deutsche  Liehe  [ch.  x 

as  far  as  the  characters  and  circumstances  are  concerned.  It 
was  written  as  a  rehef  to  his  own  feelings,  and  Max  Miiller 
thought  by  making  an  invalid  princess  the  object  of  those 
feelings  no  one  would  easily  guess  the  author,  or  the  reason 
why  it  was  written.  That  the  Schloss  and  scenery  described 
resemble  Dessau  was  but  natural,  seeing  how  little  else  Max 
had  seen  in  his  own  country.  The  book  came  out  anony- 
mously, and  for  two  or  three  editions  the  secret  was  well 
kept.  Only  to  Bunsen  did  Max  Miiller  acknowledge  himself 
as  author.  Of  his  English  friends,  Froude  alone  from  the 
first  guessed  the  authorship,  and  in  a  review  of  the  book  in 
the  Saturday  Reviezv  says  : — 

'  One  of  our  first  impulses  on  seeing  the  general  character  of  this 
work  was  to  turn  to  the  "  Bekenntnisse  einer  schonen  Seele"  in 
Wilhelm  Meister,  and  to  refresh  our  recollection  of  that  remarkable 
production.  It  was  not  without  feelings  of  satisfaction  that  we  laid 
down  the  volume  of  the  great  master  and  took  up  the  one  before 
us,  reflecting  how  much  half  a  century  had  done  to  elevate  and 
purify  the  tone  of  society.  ...  It  is  due  to  the  author  to  say  that 
it  is  truly  gratifying  to  find,  in  a  book  which  touches  at  so  many  points 
on  the  domain  of  religion,  not  one  expression  which  can  offend,  in  the 
slightest  degree,  any  reasonable  and  right-minded  person.' 

The  book  is  now  in  its  twelfth  edition  in  Germany,  where 
after  forty-five  years  it  still  commands  a  steady  sale,  whilst 
an  unauthorized  translation  in  America,  under  the  title  of 
Memories,  has  had  an  enormous  circulation,  and  continues 
to  be  a  general  favourite  there.  Miss  Winkworth  published 
a  translation  in  English  as  soon  as  the  book  appeared,  by 
leave  of  the  publisher,  and  twenty  years  later  Max  Miiller 
brought  out  a  translation  by  his  wife,  made  many  years 
previously,  which  has  been  through  several  editions.  One 
review  spoke  of  Deutsche  Liebe  as  a  book  'full  of  tender 
grace,  touching  sympathy,  noble  compassion,  impressing 
love.  With  a  delicate  hand  the  author  places  before  us  the 
deeper  depths  of  a  true  soul.  It  is  a  humanizing,  refining, 
chastening  volume,  and  is  worthy  of  the  widest  circulation.' 
Another  paper  says :  '  These  recollections  touch  with  much 
delicacy  of  feeling  upon  some  of  the  most  sacred  emotions 
and  hopes.     Whoever  the  original  author  or  authors  may  be, 


1857]  Buddhist  Pilgrims  191 

the  papers  reveal  a  very  deep  and  sympathetic  insight  into 

man's  nature  ;  and  many  notable  things  are  said  of  happiness, 

love,  loss,  gain,  and  suffering,  as  they  constantly  affect  and 

impinge  upon  the  human  soul.'    It  was  pronounced  by  Bunsen 

to  be  one  of  the  most  perfect  specimens  of  German  writing 

he  had  ever  read. 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  February  24,  1857. 

'  I  wanted  a  short  time  ago  to  send  you  a  book,  written  by  a  very 
intimate  friend  of  mine,  and  published  by  Brockhaus.  It  is  called 
Deutsche  Liehe.  The  author  does  not  wish  his  name  to  be  known. 
If  you  have  any  spare  money,  buy  a  copy,  and  tell  me  how  you  like  it, 
but  do  not  tell  any  one  that  I  know  the  author.  I  was  very  sorry  to 
hear  of  Kriiger's  ^  death,  though  I  never  really  saw  much  of  him.  He 
lived  in  quite  another  world,  and  his  art  did  not  appeal  much  to  me. 
But  he  had  won  a  good  position  by  his  work  alone,  and  that  was 
greatly  to  his  credit,  and  one  always  rejoices  when  merit  like  his  is 
recognized  by  a  man's  contemporaries.  I  wish  I  had  a  picture  of  you 
by  him.  Find  out  how  much  a  good  oil  picture  costs  in  Dresden,  but 
it  must  be  good,  by  Hiibner  or  some  other  good  artist.' 

Max  Miiller's  course  of  lectures  this  term  was   on  '  Epic 

^'  To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  London,  March  26. 

'  I  was  not  at  all  well :  bad  colds  and  toothache  had  made  me  quite 
ill,  and  I  needed  a  change  and  amusement  I  am  staying  with  Walrond, 
you  know  where  that  is,  and  I  visit  old  friends.  I  hoped  to  find 
Morier,  but  he  has  not  yet  arrived,  though  he  has  left  Vienna. 
I  must  tell  you,  and  Emilie  also,  that  I  am  quite  innocent  as  to 
Deutsche  Liebe.  I  know  the  author,  but  have  promised  not  to  mention 
his  name,  as  he  makes  a  point  of  it.  He  only  published  the  book 
because  he  thought  that  here  and  there  it  might  do  some  good,  and 
might  cure  young  people  of  the  epidemic  of  so-called  unfortunate  love. 
The  book  contains  the  antidote  to  Werthers  Leiden,  and  in  so  far  is 
interesting ;  but  it  ought  to  have  been  more  fully  worked  out  to  have 
much  influence.  I  entirely  agree  with  the  spirit  of  the  book,  and  am 
glad  you  Uke  it.  I  do  not  care  much  for  the  plan  of  the  story ;  it  is 
too  sketchy,  and  is  wanting  in  repose  and  unity.' 

It  was  in  the  Times  of  April  17  and  20  of  this  year  that 
a  review  appeared  by  Max  Mliller  of  Stanislas  Julien's  Voyages 
des  Pelerins  Boiiddhistes.     It  was   afterwards    published   as 

^  The  artist. 


192  Nirvana  [ch.  x 

a  pamphlet,  together  with  a  letter  on  Nirvana  called  forth 
by  a  protest  printed  in  the  Times  of  April  24,  against  Max 
Muller'sviewof  Nirvana  as  ntter  annihilaHoji,\v\\cr&2i5  the  writer 
of  the  protest  maintained  that  Nirvana  meant  tinion  and 
commwiion  with  God.  Max  Miiller's  opponent  appealed  to 
the  works  of  Mander  and  Creuzer,  who  were  neither  of  them 
Oriental  scholars,  and  who  wrote  before  the  canonical  books 
of  the  Buddhists  had  been  brought  to  Europe.  In  his 
answer  Max  explains  the  etymology  of  the  word,  which 
means  blozving  out.  *  The  human  soul,  when  it  arrives  at  its 
perfection,  is  blown  out,  like  a  lamp,  as  the  Buddhists  say, 
not  absorbed,  as  the  Brahmans  say,  like  a  drop  in  the  ocean.' 
He  shows  also  'that  Nirvana,  as  taught  in  the  metaphysics 
of  Kasyapa,  a  friend  and  pupil  of  Buddha  himself,  is  annihila- 
tion, and  there  is  no  earlier  document  from  which  we  can 
form  an  opinion  as  to  Buddha's  original  teaching.'  '  Buddhism, 
therefore,  if  tested  by  its  own  canonical  books,  cannot  be 
freed  from  the  charge  of  Nihilism,  whatever  may  have  been 
its  character  in  the  mind  of  its  founder,  and  whatever  changes 
it  may  have  undergone  in  later  times,  and  among  races  less 
inured  to  metaphysical  discussions  than  the  Hindus.'  '  Buddha 
himself,  however,  though  perhaps  not  a  Nihilist,  was  certainly 
an  Atheist.  He  does  not  deny  distinctly  either  the  existence 
of  gods,  or  that  of  God  ;  but  he  ignores  the  former,  and 
is  ignorant  of  the  latter.  Therefore  if  Nirvina  in  his  mind 
w^as  not  yet  complete  annihilation,  still  less  could  it  have 
been  absorption  into  a  Divine  Essence.'  In  1869  Max 
Miiller  gave  an  address  at  Kiel  on  Buddhist  Nihilism,  before 
the  Association  of  German  Philologists,  in  which  these  words 
occur :  '  No  person  who  reads  with  attention  the  metaphysical 
speculations  on  the  Nirvana  contained  in  the  Buddhist  Canon, 
can  arrive  at  any  other  conviction  than  that  expressed  by 
Burnouf,  i.  e.  that  Nirvana,  the  highest  aim,  the  sumimim 
bonuin  of  Buddhism,  is  the  absolute  nothing.'  Those  among 
Max  Miiller's  friends  who  know  his  own  strong  convictions 
as  to  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  may  perhaps  feel  surprised 
at  the  increasing  interest  he  took  in  Buddhism  as  years  went 
on.  For  at  Kiel  he  declared,  '  Buddhist  Nihilism  has  always 
been  much  more  incomprehensible  than  Atheism.     A  kind 


1857]  Buddhism  193 

of  religion  is  still  conceivable,  when  there  is  something  firm 
somewhere,  when  a  something  eternal  and  self-dependent  is 
recognized,  if  not  luithont  and  above  man,  at  least  witJiin 
him.  But  if,  as  Buddhism  teaches,  the  soul  after  having 
passed  through  all  the  phases  of  existence,  all  the  worlds 
of  the  gods  and  the  higher  spirits,  attains  finally  Nirvana 
as  its  highest  aim  and  last  reward,  i.  e.  becomes  quite  extinct, 
then  religion  is  not  any  more  what  it  ought  to  be — a  bridge 
from  the  finite  to  the  infinite,  but  a  trap-bridge  hurling  man 
into  the  abyss,  at  the  very  moment  when  he  thought  he  had 
arrived  at  the  stronghold  of  the  Eternal.'  But  even  from 
his  address  at  Kiel,  it  may  be  gathered  that  by  that  time 
Max  Muller  had  convinced  himself  that  the  third  part  of  the 
Buddhist  Canon,  in  which  alone  the  doctrine  of  Nirvana  in 
its  crude  form  is  to  be  found,  was  not  '  pronounced  by  Buddha,' 
and  that  passages  are  to  be  found  in  the  first  and  second  parts 
of  the  Canon  which  contradict  this  crude  Nihilism.  Max 
Muller  asks  pertinently,  '  Where  Buddha  speaks  of  Nirvana 
as  the  highest  happiness,  can  he  mean  annihilation?'  It  was 
when  preparing  a  translation  of  the  Dhammapada  in  1870, 
afterwards  revised  and  published  as  Volume  X  of  the  Sacred 
Books  of  the  East,  that  the  extreme  moral  beauty  of  Buddha's 
teaching  powerfully  attracted  Max  M tiller's  sympathy  for 
Buddhism,  and  this  was  further  increased  when  two  years 
later  he  came  in  contact  with  living  Buddhists,  his  pupils 
Bunyiu  Nanjio  and  Kenjiu  Kasawara,  and  still  later  Professor 
Takakusu,  and  saw  the  purity  of  their  character,  their  true 
and  gentle  dispositions,  and  entire  devotion  to  duty.  The 
article  on  Stanislas  Julien's  book  was  almost  Max  Miiller's 
first  introduction  to  Buddhism.  Pali  he  had  studied  at 
Berlin. 

After  several  months  of  silence  Max  Muller  writes  again  to 
his  old  friend  Chevalier  Bunsen  : — 

Translation.  55,  St.  John  Street,  May  i. 

'  One  may  fight  against  physical  illness,  though  it  is  difficult  with 
persistent  colds,  which  attack  the  head  to-day,  the  teeth  to-morrow,  to 
keep  up  one's  good-natured  warmth  and  communicativeness ;  but  if  the 
cold  once  takes  possession  of  the  mind  and  the  spirits,  it  is  really  the 
best  thing  to  shut  oneself  up  for  a  time.     I  have  felt  like  this  this 

I  O 


194  Frondes  History  [ch.  x 

winter.  I  felt  I  was  not  myself,  and  I  did  not  wish  to  be  a  burden  to 
others  with  my  worries  and  blue  devils.  You  will  laugh  at  me  and 
scold  me,  for  no  one  has  any  sympathy  with  mental  illness  till  it  takes 
the  worst  form.  But  I  can  assure  you  that  I  have  suffered  a  great 
deal,  and  am  still  suffering  in  spite  of  the  approach  of  spring.  I  cannot 
sympathize  with  the  fancy  of  most  people  always  to  appear  happy. 
But  when  I  feel  miserable,  I  will  at  all  events  not  be  a  burden  to 
others,  and  so  I  shut  myself  up,  and  write  no  letters.  So  forgive  my 
long  silence,  and  have  patience  with  me,  who  have  so  much  that  I 
must  bear  patiently.  I  received  the  three  volumes  of  Egypt  but 
recently,  and  I  cannot  find  that  you  wrote  to  me  that  you  wished  for 
any  supplement  or  remarks  for  your  English  edition.  I  have  read 
your  work  here  and  there,  and  have  followed  with  great  delight 
your  Herculean  labours  in  the  Augean  stable  of  Indian  history.  But 
as  my  present  work  lies  in  quite  a  different  direction,  I  have  postponed 
the  careful  reading  of  your  book  to  Long  Vacation,  and  hope  then  to 
be  able  to  say  something  more  definite  about  it.  It  will  interest  you 
to  find  in  the  journal  of  the  Chinese  traveller  Hiouen-thsang,  therefore 
in  the  seventh  century  a.d,,  quotations  in  several  places  from  native 
Indian  historical  works,  of  which  we  till  now  knew  nothing,  and  whose 
existence  even  in  the  seventh  century  appeared  to  me  till  now  very 
problematical.  The  work  is  full  of  interest,  and  I  have  written  a  long 
review  on  it  in  the  Times  of  April  17  and  20.  I  have  also  given  there 
the  translation  of  a  Vedic  hymn,  which  would  interest  you.  I  have 
had  to  give  up  and  waste  my  time  lately  on  German  literature.  The 
University  raised  my  salary,  and  I  felt  I  must  work  for  it,  and  so  I  am 
printing  a  chronologically  arranged  Reading  Book,  extracted  from 
Wackernagel,  &c.  It  is  a  sad  waste  of  my  time,  for  I  could  do  better 
and  more  important  work,  but  I  cannot  help  myself.  ...  I  consider 
Roth's  conception  of  Yama  as  entirely  mistaken.  Yama  is  the  setting, 
dying  sun,  thus  the  Beyond,  the  eternal  life,  or  personified,  the  Lord 
of  those  who  are  gone,  of  the  kingdom  of  death.  What  we  call  death 
was  to  the  Hindus  always  a  passage ;  later  they  called  it  a  setting  free, 
a  word  that  suits  us  better  than  death.  .  .  .  You  are  really  unjust  to 
Froude.  Even  if  his  idea  of  Henry  VIII  is  mistaken,  his  picture  of 
English  life  is  not  affected  by  that.  There  are  chapters  in  his  work 
that  are  really  masterly — the  Irish  rebellion,  the  Charterhouse  monks; 
and  he  has  described  the  secret  workings  of  the  Reformation  among 
the  common  people  with  genuine  feeling  and  sympathy.  Froude's 
idea  of  Henry  VIII  seems  to  me  too  problematical.  But  at  all  events 
Henry  was  one  of  the  most  popular  of  kings,  and  has  his  admirers  not 
only  in  Froude  but  in  his  people,  and  in  such  historians  as  Sharon 
Turner,  and  such  philosophers  as  Carlyle.     I  have  a  great  aliection 


Ji 


1857]  Friends  in  Oxford  195 

for  Froude,  for  I  know  him  with  all  his  faults,  and  know  that  he  prays 

and  works.     Kingsley  is  a  more  brilliant  nature,  but  his.  relation  to 

Froude  has  never  been  that  of  a  teacher;  on  the  contrary,  that  of  an 

admirer.     Le   roinan   ne   vaut  pas   thistoire.     How  people  came  to 

look  on  the  Saturday  as  Kingsley's  and  my  organ  I  cannot  imagine. 

I  met  the  editor  once  in  London,  and  have  sent  him  a  few  articles. 

The  paper  is  politically  in  the  hands  of  decayed  Peelites ;  in  literature 

it  is  independent  and  active.     I  remember  one  gross  attack  on  you  in 

the  political  part  of  the  paper,  but  I  should  have  felt  it  unworthy  of 

your  name  to  take  any  notice  of  such  an  attack.     Woe  to  the  man 

who  has  no  enemies  in  England — you  will  never  want  for  them,  but 

they  help  far  more  than  they  hurt.     I  have  to  fight  my  way  bravely, 

and  here  in  Oxford  the  battle  never  ceases.     I  sit  on  the  same  board 

with  Pusey,  and  know  the  man.     He  will  soon  attack  me,  but  I  am 

armed.     Stanley  is  now  coming  to  Oxford.     Liddell  is  better,  and 

comes  back  next  month  from  ]\Iadeira.     Jowett  is  indefatigable,  and 

they  have  not  conquered  him.     He  is  printing  his  second  edition  ^ 

Vaughan  is  married,  and  comes  very  seldom  to  Oxford.     Pattison  is 

as  reserved  as  ever,  and  trusts  no  one.     It  is  a  deep  secret  that  he 

writes  the  article  in  the  Westminster'^.     I  live  chiefly  alone,  and  see 

no  one  but  Jowett.     My  mother  left  me  in  October.     She  was  not 

strong  enough  to  stand  an  English  November ;  but  I  hope  to  have  her 

here  again  this  summer.     And  now  I  have  written  really  too  much, 

and  must  again  beg  you  to  have  patience  with  a  poor  melancholy 

invalid.     Begging  you  to  remember  me   most  heartily   to  all  your 

party,  I  remain  as  ever,  yours  in  true  reverence  and  devotion.' 

With  this  letter  Max  Muller  sent  his  pamphlet  on  Buddhist 
Pilgrims  to  Bunsen. 

On  May  8  Bunsen  writes : — 

Translation. 

'I  must  thank  you,  and  express  my  delight  at  your  letter  and 
article.  The  letter  confirms  my  fears  in  the  highest  degree,  namely 
\h2Xy0u  are  riot  well,  not  to  say  that  you  begin  to  be  a  hypochondriacal 
old  bachelor.  But  that  is  such  a  natural  consequence  of  your  retired 
sulky  Don's  life,  and  of  your  spleen,  that  I  can  only  wonder  how  you 
fight  so  bravely  against  it.  .  .  .  You  will  soon  see  how  nearly  we 
agree  together,  although  I  cannot  say  so  much  of  the  humanizing 
influence  of  Buddhism.  .  .  .  You  have  represented  the  whole  as  with 
a  magic  wand.  We  really  edified  ourselves  yesterday  evening  with  it, 
Francis  read  aloud  and  we  listened.' 

^  Commentary  on  Thessalonians. 
^  On  Bunsen's  God  in  History. 

o  a 


196  Dr.  W.   Wright  [ch.  x 

This  term  Max  Muller  read  the  Nibelimgen  with  his  class. 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Tratislaiion.  Oxford,  May  24. 

'  How  beautiful  it  must  be  in  Carlsbad .  .  .  how  gladly  would  I  find 
myself  there  for  a  couple  of  weeks  1  But  I  am  up  to  my  ears  in 
work,  and  then  just  now  I  have  so  many  interruptions — parties,  picnics, 
business  in  London,  examinations,  &c.  We  have  just  begun  our 
musical  practisings  again.  The  Jelfs  are  here,  and  other  ladies  who 
sing  very  well,  and  this  time  we  are  studying  Mendelssohn's  Lohgesang. 
There  are  difficulties,  and  it  is  not  easy  to  keep  twenty  voices 
together  and  conduct  them.  And  I  must  not  swear  like  old 
Schneider !  I  have  so  much  to  do  I  shall  probably  take  no  holiday. 
If  I  do  get  to  Germany  I  must  go  to  Leipzig,  where  I  have  to  print 
a  book.  But  it  must  first  be  written.  .  . .  The  gardens  are  so  lovely 
here  now — even  my  little  garden  looks  nice,  and  your  ivy  begins  to 
grow.  The  heat  is  beginning,  and  what  that  is  in  these  small  rooms  you 
know.  In  about  three  weeks  I  am  going  to  Froude  to  the  seaside, 
and  to  another  friend  who  lives  near  Exeter,  a  brother  of  Dr.  Acland.' 

To  Chevalier  Bunsen. 

Translatmi.  55,  St.  John  Street,  May  24. 

'  It  really  does  one  good  to  be  thoroughly  scolded  and  abused. 
Here  no  one  takes  the  trouble  to  do  it,  and  I  have  done  it  myself 
so  long  without  any  result  that  I  give  the  Oxford  Don  his  own  way, 
till  at  last  of  his  own  accord  he  becomes  German  a2:ain.  But  I 
cannot  tell  you  how  much  one  has  to  bear  in  this  promised  land. 
Here  in  Oxford  everlasting  quarrels  and  squabbles,  and  lies  and 
slander,  and  nowhere  courage  and  faith,  and  no  one  can  speak  the 
truth,  and  any  one  who  tries  to  do  it  brings  a  perfect  hornet's  nest 
about  his  ears.  Can  you  believe  that  they  have  refused  an  excellent 
Orientalist,  Dr.  W.  Wright,  for  the  place  of  Under-Librarian  at  the 
Bodleian,  because  he  has  dared  to  afllirm  that  the  language  of  the 
Phoenician  inscriptions  is  Semitic  and  not  Hamitic,  because  he  doubts 
that  Ham  was  the  father  of  the  Canaanites  and  denies  that  Moses 
wrote  the  account  of  his  own  death  ?  The  man  is  a  thorough  Christian, 
is  ready  to  sign  the  Articles ;  but  it  is  no  good — away  with  him. 
And  no  one  moves  a  finger.  Peace  at  any  price  !  is  the  watchword. 
I  carried  my  skin  to  market,  but  have  been  thoroughly  beaten,  and 
my  friends  began  to  be  very  much  alarmed  about  me.  And  then 
these  affairs  waste  one's  time,  and  destroy  all  wish  for  work,  so  at 
last  I  shut  myself  in,  and  for  weeks  saw  no  one,  and  heard  no  one. 
Happily  the  Long  Vacation  will  soon  begin;  if  it  only  lasted  the 
whole  year,  Oxford  would  be  a  real  paradise.     I  have  tried  my  best 


1857]  Local  Examinations  197 

with  the  two  hymns  \  but  they  are  very  difficult  to  translate,  as  our 
words  mean  so  much  which  was  not  yet  in  the  old  words.  The  first 
hymn  contains  many  Manichean  thoughts,  as,  the  ray  of  light  which 
falls  from  the  realm  of  light  into  the  realm  of  darkness,  and  gives  the 
first  impetus  to  creation.  And  yet  I  cannot  consider  the  hymn  as 
modern.  It  belonged  to  the  collection  long  before  the  Brahmanas 
were  written,  and  at  the  time  of  Panini  its  syllables  were  already 
counted  in  the  sum  total  of  the  syllables  of  the  Rig-veda.  I  must 
stay  this  summer  in  England.  I  must  finish  some  work  to  satisfy  my 
conscience.  If  I  can  get  it  done  early,  I  may  cross  the  water  in 
September.  With  hearty  thanks  for  your  friendly  and  unfriendly 
words,  I  remain  as  ever,  your  truly  devoted.' 

In  June,  Max  Miiller  took  part  as  representing  Oxford 
in  the  examination  arranged  at  Exeter  by  the  late  Sir 
Thomas,  then  Mr.  Acland,  for  middle  class  and  commercial 
schools,  which  was  the  first  practical  example  of  the  system 
of  Local  Examinations  since  developed  and  carried  out  by 
our  Universities.  It  was  the  first  public  speech  in  any 
language  Max  Miiller  ever  made.  His  first  public  speech  in 
German  was  made  eight  years  later  at  a  Philological  Con- 
ference at  Kiel. 

From  Exeter  he  went  to  Bideford  to  the  Frondes',  to  get 
a  little  rest  in  fine  air  before  hurrying  to  London  for  the 
annual  Indian  Civil  Service  Examination.  After  finishing 
up  some  necessary  work  in  Oxford  he  started  in  August  for 
Germany,  his  mother  joining  him  at  Leipzig,  where  he  spent 
some  weeks,  seeing  his  Reading  Book  {German  Classics) 
through  the  Press.  From  there  he  wrote  to  his  friend 
Kingsley,  who  was  uncle  to  his  future  wife : — 

Leipzig,  August  lo,  1857. 
'  My  dear  Kingsley, — How  I  long  to  be  with  you  at  Eversley, 
but  my  work  here  will  keep  me  longer  than  I  expected,  though  I  have 
little  to  say  in  reply  to  your  letter — nothing  in  fact  but  "you  are 
quite  right."  Yet  I  must  write  to  you  to  tell  you  that  your  clear  and 
decisive  words  have  brought  me  more  comfort  than  pain ;  they  have 
driven  away  a  swarm  of  vain  hopes  and  plans,  and  the  sooner  these 
are  scattered  the  better  I  can  wait  and  work ;  and  sooner  or  later  all 
this  waiting  and  working  will  come  to  an  end,  for  this  life  cannot 

^  From  the  Rig-veda,  of  which  a  prose  translation  had  been  made  in 
Germany  for  Bunsen. 


198  Letter  from  Humboldt  [ch.  x 

last  for  ever,  and  it  will  last  no  longer  than  we  can  bear  it.  I  have 
no  right  to  complain.  I  have  all  I  wanted — more  than  I  ever  hoped 
for,  more  than  I  ever  deserved.  A  disappointment  in  love  is  hard 
to  bear  because  it  destroys  our  faith  in  ourselves  and  in  everything 
else ;  a  disappointment  in  marriage  may  be  a  life-long  trial,  but  it  need 
not  destroy  our  faith  in  our  own  nature,  in  the  truth  of  others,  or 
in  the  wisdom  of  God.  Life  may  grow  more  strange  and  awful  every 
day,  but  the  more  strange  and  awful  it  grows,  the  more  it  reveals 
to  us  its  truest  meaning  and  reality,  and  the  deepest  depth  of  its 
divinity.  "  And  God  saw  everything  that  He  had  made,  and,  behold, 
it  was  very  good."  And  so  far,  I  believe,  we  both  agree,  and  if 
there  are  a  few  words  in  your  letter  where  we  differ,  it  is  better  to 
leave  them  alone  till  we  smoke  our  next  pipe  at  Eversley.  What  you  say 
about  my  going  back  to  Germany  is  imaginary.  It  is  as  unlikely  that 
I  should  go  to  Germany  as  that  you  should  go  to  India.  But  if  your 
duty  should  ever  call  you  to  India,  would  you  like  to  find  yourself 
fettered  by  a  promise  which  no  man  has  any  right  to  make  ? — for  His 
ways  are  not  our  ways.  All  I  can  say  is  that  after  an  absence  of  ten 
years  during  the  most  critical  time  of  life,  everything  is  against  my  ever 
returning  or  settling  in  Germany.  I  am  not  wanted  here  ;  other 
people  have  taken  the  places  I  might  have  had.  You  will  not  easily 
get  rid  of  me,  unless  you  give  me  notice  to  quit.     Auf  Wiedersehn  1 ' 

To  Professor  Max  Muller. 

Translation.  Potsdam,  August  28. 

'  I  am  much  touched,  my  honoured  clever  friend,  by  your  amiable 
desire  to  see  my  hoary  head  once  more.  My  physical  powers  have 
been  steadily  declining  for  the  last  nine  months,  but  not  my  powers 
of  work,  nor  the  mental  interest  which  I  take  in  your  creative  far- 
reaching  thoughts.  I  shall  stay  at  home  on  Tuesday  from  eleven  to 
two,  and  gladly  expect  you.  With  true  friendship,  your  Vecchio 
della  Montagna,  '  A.  von  Humboldt.' 

From  Chevalier  Bunsen. 

Translation.  Charlottenburg,  August  28. 

'  So  there  he  remains  in  the  centre  of  Germany  a  whole  month,  and 
lets  one  hear  and  see  nothing  of  him.  Your  last  letter  was  a  great 
dehght  to  me.  The  snail  had  there  crept  out  of  his  shell  and  spoke 
to  me  as  the  friend  ;  but  now  "Your  Excellency"  appears  again,  so  the 
snail  has  drawn  in  his  head  again.  Now,  my  dear  friend,  you  ought 
to  be  thanked  for  the  friendly  thought  of  paying  me  a  visit  and 
writing  to  me.  .  .  .  That  the  Oxford  Don  should  ask  if  I  can  "  aiford 
him  a  few  hours  "  shows  again  the  English  leaven.  .  .  .  What  have  we 


1857]  Visit  to  Heidelberg  199 

not  to  talk  over  ?  The  hours  belong  to  the  Don's  gown,  for  you 
know  very  well  that  we  could  in  a  few  hours  only  figure  to  ourselves 
what  we  have  to  discuss  by  turns.  So  come  as  soon  as  you  can,  and 
stay  at  least  a  week  here.     You  will  find  my  house,  to  be  sure,  rather 

lonely We  two  old  people  are  here,  however,  and  full  of  life.  . . . 

I  must  tell  you  with  what  deep  sympathy  and  melancholy  pleasure 
your  touching  idyll  has  filled  me.  You  will  easily  believe  that  after 
the  first  five  minutes  I  saw  you  vividly  behind  the  mask.  I  thank  you 
very  much  for  having  ordered  it  to  be  sent  to  me.  I  am  very  glad 
that  you  have  written  it,  for  I  would  far  rather  see  you  mixing  in 
the  life  of  the  present  and  future,  with  your  innate  freshness  and 
energy.' 

To  this  Max  Muller  replied  :— 

Translation. 

'  I  was  glad  to  hear  that  you  liked  Deutsche  Liebe.  The  story 
itself  is  only  a  frame.  What  I  wished  to  make  clear  to  myself  and 
others  was,  why  with  the  inborn  love  to  our  fellow  creatures,  we 
could  show  that  love  to  so  very  few  of  them  only;  why  love  had 
to  be  confined  almost  entirely  to  the  members  of  our  family,  to  our 
parents,  our  wife,  our  children,  and  why  any  attempt  to  go  beyond 
generally  ended  in  sorrow.  It  is  so,  and  we  know  not  why,  except 
again  to  show  us  that  this  life  was  not  meant  to  be  perfect,  but  only 
to  give  us  by  its  very  imperfections  a  faith  in  and  a  longing  for 
a  better  life.' 

Early  in  September  Max  Miiller  went  to  Heidelberg,  and 
the  following  letter  to  his  mother  from  Bunsen's  tells  her  of 
his  after  proceedings.  The  visit  to  Weimar  was  to  attend  the 
inauguration  of  the  great  Goethe-Schiller  Monument  there. 

Translation.  HEmELBERG,  September  9. 

'  How  much  one  can  get  through  in  a  week,  and  how  fast  life  runs 
on  from  one  thing  to  another.  A  week  ago  I  was  still  with  you,  and 
here  I  am  in  Heidelberg,  and  ready  to  rush  off  to  England,  and 
meantime  I  have  seen  lots  of  people,  and  had  a  good  deal  of 
enjoyment.  I  suppose  you  are  now  in  Dresden,  where  you  found 
so  much  to  do  that  you  are  getting  over  our  parting,  about  which 
you  again  made  yourself  so  miserable.  If  you  only  knew  how  you 
pain  me  by  such  excessive  grief,  you  would  try  and  bear  more  quietly 
what  cannot  be  helped.  Our  being  so  long  together  this  year  was 
quite  an  unexpected  treat,  and  we  ought  to  thank  God  that  we  had 
such  enjoyment.  Think  how  few,  even  of  those  who  live  in  Germany, 
can  see  each  other  so  often  and  for  so  long  a  time  as  we  do,  and 


200  Weimar — Manchester  Exhibition       [ch.  x 

then  do  not  spoil  the  joy  of  meeting  by  brooding  over  the  parting. 
Weimar  was  more  than  I  expected,  and  through  Brockhaus  I  made 
acquaintance  with  many  interesting  people — Auerbach,  Gerstacker, 
Rietschl,  Devrient,  Andersen  and  many  others,  and  we  met  and 
talked  together  every  night  till  one  or  two  o'clock.  I  had  no  head- 
aches, and  all  went  well.  The  statues  were  very  fine,  and  Weimar 
itself  most  interesting.  I  could  not  pay  visits,  for  theatres,  parties, 
and  drives  took  up  the  whole  day.  We  saw  everything,  and  very 
well  too.  Brockhaus  and  his  pleasant  wife  stayed  till  Monday.  The 
Wartburg  festival  was  beautiful  and  the  weather  was  fine.  The 
representations  in  the  theatre  were  splendid.  I  found  many  old 
University  friends,  and  it  will  always  be  a  pleasant  memory.  Monday 
I  went  to  Frankfort,  and  came  on  here  Tuesday.  I  arrived  after  tea, 
and  Bunsen  had  just  received  an  affectionate  letter  from  the  King, 
asking  him  to  go  to  Berlin  and  stay  with  him  at  the  Palace.  So 
I  really  only  saw  him  yesterday,  and  to-day  he  started.  I  stay  till 
to-morrow,  and  then  go  direct  to  Oxford,  for  I  am  longing  for  my 
work  and  quiet.  Dr.  Meyer  is  here  and  Dr.  Bernays,  so  I  stayed 
another  day,  and  have  seen  Heidelberg  again,  where  we  once  spent 
such  a  happy  time  together.  I  am  very  tired,  such  incessant  excite- 
ment is  too  much.     I  could  not  hold  out  much  longer.' 


'o^ 


To  THE  Same. 

Translation.  Oxford,  October  7. 

'  Oxford  does  not  feel  like  home  this  time,  and  even  my  work  will 
not  please  me.  So  out  of  sheer  ennui  I  went  last  week  to  Manchester 
with  Thomson  to  the  Exhibition.  There  was  not  a  bed  to  be  had 
in  any  hotel,  and  so  there  was  nothing  for  it  but  to  go  on  to 
Liverpool  and  sleep  there,  and  come  back  next  morning  early  to 
Manchester.  Sir  Charles  Napier  was  in  the  same  hotel.  The 
Exhibition  was  magnificent,  but  much  too  much  to  see  in  so  short 
a  time.  We  were  there  from  Wednesday  to  Saturday,  and  were  dead 
beat  when  we  left.  So  that  pleasure  was  got  through  !  To-morrow 
I  am  going  to  the  country  for  a  few  days  (to  Kingsley's),  but  take 
my  work  with  me.  I  hope  to  get  some  riding,  which  always  agrees 
with  me.  What  you  write  about  Bunsen's  Gott  in  der  Geschichte 
delights  me. 

'  Don't  trouble  yourself  about  Jacob.  He  had  not  a  very  successful 
life,  and  we  learn  from  it  that  we  must  not  measure  God's  wisdom 
in  the  ruling  of  human  life  according  to  our  ideas.  Then  the 
idea  of  a  "  people  of  God  "  is  purely  Jewish.     There  is  only  one 

people  of  God,  that  is  all  mankind,  Jews  as  well  as  heathen To-day 

is  a  day  of  prayer  for  India  :  there  is  hardly  a  family  that  has  not 


1857]  His  Horse  'Folly*  201 

friends  and  relations  among  the  victims,  and  the  feeling  throughout 
England  is  very  great.' 

Max  Miiller  undertook  two  courses  of  lectures  this  term, 
continuing  those  on  the  Nibelwigen,  and  beginning  a  course  on 
'  German  Literature.' 

To  Professor  Bernays. 

Translation.  55,  St.  John  Street,  October  26. 

'  I  suppose  you  are  back  at  Breslau,  and  at  your  work  again  in  the 
treadmill.  It  is  the  same  with  me  in  Oxford,  and  I  think  with  regret  of 
the  beautiful  summer  days  that  are  no  more.  I  feel  like  Castor  and 
Pollux  in  one,  half  day  and  half  night,  and  I  shudder  at  the  thought 
of  the  winter  in  England,  and  begin  already  to  hope  again  for  the 
summer  in  Germany. 

'  I  revel  in  Meldon's  Mythology ;  it  has  helped  me  to  see  so  many 
things  more  clearly  now,  especially  about  the  Zeus  Monotheism, 
which  nobody  has  ever  yet  treated  so  simply.  And  what  are  you 
doing.?  I  have  not  yet  received  your  Aristotelicum.  Keep  your 
heart  warm ! 

'  I  had  finished  the  above  when  your  kind  lines  reached  me.  I  see 
now  your  heart  is  quite  the  same.  Yes,  if  I  could  have  you  here ! 
The  fresh  air  would  do  you  much  good !  In  Germany  I  am  useless, 
here  to  be  sure,  too — but  the  air  here  is  freer  and  purer.  I  have 
not  heard  from  Bunsen.  I  believe  in  no  improvement  from  above, 
it  must  come  from  below  !  The  Prince  of  Prussia  (who  is  Regent) 
will  soon  make  everything  so  tedious  that  people  will  go  to  sleep. 
I  have  neither  heard  nor  seen  anything  of  Pattison,  and  therefore 
know  nothing  of  Scaliger  and  his  regeneration.  Farewell,  rejoice  in 
life  and  in  human  beings,  who  are  far  better  than  we  think — they  are 
only  ashamed  of  their  good  souls.' 

Early  in  November  Max  Miiller  tells  his  mother  he  has 
bought  a  horse,  and  rides  almost  every  day.  His  little 
'Folly'  soon  became  great  friends  with  its  master,  and  was 
happily  for  him  a  quiet  creature,  for  unless  with  friends 
Max  Miiller  was  apt  to  sink  into  a  brown  study  when  riding, 
and  many  were  the  humorous  stories  he  told  against  himself, 
and  the  falls  and  escapes  he  had.  He  parted  with  his  little 
friend  when  he  married. 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation,  December  6,  1857. 

'  Thirty-four  years  old.  IMy  birthdays  here  are  always  quiet  and 
lonely,  and  when  one  is  as  old  as  I  am,  one  passes  willingly  over  the 


202  Thinks  of  visiting  India  [ch.  x 

new  step  towards  the  grave  without  marking  it.  I  often  can  hardly 
believe  that  I  am  already  so  old,  and  you  are  quite  right  when  you 
say  that  I  must  no  longer  think  of  marrying.  Well,  many  have 
passed  through  life  like  me,  and  if  one  loses  a  great  deal  of  happiness 
by  it,  I  am  satisfied  with  what  God  has  given  me.  I  often  long  for 
a  larger  sphere  of  usefulness,  and  my  wish  to  go  to  India  has  revived 
strongly  of  late.  It  is  quite  possible  the  East  India  Company  may 
be  done  away  with,  and  that  Government  will  undertake  to  rule  the 
country.  Whether  my  Veda  will  be  ruined  by  this  I  don't  know,  but 
I  would  willingly  exchange  this  work  for  a  few  years,  for  a  scientific 
mission  to  India.  But  these  are  only  ideas  and  we  will  await  quietly 
what  God  sends.  My  little  horse  "  Folly  "  is  a  constant  pleasure,  but 
it  costs  a  good  deal,  and  like  every  one  else  I  expect  to  be  bankrupt ! 
I  shall  stay  here  for  Christmas,  though  I  have  many  invitations.  But 
I  cannot  spare  the  time ;  if  I  dawdle  away  the  summer,  I  must  spend 
the  winter  in  working  hard,' 

To  THE  Same. 

Translation.  Oxford,  December  21. 

'  You  need  not  begin  to  frighten  yourself  about  India.  If  I  were  to 
find  a  chance  of  visiting  it,  you  would  be  as  pleased  as  me.  It  is  not 
out  of  the  world,  still  less  beyond  God's  hand.  It  would  be  of  the 
greatest  use  and  interest  to  me.  But  you  see  how  difficult  it  is  to 
discuss  any  plans  with  you;  you  make  life  so  difficult  for  yourself 
and  for  others  by  such  incessant  fears,  and  it  is  so  much  easier  only 
to  find  out  and  dwell  on  the  good  and  bright  side  of  things.  I  have 
had  a  very  bad  cold  for  above  a  week  and  am  heartily  tired  of  it. 
My  Christmas  will  be  very  quiet  and  lonely  whilst  you  are  all  eating 
your  StoUe  ^  joyfully.  The  children  no  doubt  are  rejoicing  not 
a  little  at  the  prospect  of  Christmas.  I  wish  one  could  look 
forward  with  delight,  as  one  once  did.  Now  one  is  only  glad  when 
something  has  passed  by  and  is  done  wilh.  The  book  Brockhaus 
is  bringing  out  for  me  is  finished  at  last,  the  extracts  from  German 
authors,  from  the  fifth  century  to  Goethe,  with  translations  of  the  old 
German  things  and  notes;  but  it  will  not  be  published  till  Easter. 
Then  you  shall  have  a  copy  and  read  Ulfilas  and  the  Minnesinger. 
It  was  a  hard  bit  of  work,  and  I  am  glad  to  have  done  with  it.  Now 
I  am  busy  on  a  book  on  Indian  Religion,  and  the  Veda  too  is 
getting  on.' 

To  A  Friend. 

55,  St.  John  Street,  Christmas  Eve,  1857. 
'  As  one  is  getting  old  and  looks  forward  with  fear  rather  than  with 
hope  to  what  is  still  in  store  for  us,  one  learns  to  appreciate  more 

^  Christmas  cake. 


1857]  Memory  203 

and  more  the  never-failing  pleasure  of  recalling  all  the  bright  and 
happy  days  that  are  gone.  Gone  they  are,  but  they  are  not  lost. 
Ever  present  to  our  calling  and  recalling,  they  assume  at  last  a  vivid- 
ness such  as  they  hardly  had  when  present,  and  when  we  poor  souls 
were  trembling  for  every  day  and  hour  and  minute  that  was  going  and 
ever  going  and  would  not,  and  could  not,  abide.' 


CHAPTER    XI 

1858-1859 

Letters  of  Philindus.  Canterbury.  German  Classics.  Fellow  of  All 
Souls.  Jenny  Lind.  Birmingham  Festival.  Correspondent  of  French 
Institute.  Death  of  Manuel  Johnson.  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature. 
Marriage.  Germany.  Life  at  Oxford.  Mother's  illness.  Correspondent 
of  Turin  Academy. 

In  the  late  autumn  of  1857,  when  England  was  under  the 
influence  of  the  horrors  of  the  Indian  Mutiny,  a  series  of  papers 
appeared  in  the  Times  signed  Indophilus  and  Philindus.  It 
was  soon  known  that  they  were  by  Sir  Charles  Trevelyan  and 
Max  Miiller  respectively.  Sir  Charles  traced  the  Mutiny 
solely  to  the  issue  of  the  famous  greased  cartridges.  The 
first  letter  by  Philindus  was  entitled  'The  neglect  of  the 
study  of  Indian  Languages  considered  as  a  cause  of  the  Indian 
Mutiny.'  It  points  out  that  ignorance  of  the  languages  pre- 
vented any  real  intercourse  with  the  natives,  and  created 
a  feeling  of  estrangement,  mistrust,  and  contempt  on  both 
sides,  and  mentions  that  in  the  examinations  for  the  Indian 
Civil  Service  as  many  marks  could  be  gained  for  Italian  as 
for  Sanskrit  or  Arabic.  In  his  second  letter  Indophilus  con- 
firmed all  that  Philindus  had  said,  and  he  advocated  the 
establishment  of  an  institution  in  London  for  the  teaching 
of  Oriental  languages.  In  his  reply  Philindus  repeated 
what  he  had  already  said  on  this  subject  in  1854,  and 
anticipated  the  speech  made  thirty-two  years  later  in  the 
presence  of  the  Prince  of  Wales,  our  present  King.  More 
letters  followed  from  both  Indophilus  and  Philindus,  from 
Mr.  Monier  Williams  and  Professor  Syed  Abdoolah. 

These  letters  were  collected  and  published  together  as 
a  small  pamphlet,  and  diligently  circulated ;   but,  as  is  well 


1858]  Indophillis  and  Philindiis  205 

known,  no  arrangements  were  made  by  Government  to  assist 
their  candidates  for  the  Civil  Service  of  India  in  acquiring  the 
various  subjects  for  examinations ;  and  when  the  East  India 
Company  ceased  to  exist  their  college  at  Haileybury,  where  so 
many  eminent  Indian  civil  servants  had  been  educated,  came  to 
an  end  also,  and  it  was  left  to  the  private  unaided  efforts  of  the 
English  Universities  to  provide  the  special  teaching  required. 

The  lectures  announced  by  the  Professor  for  this  term 
were  on  '  The  Principles  of  Comparative  Philology,'  and  he 
was  also  reading  Faust  with  a  class. 

During  January  Max  Miiller  paid  a  visit  of  some  days  to 
his  friend  Dr.  Stanley,  then  Canon  of  Canterbury,  where  he 
met  Whewell,  Sir  John  Herschell,  and  others.  He  tells  his 
mother,  '  We  were  in  all  a  party  of  twelve,  women  as  well  as 
men,  guests  of  a  young,  unmarried  man.'  He  adds  that  he 
had  seen  nothing  of  the  wedding  of  the  Princess  Royal,  and 
had  always  hoped  it  might  bring  Bunsen  over,  but  he  did  not 
come.     Max  adds  : — 

'  He  has  been  made  Baron  without  his  knowledge  or  will,  and  the 
Prussian  nobility  may  be  proud  that  Bunsen  has  done  them  the 
honour  of  taking  such  a  title.  .  .  .  Things  still  look  bad  in  India ; 
and  in  France  they  begin  to  laugh  at  England — it  is  only  to  bring 
down  the  Funds,  that  JMorny  may  do  a  little  business.  But  it  is 
splendid  when  one  sees  how  a  small  country  like  England  can  carry 
on  war  with  India  and  China,  and  quarrel  with  America,  Russia,  and 
France,  and  yet  is  always  cheerful  and  never  loses  her  head.' 

Truly  Max  Miiller  loved  his  adopted  country,  though  he 
could  see  her  faults  as  well  as  her  virtues.  He  had  been 
naturalized  in  October,  1855. 

Bunsen  writes  in  February : — 

Translatioji. 

'I  have  read  your  brilliant  article  on  Welcker  in  the  Saturday 
Review  with  great  delight.  In  fact  everything  would  give  me  undis- 
turbed pleasure  did  I  not  see  (even  without  your  telling  me,  which 
however  you  have  done,  as  a  sacred  duty  between  friends)  that 
you  are  not  happy  in  yourself.  Of  one  thing  I  am  convinced,  you 
would  be  just  as  litde  so,  even  less,  in  Germany,  and  least  of  all  among 
the  sons  of  the  Brahmans.  If  you  continue  to  live  as  you  do  now, 
you  would  everywhere  miss  England — perhaps  also  Oxford,  if  you 
w^ent  to  London.  .  .  .  Unfortunately  I  have  neither  read  Indophilus,  nor 


2o6  Translations  of  Greek  Classics       [ch.  xi 

Philindus ;  please  tell  me  the  numbers  of  the  Times.  ...  I  am  curious 
about  your  German  Reading  Book.  I  maintain  one  thing — you  are 
not  happy,  and  that  comes  from  your  bachelor  life.' 

To  A  Friend. 

55,  St.  John  Street,  February  14. 

'  I  hear  you  want  some  translations  of  the  Greek  Classics.  Oh  that 
I  could  read  some  of  them  with  you  !  They  ought  not  to  be  read 
as  if  they  were  very  wise  and  learned  and  unintelligible  books,  but  as 
if  they  were  written  by  a  man  whom  we  know  and  like.  Those 
ancients  were  exactly  like  our  modern  poets  and  philosophers.  In 
their  time  they  were  read  and  criticized  by  men  and  women  not 
a  whit  wiser  than  we  are.  It  is  mere  pedantry  if,  instead  of  reading 
and  enjoying  their  writings,  we  sit  down  to  interpret  them,  and  to 
look  grave  and  wise  over  their  volumes.  If  Plato  and  Aristotle  came 
to  stay  at  our  house,  most  of  our  young  ladies,  to  say  nothing  of  how 
shocked  they  would  be  by  their  manners,  would  converse  with  them 
as  they  do  with  Maurice,  or  Kingsley.  They  would  tell  them  where 
they  could  not  quite  agree  with  the  views  of  those  wise  philosophers, 
they  would  think  now  and  then  that  they  talked  nonsense,  and  might 
speak  more  like  other  gentlemen,  and  they  would  thank  them  for 
anything  really  good  and  sensible  they  had  to  say.  The  real  charm 
of  the  Classics  is  the  simplicity  with  which  they  say  things  which  in 
our  modern  writers  would  be  commonplace.  They  had  nobody  to 
imitate,  nor  had  they  to  avoid  saying  what  others  had  said  before. 
There  is  no  effort,  nothing  far-fetched  in  their  prose  and  poetry. 
And  then  they  did  not  write  merely  because  they  wished  to  pubHsh 
a  book.  They  generally  wrote  because  they  felt  they  had  something 
really  important  to  say.  They  wrote  with  their  whole  heart  and 
soul,  and  if  we  read  them  carefully  we  sometimes  imagine  they  knew 
that  they  would  be  read  for  thousands  of  years,  and  that  they  wrote 
for  mankind  rather  than  for  the  drawing-rooms  of  Athens. 

'You  were  right  about  my  article  on  Welcker  in  the  Saturday 
Review.  I  had  lately  written  a  good  deal  for  that  journal,  and  had 
just  told  the  editor  that  for  the  present  I  could  write  no  more,  because 
I  wanted  to  finish  some  other  w'ork.  Now  that  I  find  you  read  the 
paper,  I  shall  write  again,  and  I  daresay  you  will  find  me  out, 
although  my  horrid  German  handwriting  is  changed  into  decent 
English  print.  There  was  a  short  time  ago  an  article  on  German 
Mystics ;  I  sometimes  thought  of  you  whilst  I  was  writing  it. 
I  have  not  yet  given  up  my  intention  of  going  to  India ;  I  might  have 
had  an  appointment  last  year,  but  I  found  that  my  mother,  though 
she  wrote  she  would  not  dissuade  me  from  going,  was  so  much  grieved 


1858]  Eversley  207 

at  the  thought  of  never  seeing  me  again,  that  I  felt  I  ought  not  to  go 
as  long  as  she  lives.  I  do  not  know  whether  it  was  right,  and  yet 
I  cannot  bring  myself  to  believe  it  was  wrong.' 

To  Mrs.  Kingsley. 

55,  St.  John  Street,  February  28,  1858. 

'  I  received  your  kind  message  and  I  must  thank  you  for  it  myself, 
and  tell  you  that  I  have  been  longing  to  spend  a  few  warm  and  bright 
days  at  Eversley.  But  the  spring  will  not  come,  and  I  am  busy  and 
have  to  lecture,  and  to  write,  and  cannot  get  away.  As  soon  as  the 
sun  comes  back,  and  as  soon  as  I  hear  from  you  or  Mr.  Kingsley 
that  I  may  come,  I  shall  be  delighted.  I  want  to  lay  in  a  new  stock 
of  happiness,  though  what  I  carried  away  from  you  last  Christmas  is 
by  no  means  exhausted. 

'  I  had  a  letter  from  Bunsen — he  tells  me  he  is  pouring  out  his 
heart  about  Hypatia  in  a  preface.  Does  Mr.  Kingsley  know  of  it? 
Please  to  tell  him  also,  that  my  little  horse  is  the  most  delightful 
creature,  and  quite  a  pet  among  the  Dons  and  Donnas  of  Oxford.' 

His  mother  writes  early  in  March  that  she  had  been  to 
a  ball,  to  which  Max  Miiller  replies : — 
Translation. 

'  There  is  nothing  of  that  sort  for  me.  Giving  lectures  and  correct- 
ing proof-sheets,  those  are  my  amusements  late  and  early.  Then  it  is  so 
cold  one  is  quite  shrivelled  up,  and  one  cannot  ride  in  such  weather, 
and  the  horse  eats  his  head  off  and  has  nothing  to  do !  Froude  has 
been  staying  with  me.  I  have  already  told  you  my  salary  is  raised  to 
£500  ;  I  hoped  it  would  be  £600,  and  that  is  cheap  for  all  the  work !  * 

To  A  Friend. 
55,  St.  John  Street,  March  7,  1858. 
'  Your  letter  written  with  the  accompaniment  of  Beethoven's  Septette 
was  all  music  to  me.  What  is  time  and  space,  and  earth  and  life,  and 
all  that  people  call  stern  reality }  While  I  was  reading  your  letter 
I  was  sitting  in  a  quiet  corner  of  your  room — watching  the  dark  cedar 
tree  that  stretches  out  its  broad  branches  to  bless  you  and  your  house, 
and  I  listened  to  every  note,  and  I  thought  of  the  happy  days  when 
I  drank  in  the  same  strange  melodies  as  a  child,  six  years  old,  and 
my  mother  told  me  it  was  so  beautiful,  and  I  believed  it  because  she 
told  me  so,  and  have  believed  it  ever  since.  And  why  ?  Who  can 
tell  us  the  meaning  of  those  sounds .?  and  whence  do  they  come,  and 
whither  do  they  go  ?  I  once  asked  my  old  music-master  who  had 
taught  him  music,  and  he  told  me  that  he  had  a  master;  and  then 


2o8  Music  [cH.  XI 

I  went  on  asking  who  had  taught  his  master,  and  he  did  not  under- 
stand what  I  meant,  and  I  remember  how  his  eyes  grew  bright  when 
I  told  him,  with  all  the  authority  of  a  child,  that  I  was  certain  that 
God  must  have  been  our  first  music-master.  And  now  I  am  thinking 
■what  he  wrote  in  my  album  when  I  left  him  in  1836 — I  was  then 
sent  to  school  at  Leipzig.  I  shall  try  to  translate  it  for  you.  "  Music, 
echo  of  a  distant,  harmonious  world — sign  of  the  angel  within  us ; 
when  the  word  is  speechless,  and  the  eye,  and  the  tear,  and  when  our 
silent  hearts  lie  lonely  behind  the  bars  of  our  breast,  it  is  thou.  Music, 
through  whom  they  call  to  each  other  and  mingle  their  distant  sighs." 
He  was  a  good  old  man.  I  hardly  know  whether  he  could  have 
written  those  lines  himself,  and,  as  I  am  writing  them  down,  I  think  he 
must  have  taken  them  from  Jean  Paul ;  but  he  must  have  been  a  true 
musician  whoever  wrote  them.  Poetry  is  like  poverty — the  true  poet 
and  the  truly  poor  are  ashamed  to  show  what  they  suffer,  and  what 
they  are  longing  for.  It  is  not  so  with  music,  and  you  sometimes  find 
men,  who  would  be  ashamed  to  indulge  in  any  poetical  sentiment, 
plunging  with  their  whole  soul  into  the  Unknown,  the  Infinite,  the 
Beautiful,  and  the  Divine,  when  it  appeals  to  their  hardened  hearts 
with  the  sounds  of  music.  There  is  a  blessing  for  every  one,  and 
even  the  cold  man  of  the  world  has  somewhere  or  other  his  happy 
valley  and  his  quiet  cottage,  where  he  sees  his  old  friends,  his  old 
thoughts,  his  old  feelings,  which,  if  they  meet  him  in  the  drawing-room, 
he  dismisses  with  a  haughty  sneer,  as  if  he  had  never  known  them. 
Excuse  my  wandering.  I  must  say  like  you — there  is  the  music,  it  is  all 
that  Septette  of  Beethoven,  which  they  are  playing  in  the  other  room.' 

The  following  letter  was  sent  to  Max  Miiller  about  this 
time,  from  a  man  who  had  been  long  in  India,  confirming  the 
views  advocated  by  Philindus  : — 

'  There  seems  to  be  a  greater  stir  than  ever  in  India  about  education 
for  the  natives,  and  yet  in  this  country  young  men  who  obtain  direct 
commissions  in  the  Company's  service  are  not  even  obliged  to  have 
the  slightest  knowledge  of  any  vernacular  before  starting.  To  such 
an  extent  is  this  carried,  that  I  understand  from  various  pupils  who 
were  educated  here,  that  a  candidate  taking  up  Hindiastani  is  looked 
upon  as  rather  a  fool  for  his  pains.  I  was  extremely  glad  to  see 
from  certain  letters  in  the  Times  that  the  attention  of  the  future  rulers 
will  be  directed  to  this  point.  The  two  schemes  ought  undoubtedly 
to  proceed  hand  in  hand.  The  poor  native  ought  not  to  be  expected 
to  make  every  eff"ort  to  acquire  a  knowledge  of  English,  without  there 
being  also  a  corresponding  efibrt  made  by  his  rulers  to  acquire  the 
native  language.' 


1858]  German  Classics  209 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  Oxford,  April  5. 

'  To-day  is  Easter  Monday,  but  the  Hare  has  laid  no  t%g  for  me, 
as  he  used  to  do  in  the  grandfather's  garden.  Instead  of  that,  I  have 
sat  the  whole  day  at  work,  except  that  this  afternoon  I  had  a  visit  from 
Sir  Charles  Trevelyan,  and  also  saw  Lord  Macaulay,  whose  sister 
Trevelyan  married.  The  Jelfs  are  here  .  .  .  and  I  dine  there  on 
Tuesday,  and  we  shall  have  some  music.  A  little  boy  was  born  at 
the  Thomsons'  a  few  days  ago,  and  one  is  soon  expected  at  the 
Kingsleys',  or  I  should  have  spent  Easter  there.  I  have  been  several 
times  in  London  for  a  couple  of  days.  I  had  to  examine.  One 
evening  I  heard  a  fine  concert  in  the  new  St.  James's  Hall.  I  have 
such  a  bad  cold  that  every  limb  aches,  and  yet  I  have  to  sit  and 
slave  from  morning  till  evening.  I  have  had  a  great  deal  of  writing 
about  an  Oriental  Institute  in  London,  to  be  founded  by  Govern- 
ment, and  then  came  a  change  of  Ministry,  so  now  we  must  wait 
for  a  new  Ministry.  My  little  horse  is  my  best  friend.  I  must  spend 
the  summer  in  my  furnace  of  a  room.  I  am  printing  an  English  book 
on  the  Veda,  and  that  must  be  finished  off,  if  I  am  not  first  finished 
off  myself,  as  you  very  truly  remark.' 

During  this  year  Max  Miiller  became  more  and  more  intimate 
with  Dr.  Thomson,  Provost  of  Queen's,  whose  house  was  always 
a  pleasant  change  for  him  from  the  loneliness  and  hard  work 
of  his  own  bachelor  menage.     Mrs.  Thomson  writes  : — 

'I  know  the  Archbishop  was  more  devoted  to  Mr.  Max  Miiller 
than  to  any  of  his  Oxford  friends,  and  they  met  almost  daily  before 
his  marriage.  He  retained  the  same  warm  affection  for  Mr.  Max 
Miiller  to  the  end  of  his  life,  and  did  so  enjoy  having  him  at  Bishop- 
thorpe.  The  Archbishop  sympathized  in  all  the  difficulties  about  his 
marriage,  which  were  confided  to  him,  as  Mr.  Max  Miiller  had  helped 
him  in  all  the  difficulties  of  his  own  marriage  a  few  years  before.' 

At  Easter  Max  Miiller's  German  Classics  was  published, 
and  was  welcomed  in  Germany  as  warmly  as  in  England. 
The  Times  reviewed  it  later  in  the  year  most  favourably : — 

'  Unlike  all  other  books  of  extracts  we  know,  it  is  compiled  with 
a  view  of  systematizing  its  contents.  The  extracts  are  not  thrown 
together  at  the  capricious  suggestion  of  personal  taste,  but  the 
Professor  has  chosen  only  characteristic  specimens,  and  has  so  ar- 
ranged them  in  their  relative  sequence  that  they  suggest,  as  it  were, 
a  history  of  the  literature  of  his  country.     His  brief  preface  shows  the 

I  P 


2IO  All  Souls  Fellowship  [ch.  xi 

scope  of  his  design,  and,  brief  as  it  is,  is  the  best  History  of  German 
Literature,  in  its  relation  of  social  changes,  with  which  we  are 
acquainted.  .  .  .  We  can  accept  this  as  an  English  class-book, 
peculiarly  adapted  for  our  own  special  purposes.' 

On  May  9  Max  writes  to  his  mother  that  he  cannot 
ask  her  to  visit  him  this  year  ;  he  is  so  overwhelmed  with  work, 
both  in  Oxford  and  elsewhere,  that  she  would  have  to  be  much 
alone.  Probably  the  whole  summer  must  be  spent  at  work,  but 
if  he  can  find  time  for  a  week  or  two  in  Germany,  he  comforts 
her  with  the  assurance  that  he  will  go  to  her.  The  same  letter 
mentions  the  death  of  his  old  friend  Gathy.  '  I  felt  it  very 
much.  ...  I  had  so  often  seen  him  of  late  years ;  he  was  a 
thoroughly  brave  and  honest  man.  The  old  friends  are  gather- 
ing on  the  other  side,  and  he  must  be  happier  there  than  here.' 
A  very  few  days  after  writing  the  above  Max  Miiller  was  asked 
whether  he  would  accept  a  Fellowship  at  All  Souls  if  it  were 
offered  to  him.  It  was  the  very  thing  needed  at  that  time  to 
make  his  life  happier  and  less  lonely ;  the  offer  was  entirely 
unexpected,  and  was  accepted  with  great  thankfulness.  He 
often  mentioned  in  later  years  that,  as  he  entered  the  College 
after  his  election,  he  said  to  himself,  *  My  home  for  the  rest 
of  my  life.      I  shall  not  leave  this  till  I  am  carried  out.' 

Letter  from  Sir  Robert  Herbert. 

March  3,  1902. 
'To  Mrs.  Max  Mijller, — Mr.  Robarts  has  told  me  that  you 
would  like  to  hear  from  me  anything  I  can  tell  you  about  the 
circumstances  connected  with  your  husband's  election  to  a  fellowship 
at  All  Souls.  The  story  is  a  very  simple  one.  The  person  to  whom 
credit  is  principally  due  for  a  step  unprecedented  at  that  time — the 
election  of  a  foreign  gendeman  to  an  Oxford  fellowship — was  the  late 
Henry  Coxe,  the  Librarian  of  the  Bodleian.  He  and  his  wife  were 
intimate  friends  of  my  family  and  myself,  and  I  used  often  to  pass 
a  quiet  evening  with  them  in  Beaumont  Street,  and  meet  there 
Max  Miiller,  for  whom  Mr.  Coxe  from  the  first  entertained  a  warm 
friendship.  I  thus  became  aware  that  while  the  status  and  home 
afforded  by  a  College  fellowship  would  be  an  advantage  and  con- 
venience to  your  husband,  he  would,  on  his  part,  contribute  much 
honour  and  pleasure  to  the  College  that  might  secure  him  as  a  fellow, 
and  I  cordially  joined  with  Mr.  Coxe  in  pressing  upon  the  Fellows  of 
All  Souls  the  advisability  of  electing  him  under  the  special  power 


i8=i8  All  Souls 


211 


of  doing  so  conferred  by  the  new  statutes.  Max  Miiller  could  not 
have  failed  to  find  in  Oxford  a  great  number  of  warm  friends  and 
admirers,  but  in  the  earlier  days  of  his  residence  there,  it  must  have 
been  a  comfort  to  him  to  have  a  home  in  the  College  which  was  so 
proud  of  him. — Yours  very  sincerely,       '  Robert  G.  M.  Herbert.' 

Max  Miiller's  large  sitting-room  on  the  ground  floor  next  the 
Library,  in  the  corner  of  the  great  Quad,  commanded  a  beauti- 
ful view  of  the  spire  of  St.  Mary's  and  the  dome  of  the  Rad- 
cliffe  Library,  a  view  that  was  a  constant  delight  to  him,  and 
was  always  pointed  out  to  his  visitors  with  loving  appreciation. 

To  Dr.  Acland. 

St.  John  Street,  May  26,  1858. 
'  My  dear  Acland, — I  never  thought  that  anything  would  happen 
to  me  again  on  which  I  should  be  congratulated,  but  I  certainly  do 
appreciate  the  very  kind  feeling  which  prompted  the  Fellows  of  All 
Souls  to  elect  me,  and  in  a  dark  night  even  the  smallest  light  is 
welcome.  I  am  looking  forward  with  great  pleasure  to  living  in 
College,  but  at  present  there  is  no  set  of  rooms  where  I  could  put  up 
all  my  books,  &c.  I  am  confident  I  shall  feel  quite  at  home  at  All 
Souls  for  the  rest  of  my  life.  Wherever  our  Father  leads  us,  there  is 
our  Fatherland.' 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  All  Souls  College,  y««^  7,  1858. 

'  You  will  wonder  when  you  see  my  new  address.  The  bells  have 
been  rung  again  for  me  in  Oxford,  for  I  have,  quite  unexpectedly, 
received  a  fellowship  in  All  Souls  College.  I  have  very  nice  rooms, 
but  I  only  begin  really  moving  to-morrow,  and  therefore  write  to-day, 
as  I  shall  at  first  have  no  time  for  letters.  I  had  no  idea  of  it,  and 
the  thing  has  excited  great  surprise.  A  fortnight  ago  I  was  asked  if 
I  should  have  any  objection  if  I  were  elected,  and  the  next  day  I  was 
elected.  Why  they  elected  me  I  have  no  idea :  it  is  a  great  distinction. 
What  I  like  best  is  being  free  from  the  trouble  of  housekeeping.  My 
house  will  be  let ;  my  furniture  I  bring  to  my  rooms  here.  The  rooms 
are  larger,  three  of  them.  But  now  I  can't  marry,  or  receive  you  as 
a  guest.  The  Jelfs  are  here,  and  are  very  sorry  that  I  have  joined 
the  Monks.  Nearly  all  our  fellows  belong  to  the  best  families  in 
England,  several  are  members  of  Parliament,  some  in  the  IMinistry. 
So  you  see  monkhood  is  bearable,  and  I  need  not  have  a  tonsure ! 
The  lectures  are  nearly  over,  and  in  a  fortnight  I  think  of  going  to  the 
seaside.' 

P  % 


212  M.  M.  at  All  Souls  [ch.  xi 

From  the  Dean  of  Ripon. 

*  My  dear  Mrs.  Max  Muller, — You  ask  me  to  tell  you  some  of 
my  recollections  of  your  husband  in  the  early  days  before  you  were 
married.  I  fear  they  are  scanty ;  but  it  is  pleasant,  as  he  found  it,  to 
make  an  excursion  into  Aiild  Lang  Syne. 

'When  I  went  up  to  Balliol  in  1850,  he  had  just  begun  to  give 
lectures  on  what  was  then  a  new  subject,  Comparative  Philology. 
I  think  he  had  been  so  immersed  in  the  Rig-veda  during  the  two 
previous  years,  that  his  powers  as  a  lecturer  had  hardly  been  tested  ; 
but  his  delight  in  his  subject,  his  clearness  of  exposition,  and  his 
excellent  English,  not  the  worse  for  the  slight  foreign  accent  which  he 
always  retained,  carried  us  all  away.  And  the  ease  with  which  he 
traced  the  starding  changes  of  words,  such  as  that  which  derived  the 
French  word  mane  from  se77iet  tpsissimum,  came  like  a  series  of 
dissolving  views.  All  such  things  have  become  common  property 
long  ago,  chiefly  owing  to  his  very  readable  books  on  the  science  of 
language  and  kindred  subjects. 

'I  met  him  only  occasionally  during  my  undergraduate  course. 
Eight  years  make  a  great  difference  at  that  time  of  life.  But  while 
I  was  a  curate  at  Claydon  I  had  the  happiness  to  come  across  his 
memorable  Essay  on  Comparative  Mythology.  It  was  the  best 
counteraction  that  could  be  to  the  narrowness  which  sometimes  besets 
an  earnest  pastorate,  and  carried  one  into  regions  before  undreamed 
of  both  of  history  and  of  thought.  I  was  then  a  fellow  of  All  Souls, 
and  I  went  back  there  in  1857  to  read  under  Stanley,  who  had  just 
become  Professor  of  Ecclesiastical  History.  It  was  then  that  the 
happy  thought  occurred  to  some  of  our  fellows,  first,  I  think,  to  my 
old  friend  Robert  Herbert,  to  invite  Max  Miiller  to  become  a  fellow  of 
the  College.  This  was  done  under  the  new  Ordinance  of  the  Com- 
missioners for  giving  effect  to  the  Oxford  Reform  Act  of  1854,  which 
allowed  us  to  elect  a  Professor,  a  man  of  literary  distinction,  to  an 
"  Exceptional  Fellowship,"  one  which  bound  him  neither  to  residence, 
nor  to  celibacy.  He  was  elected  in  the  beginning  of  1858;  and, 
though  I  was  at  that  time  appointed  to  a  College  living  sixteen  miles 
from  Oxford,  I  saw  him  every  time  I  drove  into  the  city.  I  remember 
especially  one  such  time  in  the  summer  of  1858,  which  (all  my 
parishioners  being  in  the  harvest  field)  I  spent  in  my  College  rooms, 
having  arranged  to  meet  one  of  our  fellows,  Godfrey  Lushington,  to  read 
German  together.  We  were  puzzling  over  some  difficult  expressions 
in  Lessing's  great  "  Essay  on  the  Education  of  Mankind,"  when  Max 
came  to  our  rescue,  and  devoted  a  large  part  of  two  days  to  our 
benefit.     It  was  delightful  to  see  his  enthusiasm  in  drawing  out  the 


1858]  Cartoon  of  the  Carita  213 

thoughts  of  one  of  the  greatest  of  his  countrymen,  and  one  hardly 
realized — he  was  so  simple  and  genial — that  one  was  being  taught  by 
one  of  the  leading  philologists  in  Europe. 

'  The  Ordinance  under  which  we  elected  him  demanded,  though 
in  language  not  perfectly  clear,  that  we  should  choose  our  fellows 
according  to  their  merits  as  shown  by  the  examination ;  but  the  old 
custom  still  remained  of  choosing  them  as  one  would  the  members  of 
a  social  club,  and  I  was  one  of  three  who  had  appealed  to  the  Visitor 
against  this  practice.  The  dispute  lasted  some  five  or  six  years,  and 
I  am  afraid  must  have  given  Max  some  days  of  discomfort,  though  his 
lot  was  otherwise  enviable.  He  tried  to  mediate,  and  asked,  but  in 
vain,  that  the  examiners  should  report  a  small  list  of  fit  candidates 
between  whom  the  choice  should  be  made.  The  decision  was 
eventually  given  according  to  our  contention:  but  Max,  though 
mainly  on  our  side,  had,  I  think,  what  is  called  a  "  sneaking  kindness  " 
for  the  old  system — had  he  not  been  elected  by  the  College  as  it 
was  ? — and  maintained  that  those  who,  as  the  Saturday  Revietv  said, 
were  chosen  for  "  what  are  vaguely  called  social  considerations," 
formed  a  pleasing  variety  in  the  monotony  of  Oxford  residents. 
But  though  he  used  to  complain  that  he  sometimes  suffered  from 
being  identified  with  us,  who  were  spoken  of  as  the  Sepoys  in  allusion 
to  the  Indian  Mutiny  of  1857-8,  I  am  sure  he  never  had  an  enemy  in 
the  College.  He  was  always  genial,  and  had  nothing  of  the  mere 
Don  in  him.  On  occasions  such  as  the  annual  Gaudy  on  All  Souls' 
Day,  he  would  become  the  German  student  again,  and  join  with  the 
somewhat  tumultuous  merriment  of  the  younger  fellows,  and  be 
induced  to  sing  "  Gaudeamus  igitur."  If  ever  there  was  a  cloud  upon 
his  brow,  it  was  from  a  cause  unknown  to  us,  and  was  happily 
dissipated  by  the  event  so  full  of  blessing  to  you  and  to  him  in  the 
following  year,  1859.  It  has  always  been  a  dark  spot  of  disappoint- 
ment to  me  in  the  retrospect,  that  I  was  prevented  by  a  sharp  touch 
of  fever  from  being  present  at  your  wedding. 

'  Of  all  that  came  after  that  event  no  one  can  speak  so  well  as 
yourself.  But  I  do  not  like  to  close  this  letter  without  a  word 
expressive  of  the  value  that  I  entertained  for  his  friendship  and  for  his 
teaching.  I  never  knew  him  other  than  a  kind  and  generous  friend, 
and  a  delightful  companion.  He  would  frankly  give  one  of  his  best 
on  any  subject,  grave  or  gay.  I  remember,  w'hen  he  brought  home 
from  Italy  the  cartoon  of  the  Carita,  that  he  asked  me  to  look  at  it  in 
his  library,  and  to  say  whose  work  I  thought  it  to  be;  and  when 
I  said  that,  though  I  was  not  much  of  a  judge,  I  should  have  assigned 
it  to  Andrea  del  Sarto,  he  showed  as  much  pleasure  as  if  it  had  been 
the  testimony  of  a  connoisseur.     But  I  think  that  his  mind  turned 


214  Saturday  Review  [ch.  xi 

more  and  more  to  the  problems  of  religion ;  and  it  is  my  belief  that 
his  researches  and  his  teaching  have  done  as  much  as  those  of  any 
man  of  his  generation  to  enlarge  the  horizon  of  men's  views,  and  to 
win  for  Christian  faith  a  truer  and  a  wider  basis. 

'  Believe  me,  yours  sincerely  and  affectionately, 

'  W.  H.  Fremantle.' 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  All  Souls  College, y«/y  ii. 

'  When  I  was  in  London  I  made  the  acquaintance  of  Jenny  Lind. 
She  has  a  very  nice  house  near  Richmond.  I  called  on  her  twice, 
and  heard  the  Swedish  singers  at  her  house.  But  she  will  not  sing 
herself  any  more,  and  that  is  a  great  mistake.  I  went  too  to  a  great 
gathering  at  Harrow ;  Lord  Palmerston  was  there,  and  Lord  Stratford 
de  Redcliffe,  and  all  the  beau  monde  of  London,  and  when  my  name 
was  mentioned  there  were  great  cheers.  Then  I  went  to  a  great 
whitebait  dinner  at  Greenwich,  but  all  this  was  very  tiring.  I  went 
too  to  a  concert  at  the  Crystal  Palace,  2,500  people  in  the  chorus  and 
orchestra,  and  yet  it  was  not  powerful  enough,  unless  one  was  quite 
near.' 

In  July  Bunsen  writes  to  congratulate  : — 

Translation.  Charlottenberc/w/j^  31. 

'  Nothing  could  be  more  agreeable  and  suitable ;  it  is  personally  and 
nationally  an  honour,  and  a  unique  acknowledgement.  I  can  only 
add  the  wish  that  you  may  enjoy  the  dignity  itself  as  short  a  time 
as  possible,  and  take  leave  as  soon  as  possible  of  the  Fellow  celibates 
of  All  Souls.  Your  career  in  England  wants  nothing  but  this 
crowning-point.  How  prosperous  and  full  of  results  has  it  been ! 
Without  ceasing  to  be  a  German  you  have  appropriated  all  that  is 
excellent  and  superior  in  English  life,  and  of  that  there  is  so  much, 
and  it  will  last  for  life.' 

For  several  years  Max  MUller  had  been  a  regular  contributor 
to  the  Satw'day  Review^  and  the  titles  of  his  articles  show 
the  variety  of  questions  that  interested  him: — The  Transactions 
of  the  Philological  Society,  Dialects  of  Algeria,  Chinese 
Buddhist  Pilgrims,  Hindustani  Literature  and  the  King  of 
Oude,  The  Origin  of  Goethe's  Fmist^  Renan's  Essays  on  the 
History  of  Religion,  The  English  Alphabet  applied  to  the 
Languages  of  Lidia,  German  Mystics,  Anglo-Indian  Phraseo- 
logy, and  Latham's  Celtic  Philology,  were  among  the  topics 
treated  by  his  facile  pen.     He  looked  on  these  writings  as 


1858]  Jenny  Lind  215 

a  recreation,  as  a  change  from  Indian  Civil  Service  and  Mili- 
tary examinations,  from  lectures,  and  from  collating  and 
editing  the  Rig-veda.  He  had  already  in  1 857  begun  to  put 
together  the  materials  for  his  History  of  Ancient  Sanskrit 
Literature,  which  required  considerable  research  in  works 
which  at  that  time  only  existed  in  manuscript.  The  Bodleian 
meetings  also  made  constant  demands  on  his  time.  No 
wonder  that  he  complains  so  often  of  being  worn  and  weary, 
and  longing  for  rest. 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  All  Souls,  August  6. 

'  I  returned  yesterday  from  London,  where  I  had  to  examine  for 
a  whole  week  from  ten  till  six.  My  head  at  last  began  to  buzz,  and 
I  am  glad  that  it  is  over  and  my  holidays  at  last  begin.  The  summer 
here  is  delicious  and  my  monk's  life  very  pleasant.  The  front  view 
from  my  windows  is  beautiful,  and  I  have  the  whole  College  to  myself, 
ten  servants,  &c. ;  who  can  want  more  ?  I  invite  my  friends  to  dinner, 
and  nothing  is  wanting  but  that  you  could  visit  me  in  my  new  home, 
and  it  is  sad  that  that  cannot  be.  I  can  only  invite  ladies  for  great 
festivities.  Did  I  tell  you  that  I  paid  Jenny  Lind  a  visit  lately 
and  she  sang  to  me  nearly  the  whole  of  the  Sclmie  Mullerin,  and  so 
perfectly  ?  She  loves  the  poems,  and  she  said  to  me,  "  I  felt  I 
mtist  sing  them  to  you."  She  sang  them  with  so  much  expression 
that  it  was  like  a  real  opera ;  I  hardly  recognized  the  songs.  Then 
she  sang  Schumann  and  Mendelssohn.  It  went  on  from  four  in  the 
afternoon  till  one  in  the  night,  and  then  she  sent  us  in  her  carriage 
back  to  London — Benedict,  Joachim,  and  Piatti.  Joachim  played  very 
well,  and  Piatti's  cello  was  splendid.  In  fact  it  was  perfection,  and 
she  is  a  most  interesting  woman,  and  when  she  likes  very  agreeable. 
I  heard  lately  from  Bunsen  ...  he  invited  me  to  Heidelberg  for  his 
birthday,  August  26,  but  I  had  to  write  that  I  could  not  come,  and 
I  must  tell  you  now,  I  must  stay  this  summer  in  England.  I  have 
had  too  many  interruptions  in  my  work,  and  must  use  the  holidays  to 
make  the  time  good.  You  know  how  gladly  I  would  go  to  you,  but 
I  should  not  feel  it  right,  for  I  am  quite  well,  and  do  not  want  rest. 
I  have  been  riding  a  great  deal,  which  is  always  good  for  me.' 

To  a  friend,  to  whom  he  had  sent  a  little  novel,  very 
popular  just  then,  A  Lost  Love^  he  writes  : — 

All  Souls,  September  10. 

'  Is  there  such  a  thing  as  a  Lost  Love  ?  I  do  not  believe  it. 
Nothing  that   is  true  and   great   is  ever  lost  on   earth,    though   its 


2i6  Binningham  Festival  [ch...^i 

fulfilment  may  be  deferred  beyond  this  short  life.  Marriage  is  meant 
for  this  life  only,  but  love  is  eternal,  and  all  the  more  so,  if  it  does 
not  meet  with  its  fulfilment  on  earth.  If  once  we  know  that  our 
lives  are  in  the  hands  of  God,  and  that  nothing  can  happen  to  us 
without  His  will,  we  are  thankful  for  the  trials  which  He  sends  us. 
Is  there  any  one  who  loves  us  more  than  God  ?  any  one  who  knows 
better  what  is  for  our  real  good  than  God  ?  This  little  artificial  and 
complicated  society  of  ours  may  sometimes  seem  to  be  outside  His 
control,  but  if  we  think  so,  it  is  our  own  fault,  and  we  have  to  suffer 
for  it.  We  blame  our  friends,  we  mistrust  ourselves,  and  all  this 
because  our  wild  hearts  will  not  be  quiet  in  that  narrow  cage  in  which 
they  must  be  kept  to  prevent  mischief.' 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation,  Septemher  15. 

'I  have  just  lately  had  a  good  deal  of  enjoyment  from  the  Bir- 
mingham Festival,  where  I  went  to  hear  the  Elijah  and  Messiah,  &c. 
It  was  splendid.  I  was  on  a  visit  to  the  Minister  of  Education  near 
Birmingham,  and  we  drove  in  each  day.  English  country  life  is  so 
pleasant;  nowhere  else  is  there  anything  like  it.  Then  I  spent  a 
couple  of  days  at  Rugby  with  the  head  master.  Will  you  send  me  the 
book  of  Weber's  songs  with  "  Mein  Schatz,  der  ist  auf  der  Wander- 
schaft "  ?  I  have  played  it  to  a  very  dear  friend  of  mine,  and  she 
wishes  to  have  it.  She  is  the  daughter  of  Lord  Denbigh,  where  I 
often  go  to  stay ;  she  sings  well,  and  you  would  like  her.' 

Max  MUller  had  carried  through  his  resolution  of  spending 
the  chief  part  of  Long  Vacation  in  College.  He  often  said 
later  he  was  looked  at  with  very  dubious  eyes  by  the  College 
servants,  who  were  in  general  completely  their  own  masters 
in  '  the  Long,'  but  were  obliged  to  stay  in  College  if  a  Fellovv^ 
was  in  residence. 

It  is  evident  from  the  following  letter  that  the  feeling  of 

soreness  between  Max  Miiller  and  M.  Renan  had  quite  passed 

away.      The  article  translated  by  M.  Renan  was   the   one 

which    originally  appeared  in    the   first  number  of   Oxford 

Essays,  and  was  afterwards  reprinted  in  all  the  editions  of 

Chips.  -   ... 

To  M.  Renan.  i    j,' 

All  Souls,  October  27. 

'  I  have  looked  over  the  translation  of  my  Comparative  Mythology 
and  I  think  it  is  excellent.  I  am  extremely  obliged  to  you,  and  still 
more  to  Madame  Renan,  for  the  trouble  you  have  taken  in  making 


1858]  Jenny  Lind  at  All  Souls  217 

my  English  language  and  my  German  thought  palatable  to  the  French 
public.  The  corrections  I  have  made  bear  chiefly  on  Sanskrit  words. 
...  In  a  few  passages  which  I  have  marked,  the  chain  of  the  argu- 
ment seems  to  me  somewhat  broken  by  omitting  some  of  my  illustra- 
tions. But  I  leave  this  entirely  to  your  judgement,  as  you  know 
how  far  one  may  try  the  patience  of  the  French  public. 

'  I  should  be  glad  to  have  your  name  on  the  title-page,  as  intro- 
ducing my  essay — as  you  have  so  kindly  done — in  the  Revue  Ger7Jia- 
nique.  It  might  perhaps  be  as  well  to  add  to  my  name,  "  Professeur 
a  rUniversitd  d'Oxford"  or  Fellow  of  All  Souls  College  at  Oxford, 
only  I  do  not  know  how  the  latter  can  be  rendered  in  French.  .  .  . 

'  I  have  received  the  second  edition  of  your  Granimaire  Co?npar^e, 
and  I  have  to  thank  you  for  it  in  more  than  one  sense.  No  doubt 
we  shall  always  differ  on  some  points  in  the  early  history  of  language, 
and  I  shall  have  to  oppose  some  of  your  views  with  all  my  power. 
But  I  feel  confident  that  no  diff"erence  of  opinion  with  regard  to 
scientific  questions  will  ever  lead  again  to  any  personal  misunder- 
standing between  you  and  me,  and  I  beg  to  assure  you  of  my  sincere 
respect  and  gratitude,' 

The  lectures  this  term  were  on  '  The  Parts  of  Speech.'  In 
the  Summer  Term  Max  Muller  had  given  a  course  on  'The 
Origin  and  Formation  of  the  French  Language,'  continuing 
also  his  class  for  reading  Fattst. 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  Oxford,  Novejnher  ii. 

'  I  had  a  large  dinner  of  1 4  and  an  evening  party  the  other  day. 
Jenny  Lind  was  here,  and  would  sing  nowhere  but  at  my  party.  It 
was  wonderfully  beautiful.  You  can  imagine  that  people  were  very 
anxious  for  invitations  and  it  all  went  very  well.  She  came  first  in 
the  morning  to  practise  a  little,  then  in  the  evening  she  sang  Mozart's 
"Batti,  batti,"  Mendelssohn's  "Auf  Fliigel  der  Gesanges,"  Swedish 
songs,  Schumann,  and  Weber's  "Mein  Schatz,  der  ist  auf  der  Wander- 
schaft."  She  came  again  the  next  day  and  sang  Schumann  and  Schubert: 
it  was  a  great  treat,  but  really  almost  exhausting.' 

To  THE  Same. 

Translaiion.  Blenheim  Palace,  December  6. 

'  You  would  be  surprised  to  -see  me  sitting  here  on  my  birthday, 
not  at  All  Souls,  but  on  a  visit  to  the  Duke  of  Marlborough,  Last 
week  I  spent  a  few  days  in  the  country  in  the  house  of  Lord  Lovelace, 
who  married  Byron's  daughter.     It  is  now  inhabited  by  one  of  the 


2i8  Oriental  Studies  in  England        [ch.  xi 

Judges,  the  same  who  managed  the  divorce  of  Lord  and  Lady 
Byron,  a  most  interesting  old  man.  Yes,  you  are  right  when  you 
say  I  cannot  be  grateful  enough  to  God  for  all  the  goodness  He  has 
shown  me,  my  whole  life  long.  My  present  position  is  really,  of  its 
kind,  quite  perfect,  and  if  I  only  keep  well  I  am  thoroughly  satisfied. 
Here  I  was  called  away  to  dinner,  which  was  splendid ;  we  dined  in 
the  Rubens  room,  and  opposite  me  hung  Rubens  and  his  wife, 
Andromeda,  and  Phillip  of  Spain.  We  were  twenty-four  at  dinner. 
After  dinner  we  wandered  about  the  rooms.  There  was  a  splendid 
Erard  in  one  room,  and  we  had  some  music;  the  next  day  I  saw 
the  pictures  in  the  private  rooms,  which  one  cannot  see  otherwise, 
the  gems,  the  sketches,  then  more  music.  The  Duchess  is  musical 
and  very  friendly.  They  asked  me  to  stay  another  day,  but  I  could 
not.  Two  days  later  I  had  a  party  from  Blenheim  to  luncheon — Lord 
Denbigh's  family,  &c.  It  went  off  very  well.  The  Jelfs  are  here, 
and  we  have  a  great  deal  of  music' 

To  M.  Kenan. 

All  Souls,  December  15. 

'I  have  just  read  your  severe  remarks  on  Oriental  St^dies  in 
England,  in  one  of  the  recent  numbers  of  the  De'bals.  You  are  partly 
right,  and  I  was  delighted  to  see  how  well  you  perceived  the  real  and 
true  value  of  the  discovery  of  the  Vedas  for  the  reconstruction  of  the 
annals  of  the  human  mind,  and  the  right  appreciation  of  the  earliest 
efforts  of  man  in  his  search  for  his  true  home  in  God.  But  how  few 
perceive  this  importance  of  ancient  Sanskrit  literature  even  now.  How 
few  of  our  best  Sanskrit  scholars  are  aware  that  the  stones  which  they 
bring  to  light  are  the  relics  of  a  real  temple,  and  the  object  of 
philology  is  not  only  to  cut  stones  and  collect  rubbish,  but  to  find 
the  foundations  and  ground-plan  of  that  lost  Sanctuary.  We  are 
all  progressing,  and  the  importance  of  our  studies  dawns  upon  us  by 
degrees.  To  the  early  Greek  refugees,  the  Greek  which  they  taught 
in  Italy  was  not  the  key  to  a  lost  civilization,  not  the  lever,  as  it 
turned  out  to  be,  that  was  to  lift  the  dead  weight  of  the  Middle  Ages ; 
it  was  simply  an  accompHshment,  the  mark  of  a  cultivated  mind 
and  curiosity.  Surely  there  was  something  grand  in  the  enthusiasm 
of  the  faith  with  which  men  like  Sir  W.  Jones  and  Colebrooke 
pierced  into  the  jungle  of  Sanskrit,  and  where  should  we  be  if  Wilson 
had  not  opened  to  us  many  a  smooth  road  into  that  enchanted 
forest  ?  However,  I  know  what  you  mean,  only  the  absence  of  a 
bold  critical  spirit  is  not  to  be  ascribed  to  the  English  nation  as 
a  whole,  it  is  the  languid  temper  of  the  present  generation.     But  then 


1858]  Christmas  at  All  Souls  219 

there  was  a  time  when  England  had  giants  in  thought,  and  Davids  in 
boldness  and  faith.  It  will  come  again,  and  even  now  what  you  take 
for  indolence  and  cowardice  is  more  truly  a  feeling  of  awe  at  the 
greatness  of  the  questions  which  now  occupy  the  best  minds  in 
France,  in  Germany,  and  in  England.  You  and  your  friends  in 
Paris  do  much  service  by  recognizing  and  patronizing  what  is  good 
and  genuine  in  the  literary  life  of  Germany.  You  might  do  the  same 
for  England,  and  thus  raise  your  Revue  Germanique  to  a  Revue 
Teuio7iique,  including  Scandinavia,  England,  and  America.  I  also 
read  another  article  of  yours,  or  rather  an  extract  from  your  forth- 
coming translation  of  the  Book  of  Job,  with  great  interest.  Might 
I  ask  you  whether  anything  has  been  done  to  carry  your  reprint  of 
your  translation  of  my  Essay  on  Mythology  through  the  Press? 
I  sent  you  the  proof-sheets  some  time  ago,  but  have  not  heard  of 
it  since.  I  have  been  very  busy,  as  I  am  printing  a  book  on  the 
Vedic  Age.  I  hoped  it  would  have  been  out  before  now,  but  I  have 
so  many  things  to  read,  as  I  am  going  on  with  my  work,  that  it  will 
hardly  be  published  before  Easter.  In  the  summer  the  fourth 
volume  of  the  Veda  will  be  finished,  if  my  health  allows  me  to  work 
hard.  As  soon  as  I  have  brought  out  my  book,  I  have  promised  to 
write  several  reviews,  among  the  rest  one  on  your  Origine  de  la 
langice,  but  at  present  I  have  not  a  single  moment  to  spare  for 
anything  but  the  Veda! 

Christmas  was  passed  by  Max  Miiller  in  All  Souls — the 
only  Christmas  he  was  destined  to  pass  inside  the  College 
walls — and  the  wish  expressed  in  the  following  letter  was  to 
be  fulfilled  in  a  way  he  little  imagined  as  he  wrote  it : — 

To  Miss  Grenfell^ 

All  Souls,  December  30. 
'  I  cannot  let  this  old  year  pass  away  without  once  more  writing  to 
you.  It  seems  such  a  long  time  since  I  heard  from  you.  If  I  had 
followed  my  inclination  you  would  have  received  many  a  letter  from 
me.  ...  I  felt  convinced  that  even  without  hearing  from  you,  I  might 
always  trust  in  the  continuance  of  that  friendship  which  has  been  to 
me  a  rich  source  of  blessing  for  many  years.  I  hear  about  you  now 
and  then  from  our  common  friend  Mr.  Walrond,  and  it  is  always 
a  pleasure  to  listen  to  the  cheerful  account  he  gives  of  you,  and 
all  your  party.  I  am  glad  you  appreciate  him,  and  the  longer  you 
know  him  the  more  you  will  find  how  well  he  deserves  your  con- 
fidence and  esteem.  This  has  been  a  very  important  year  to  me, 
^  The  aunt  who  had  educated  his  future  wife. 


220        Foreign  Member  of  French  Institute    [ch.  xi 

and  I  know  not  whether  I  should  be  more  thankful  for  the  trials 
I  have  had  to  go  through,  or  for  the  blessings  which  God  has 
showered  upon  me.  Much  more  has  been  given  me  than  I  ever 
asked  for,  and  I  feel  as  if  I  had  no  more  to  wish  for  in  this  life.  I 
have  found  a  home,  and  a  very  pleasant  home,  as  you  will  see  when 
you  come  to  Oxford.  I  have  no  cares,  and  if  my  health  continues 
there  is  plenty  of  work  for  me  to  do.  It  is  not  such  a  life  as  I  thought 
mine  would  be;  you  know  what  I  have  lost.  I  wish  you  all 
a  very  happy  New  Year,  and  I  hope  that  this  coming  year  may 
sometimes  lead  us  together ! ' 

The  early  days  of  the  year  1859  brought  Max  MUller  a 

great    distinction ;    he  was  made  a  Corresponding  Member 

of  the  French  Institute,  the  youngest  man  ever  elected  to 

this  honour. 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  All  ^omis.,  January  23,  1859. 

'  Your  wishes  for  the  New  Year  have  brought  me  a  good  beginning. 

.  .  .  This  is  really  the  only  distinction  that  I  have  always  wished  for, 

and  I  have  been  not  a  little  pleased  at  it.     It  is  better  than  Orders, 

and  I  don't  think  that  Tischendorf  with  all  his  hangings  has   been 

chosen  a  Corresponding  Member  of  the  French  Institute.     Here  in 

Oxford  and  London  it  has  been  much  talked  about.     It  is  so  peaceful 

here  in  the  holidays  that  I  cannot  make  up  my  mind  to  go  away, 

though  I  have  a  number  of  invitations,  often  from  people  I  hardly 

know.     But  I  prefer  sitting  quietly  at  my  work,  which  is  getting  on. 

George  Bunsen  has  been  with  me,  and  told  me  many  things.     Let  us 

hope  there  will  be  no  rising  in  Berlin.     Then  your  papers  would  go 

down  again,  but  never  mind,  my  Sanskrit  papers  never  go  down ! 

My  life  here  is  really  perfect  of  its  kind,  and  I  say  always,  things  go 

too  well  with  me.' 

To  M.  Renan. 

All  '&OVLS,  January  3. 

'  Though  I  cannot  say  with  Goethe  I  believe  that  I  am  of  the 
religion  of  Job,  yet  I  thank  you  most  heartily  for  your  Livre  de  Job. 
Your  introduction  is  excellent,  but  now  and  then  one  feels  like 
a  cat  stroked  the  wrong  way.  I  shall  hardly  be  able  to  resist  the 
temptation  of  saying  something  about  it  in  the  Saturday  Revieiv, 
though  I  have  made  a  vow  not  to  write  any  reviews  till  I  have  finished 
my  own  book.  I  like  very  much  that  little  hint  you  give  about 
Aurora,  and  your  reasons  why  Hebrew  remains  so  barren  in  myths. 
Is  it  not  owing  also  to  the  strongly  marked  radical  features  of  every 
Semitic  word,  every  one  telling  its  own  tale  by  its  three  letters,  and 


1859]  Manuel  Johnson  221 

retaining  its  appellative  power  against  all  equivocation?  How  can 
you  have  pantomimes  if  every  person  as  soon  as  he  comes  on  the 
stage  tells  you  that  he  is  not  the  Lion,  but  Smug  the  Joiner  ?  But  the 
Aryan  nations  have  had  their  revenge.  When  language  had  played  all 
her  tricks  on  them,  they  let  her  go,  and  made  themselves  a  new 
language,  and  called  it  Philosophy,  and  that  language  the  Semites 
have  never  learnt.  I  was  delighted,  as  I  need  not  tell  you,  at  my 
election  at  the  "  Institut,"  and  I  thank  you  for  your  kind  and  active 
support.  I  wish  I  could  do  it  in  person,  but  till  July  I  must  slave  at 
Oxford.' 

The  lectures  announced  for  this  term  were  on  'The  Principles 
of  Etymology,'  with  a  catechetical  class  on  German  Classics, 
Max  Miiller's  own  work  being  used  as  the  text-book. 

Early  in  March,  Max  experienced  a  great  sorrow  in  the 
sudden  death  of  Mr.  Manuel  Johnson,  the  Radcliffe  Observer, 
one  of  his  earliest  friends  in  Oxford,  at  whose  house  when 
he  first  arrived  in  1848  he  met  many  of  the  leaders  of  the 
High  Church  party,  men  of  true  piety,  and  many  of  them 
really  learned,  and  yet,  to  the  great  surprise  of  the  young 
scholar,  almost  entirely  interested  in  purely  ecclesiastical 
questions — the  validity  of  Anglican  orders,  whether  gowns  or 
surplices  should  be  worn  in  the  pulpit,  whether  the  candles  on 
the  altar  should  be  lighted  or  not — all  trifles  that  made  Max 
MUller  ask  Manuel  Johnson,  '  What  has  all  this  to  do  with 
true  religion  ? '  But  though  Johnson  told  Max  Muller  he 
'  did  not  understand,'  he  remained  his  faithful  friend  to  the 
last.  Max  dined  almost  every  Sunday  at  the  Observatory, 
and  when  his  mother  stayed  with  him  she  met  with  much 
kindness  from  Manuel  Johnson  and  his  wife.  He  married 
late  in  life,  and  in  his  bachelor  days  the  large  garden  at 
the  Observatory  was  the  constant  resort  of  men  like  Church, 
Mozley,  Palgrave,  Pollen,  Burgon,  &c.  His  collection  of  artistic 
treasures  was  a  never-failing  source  of  delight,  and  Max  Miiller 
tells  us  he  '  learned  much  from  his  Italian  engravings  and 
Dutch  etchings,  which  he  delighted  in  showing.' 

To  Dr.  Pauli. 
Translation.  All  Souls,  March  13. 

*  The  sudden  death  of  Johnson  has  been  a  great  shock.  For  many 
years  I  have  not  lost  any  more  intimate  friend,  and  one  often  forgets 


222  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature         [ch.  xi 

where  one  really  lives,  and  what  a  little  step  it  is  which  divides  us 
from  those  who  have  gone  before  us.  The  death  of  our  friends  is  an 
earnest  warning,  and  as  such,  in  spite  of  the  sorrow,  is  rich  in 
blessing.  You  must  have  experienced  this  in  the  fearful  trial  God 
laid  on  you.  I  need  not  say  that  I  shared  your  sorrow,  but  I  would 
not  intrude  on  your  grief,  and  did  not  write,  though  I  knew  you  were 
in  London.  I  know  from  experience  that  one  would  rather  get 
through  the  hard  struggles  of  life  in  silence  and  alone,  and  when  one 
has  done  so,  one  can  turn  again  slowly  towards  life,  and  to  one's 
friends  round  one,  without  having  to  talk  over  what  is  past.  Work  is 
a  great  help  and  comfort,  and  I  rejoice  that  you  have  taken  up  your 
great  work  again.  Johnson  often  spoke  of  you  to  me,  and  especially 
lately.  He  would  so  gladly  have  seen  you  here  as  Professor  of  Anglo- 
Saxon.  For  an  Englishman  he  was  wonderfully  liberal,  and  I  owe  my 
position  in  Oxford  chiefly  to  his  influence.  I  shall  long  miss  him. 
He  was  always  the  same,  open,  hearty  and  joyous.  Well,  the  sorrows 
of  life,  like  all  other  things,  pass  away,  and  the  larger  the  number 
who  await  us  beyond,  the  easier  the  parting  from  those  we  leave 
behind.  I  wish  you  would  come  to  Oxford  .  . .  but  write  beforehand, 
as  I  am  feeling  so  shaken,  I  may  go  to  the  seaside  for  change.' 

This  spring  his  sister  was  again  in  great  anxiety  about 
one  of  her  children,  and  Max  Miiller  always  felt  his  distance 
from  all  his  own  people  keenly  when  they  were  in  sorrow. 
He  writes : — 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  All  Souls,  March  26. 

'  I  often  wish  I  could  help  in  bearing  some  of  your  anxieties,  for 
I  have  little  here  to  make  me  anxious ;  however,  you  would  say  little 
pleasure  either.  But  I  am  satisfied  as  it  is,  and  thankful  for  the  peace 
in  which  my  life  passes.  You  have  little  idea  how  comfortable  the 
life  in  College  is,  and  how  one  lives  all  day  only  for  oneself  and  one's 
work,  without  being  disturbed  by  anything.  I  am  printing  my  book 
on  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature,  and  hope  it  will  be  ready  by  Whitsun- 
tide. A  French  translation  of  my  article  on  Comparative  Mytho- 
logy is  just  out,  by  Renan.  I  suppose  I  shall  have  to  go  to 
Paris  to  thank  them  for  my  election.  I  was  elected  with  Lepsius, 
and  am  the  youngest  member.' 

He  finishes  the  letter  in  London,  where  he  was  examining. 
'  I  am  staying  with  Walrond,  who  is  still  unmarried ;  so  you 
see  there  are  other  people  who  are  as  sensible  as  I  am.' 

All  through  this  spring  Max  MUller  worked  hard  at  his 


1859]  J^^'  Buhler  223 

Ancient  Sanskrit  Literahtrc,  in  which  he  had  embodied  the 
Prolegomena  to  the  Rig-vcda,  written  ten  years  before,  which 
had  at  the  time  called  forth  Professor  Wilson's  wrath.  Though, 
through  Bunsen's  influence,  the  East  India  Company  gave  it 
their  patronage,  and  promised  the  money  for  its  publication, 
it  never  was  published.  The  reason  for  this  is  explained  in 
the  preface  to  this  new  work.  Ten  sheets  had  been  printed, 
vi^hen  Max  Muller's  election  to  the  Professorship  of  Modern 
European  Languages,  and  the  three  courses  of  lectures  each 
year  which  this  election  involved,  obliged  him  to  lay  aside  his 
general  Sanskrit  studies,  and  confine  the  time  not  needed  by 
the  duties  of  his  Professorship,  exclusively  to  the  editing  of  the 
text  and  Commentary  of  the  Rig-veda.  But  though  ten  years 
had  elapsed  since  the  Prolegomena  had  been  written,  Max 
Muller  found  that  his  original  views  had  not  been  proved 
erroneous,  either  by  his  own  later  researches,  or  by  the  works 
of  other  Vedic  scholars,  and  that  the  greater  part  of  the 
original  manuscript  could  have  been  printed  as  it  was.  In 
these  ten  years  many  new  and  young  Vedic  scholars  had 
arisen,  and  their  works  were  carefully  examined  and  frequent 
reference  is  made  to  them  throughout  the  book.  It  is  in  his 
preface  to  this  work  that  Max  Muller  first  mentions  a  young 
scholar,  Dr.  Buhler,  then  copying  and  collating  Vedic  MSS. 
in  London  and  Oxford.  They  soon  became  fast  friends,  and 
it  was  Max  Muller  who  obtained  for  Dr.  Buhler  the  appoint- 
ment in  India  which  he  filled  with  such  distinction  for  nearly 
twenty  years.  During  all  that  time  the  friends  corresponded 
on  literary  questions,  and  though  they  often  differed,  their 
friendship  was  close  and  unbroken.  After  Dr.  Biihler's  return 
from  India  they  met  from  time  to  time,  and  always  with 
a  feeline  of  warm  attachment.  Max  Muller  after  Dr.  Biihler's 
untimely  death  in  1898,  which  affected  him  deeply,  wrote  : 
'We  always  exchanged  our  books  and  our  views  on  every 
subject  that  occupied  our  interest  in  Sanskrit  scholarship, 
and  though  we  sometimes  differed,  we  always  kept  in  touch. 
We  agreed  thoroughly  on  one  point — that  it  did  not  matter 
wJio  was  right,  but  only  what  was  right.'  Ancient  Sanskrit 
Literature  was  carefully  reviewed  by  the  venerable  scholar 
Barthelemy-St.-Hilaire,  in   five   articles  in  the  Jotirnal  des 


224  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature        [ch.  xi 

Savants^  that  famous  periodical,  now  nearly  1^0  years  old, 
the  contributors  to  which  must  all  be  members  of  the  Institute 
of  France.  '  This  new  work  of  M.  Max  MuUer,'  says  the 
reviewer,  '  shows  considerable  progress  in  Vedic  studies  ;  it 
answers  and  explains  a  number  of  interesting  and  doubtful 
questions,  and  it  traces  for  Vedic  literature  a  limit  which 
according  to  our  view  is  definite.  It  has  brought  order  and 
light  into  the  huge  and  confused  treasure-house  of  the  primi- 
tive monuments  of  the  Brahmanic  religion,  and  this  systematic 
arrangement  rests  on  a  basis  which  appears  well  founded.' 

'  The  History  of  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature  will  add  greatly  to 
the  distinction  with  which  the  name  of  M.  Max  Miiller  is  already 
so  justly  marked.  The  book  of  which  I  am  writing  is  of  so  high 
an  order  that  one  may  well  doubt  whether  any  one  for  a  long  time  to 
come  will  surpass,  or  even  equal  it/ 

Professor  H.  H.  Wilson  also  wrote  an  elaborate  review  of 
the  work,  which  appeared  in  the  Edinburgh  Review,  October, 
i860,  being  the  last  thing  Professor  Wilson  ever  wrote  ;  in  fact 
the  ink  of  the  last  words  was  scarcely  dry  before  the  fine  old 
scholar  passed  away.  '  It  is  not  possible,'  he  says,  *  in  a  brief 
survey  like  the  present,  to  render  justice  to  a  work  every  page 
of  which  teems  with  information  that  no  other  scholar  ever 
has,  or  could  have,  placed  before  the  public' 

A  second  edition  was  called  for  within  a  year,  but  so  rapid 
was  the  progress  of  Vedic  studies  at  that  time,  that  Max 
Miiller,  though  often  urged  to  do  so,  would  not  publish  a 
third  edition,  being  compelled,  after  his  rejection  for  the  Chair 
of  Sanskrit,  to  turn  his  attention  mainly  to  other  studies. 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  All  Souls,  Easter  Sunday,  1859, 

'  I  am  overwhelmed  with  work,  but  I  have  found  time  to  read  that 
book  of  Schleiermacher  of  which  you  wrote  to  me,  and  I  read  it  with 
great  interest.  It  is  an  important  book,  more  important  than  his 
writings.  Whether  the  publication  was  right  it  is  difficult  to  say.  It  is 
like  a  post  mortem.  Many  would  shrink  from  it,  and  yet  one  learns 
much  from  it  and  it  may  be  of  use.  Men  are  so  made  that  they 
seem  ashamed  of  what  is  best  in  themselves,  and  then  it  is  well  to 
have  such  books  to  show  us  that  men  are  all  much  better  than  they 


1859]  Mokslia  Mulara  2.2.^ 

seem  to  be.  I  am  now  reading  Perthes  Life,  which  holds  much  that 
is  important,  but  without  the  poetry  of  Schleiermacher's  surroundings, 
I  can  well  understand  that  after  reading  these  books  you  long  for 
some  of  the  Greek  Classics,  but  it  is  difficult  to  enter  into  the  old 
simple  life  and  thoughts ;  and  to  enjoy  the  beautiful  and  true  as  they 
were  then  felt  and  thought  of,  requires  longer  and  more  gradual 
study.  You  know  Schleiermacher's  Plato,  but  it  is  not  easy  to  enjoy ; 
Phaedrus  is  understandable,  also  the  Symposium  and  Phaedon,  and 
these  are  enough  to  give  you  an  idea  of  Plato  as  a  man.  I  can  settle 
nothing  about  my  summer  plans.  To  begin  with,  war  is  sure  to  break 
out  in  Italy,  and  it  may  be  that  powder  and  shot  will  be  seen  on  the 
Rhine.' 

It  was  about  this  period  that  the  natives  of  India  began  to 
speak  of  Max  Miiller  as  '  Moksha  Mulara,'  which  was  thus  ex- 
plained by  one  of  their  Pundits  :  '  He  who  by  publishing  the 
Veda  for  the  first  time  in  a  printed  form  gave  {ra)  the  root, 
{inilla)  the  foundation,  the  knowledge  of  final  beatitude 
{moksha)^  he  is  called  Moksha  Mulara.'  At  the  present 
day  this  Indianized  form  of  his  name  is  in  common  use 
amonsf  those  who  know  his  works. 


*iD 


To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  All  Souls,  May  29. 

'  I  am  very  tired,  and  yet  I  have  still  so  much  to  do  before  I  can 
get  away.  Now  there  are  the  lectures,  and  I  am  printing  and  writing 
away  at  my  book.  Then  I  have  four  examinations  before  me,  and 
then,  please  God,  I  shall  start.  Here  in  England  things  are  quiet, 
but  they  begin  to  form  volunteer  corps.  The  undergraduates  drill 
and  shoot,  and  we  are  making  ready  for  whatever  comes.  My  horse 
costs  a  lot  of  money,  but  not  so  much  as  a  wife.  I  have  been  again 
in  London  to  hear  Jenny  Lind  and  Joachim — beautiful.  I  sat  by 
the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury.  Then  I  had  Deichmann  the  violinist 
here,  and  a  party  to  which  Mrs.  Gaskell  (Mary  Barton)  came.  And 
so  one  fights  one's  way  through  life,  and  receives  many  a  black  eye ! 
I  am  very  sorry  not  to  have  seen  old  Humboldt  again,  and  indeed 
for  him  it  was  time  to  rest — he  has  done  his  day's  work.' 

And  now,  after  three  years  of  silence  and  separation,  borne 
submissively  as  the  will  of  God,  bright  prospects  suddenly 
opened,  and  within  a  fortnight  of  the  last  letter  to  his  mother, 
Max  Miiller  was  asked  to  Ray  Lodge  as  the  future  husband 
of  her  he  had  loved  for  nearly  six  years.    His  friend  Walrond 

I  Q 


226  Engagement  [ch.  xi 

was  engaged  to  her  younger  sister,  and  life  appeared  one 
dream  of  happiness  to  the  two  sisters.  The  day  after  his 
arrival  at  Ray  Lodge.  Max  IMiiller  wrote  to  her  uncle,  his 
friend  Charles  Kingsley  : — 

Ray  Lodge.  Uliil-Sunday,  1859. 

'  Can  you  believe  it  ?  I  cannot.  I  knew  not  that  the  world  con- 
tained such  happiness.  You  know  what  we  have  suffered,  and  now 
think  of  us,  and  pray  for  us  to  God.  that  He  may  help  and  teach 
us  how  to  bear  such  joy  and  blessing.  The  past  was  so  dark  and 
awful,  and  the  world  now  is  so  happy  and  bright.  We  shall  meet 
on  Tuesday.  I  long  to  see  my  new  dear  aunt,  my  old  dear  friend 
j\Irs.  Kingsley.  Oh,  this  world  of  God  is  full  of  wonders,  but  the 
greatest  of  all  wonders  is  love.' 

Baron  Bunsen  wrote  on  July  23  : — 

Translaiicm. 

'  My  sons  knew  too  well  what  delight  they  would  give  me  by  their 
communication,  which  has  already  given  us  all  a  foretaste  of  the 
delight  of  your  \isit  with  your  bride,  and  meanwhile  has  brought  me 
yoiu-  aflfecdonate  letter.  I  have  felt  all  these  years  what  was  the 
matter  with  you.  and  I  sympathize  with  your  happiness  as  though 
it  concerned  one  of  my  own  children.  I  therefore  now,  my  loved 
friend,  wish  you  all  the  more  happiness  and  blessing  in  the  acquisition 
of  the  highest  of  life's  prizes,  because  your  love  has  already  shown 
the  right  effect  and  strength,  in  that  you  have  acquired  courage  for 
finishing  at  this  present  time  your  diflBcult  and  great  work  on  the  Veda. 
The  work  will  also  give  vou  further  refi'eshment  for  the  future,  whilst 
the  editing  of  the  Veda  still  hangs  on  vour  hands.  Therefore  let  us 
all  -R-ish  you  joy  most  heartily  (my  wife  has  received  the  joyful  news 
in  Wildbad),  and  accept  our  united  thanks  beforehand  for  your  kind 
intention  of  visiting  us  shortly  with  your  yotmg  wife.  By  that  time 
we  shall  all  be  united  here.  Beg  your  bride  beforehand  to  feel  friendly 
towards  me  and  towards  us  all.  You  know  how  highly  I  esteem  her 
two  aunts,  though  ■without  personal  acquaintance  with  them,  and  how 
dear  to  me  is  the  cultivated,  noble,  Christian  circle  in  which  the  whole 
family  moves.' 

His  devoted  mother  wrote,  on  receiving  tlie  news  of  his 
engagement  from  her  son : — 

Translation.  Carlsbad,  June  16,  1859. 

'  My  dear,  my  happy  Max, — I  write  to  you  a  few  lines  in  the  greatest 
excitement  of  body  and  mind,  so  that  my  most  ardent  wishes  and 


1859]  Engagement  227 

blessings  may  reach  you  even  before  I  seem  to  be  able  to  take  in  all 
the  happiness.  Yes,  I  thank  God  with  all  my  heart  for  my  son,  who  is 
the  pride  and  happiness  and  blessing  of  my  life  !  I  thank  God  with 
all  my  heart  for  my  son,  to  whom  He  has  given  his  heart's  desire, 
and  I  ask  God  that  it  may  be  for  His  children's  blessing  ! 

'  A  being  whom  you  have  chosen  and  whom  you  have  known  and 
loved  for  such  a  long  time,  must  be  worthy  of  you,  and  I  will  love  her 
with  you,  as  long  as  I  live.  My  dear,  dear  Max,  if  I  could  but  throw 
my  arms  round  you  and  press  you  to  my  heart!  Here  I  am  all 
alone,  so  far  from  you,  and  I  have  nobody  near  who  could  calm  and 
understand  my  over-full  heart. 

'  Think  what  all  those  who  love  you  so  will  say  to  it !  And  soon 
you  will  have  a  wife,  and  the  happy  time  of  your  engagement  will  be 
very  short,  and  I  am  to  see  you  in  your  great  happiness  with  your 
wife  ! 

'I  cannot  write  any  more,  my  dear,  good  Max,  the  excitement  has 
been  too  much  for  me ;  and  you  know  all  I  should  like  to  say  to  you, 
you  know  how  I  love  you !  And  for  this  my  love's  sake  youi*  wife 
will  love  me  a  little  !  God's  richest  blessings  be  on  you  both  !  I  press 
you  to  my  full  heart  in  deepest  love,  and  I  thank  God  with  you. 

'  If  you  can,  write  to  me  soon  again.  You  can  imagine  how  much 
I  should  like  to  know  ever}lhing.  Farewell,  my  dear,  good  Max,  and 
bring  your  G.  to  see  me  as  soon  as  possible.     With  truest  love, 

'  Your  faithful  ^Mother.' 

Extracts  from  letters  written  during  June  and  July  : — 

'A  soul  to  which  I  cling  with  my  soul.  What  is  it?  What  is  that 
soul  ?  Who  made  it  ?  Who  sent  it  here  ?  Who  led  it  on  by  slow 
degrees  till  it  should  meet  that  other  soul  which  belonged  to  it  from 
the  very  beginning,  and  longed  for  it  as  for  its  better  Self.?  These 
are  awful  mysteries,  we  cannot  look  into  them  without  feeling  giddy  and 
appalled,  and  yet  we  ought  to  know  of  them,  and  then  we  can  throw 
ourselves  into  the  arms  of  God  like  children,  utterly  helpless  and 
destitute,  and  yet  full  of  faith  in  His  love  and  wisdom.  "  Dies  Leben 
ist  doch  schon,  o  Konigin." ' 

'  Think  of  us  two  in  old  Oxford  again,  and  now  it  will  be  our  home  ; 
here  we  shall  live  together  under  God's  blessing  for  many  years,  here 
we  shall  grow  old  together,  and  from  here  we  shall  pass  one  day  into 
a  new  and  better  life.  There  will  be  sorrows  too  waiting  for  you  when 
you  come  here,  sorrows  such  as  no  life  is  free  from.  And  we  shall 
bear  them  together,  and  remember  that  the  same  Father  who  now  sends 
us  so  much  joy,  sends  us  grief  also,  and  all  for  our  real  good,  though 
we  do  not  always  see  it,  and  though  we  cannot  venture  to  fathom  His 

Q2 


228  Marriage  [ch.  xi 

wisdom  in  guiding  our  steps  through  this  life.  If  we  trust  in  Him, 
our  life  will  not  have  been  in  vain,  and  in  spite  of  suffering  we  shall 
be  more  happy  than  many  whose  outward  life  seems  so  easy  and  bright.' 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  All  Souls,  August  2. 

'  This  is  the  last  letter  I  shall  write  to-night,  and  it  is  for  you,  to 
thank  you  for  all  your  love  and  goodness,  and  to  say  that  my  love  for 
you  cannot  be  lessened  or  disturbed  by  any  other  love  :  that  you  know, 
and  I  need  not  say  it.  And  when  you  see  my  wife,  you  will  feel  how 
she  has  given  me  a  new  life,  and  has  only  increased  and  raised  my 
love  for  you  and  all  who  are  so  good  to  me.  I  know  how  you  will 
love  her,  and  I  look  forward  to  our  life  all  together  with  joyous  hope. 
No  discord  must  disturb  our  happiness,  no  littlenesses  dim  our  great 
joy.  I  will  write  again  from  Heidelberg  as  soon  as  I  can  fix  the  day  we 
shall  meet.  To-morrow  early  I  start :  our  wedding  is  at  1 1.30.  Morier 
is  here ;  he  came  all  the  way  from  Naples.     I  call  that  friendship.' 

On  August  3  Max  Miiller  was  married  at  Bray  Church  to 
Georgina,  elder  daughter  of  Riversdale  Grenfell  and  Charlotte 
Elliot,  his  wife. 

A  week  was  spent  at  Eversley  Rectory,  lent  by  the 
Kingsleys,  a  spot  that  was  very  dear  to  both  of  them.  On 
the  Sunday  Charles  Kingsley  came  over  for  his  services,  and 
administered  the  Communion  to  the  newly-married  pair,  being 
their  guest  afterwards  at  luncheon  in  his  own  dining-room. 
The  week  was  spent  in  wandering  about  the  lovely  moors  or 
beautiful  Bramshill,  when  they  were  not  occupied  with  the 
papers  of  the  examinations  on  which  Max  Miiller  had  been 
busy  almost  up  to  his  wedding-day.  Then  two  or  three  days 
were  given  to  Heidelberg,  to  the  fatherly  friend  whose  affec- 
tion for  her  husband  made  a  deep  impression  on  the  young 
wife.  From  there  they  went  on  to  Dresden,  where  the  meet- 
ing with  the  mother  took  place,  and  the  three  went  together 
to  Chemnitz  to  the  sister,  and  then  to  Dessau.  Later  on,  Max 
Miiller  and  his  wife  secured  a  fortnight  alone  in  Prague  and 
Saxon  Switzerland,  where  they  had  what  was  a  most  dangerous 
experience.  They  had  climbed  the  Papststein,  opposite 
Schandau,  one  sultry  evening,  and  whilst  at  the  top,  a  bare 
rock  without  any  shelter,  an  appalling  thunderstorm  suddenly 


1859]  Mother's  Illness  229 

burst  over  and  all  round  them.  The  play  of  the  lightning  was 
terrific,  and  the  crash  of  the  thunder  such  that  they  could  not 
hear  each  other  speak,  and  they  felt  that  any  moment  might 
be  their  last.  They  hurried  down,  but  it  was  some  time  before 
they  were  off  the  bare  rocks,  and  then  only  to  find  themselves 
in  a  thick  wood,  which  was  no  safe  refuge,  and  thankful  they 
were  when  the  torrents  of  rain  showed  that  the  danger  was 
passing  away. 

On  the  return  journey  to  England,  Leipzig,  Halle,  Brussels, 
and  Ghent  were  visited.  At  Leipzig,  Max  Miiller  and  his 
friend,  Victor  Carus,  met  and  played  together,  piano  and 
violin,  as  in  days  gone  by ;  and  at  Halle  he  had  the  interest 
of  a  long  visit  to  Professor  Pott,  the  eminent  philologist. 
Oxford  was  reached  on  October  24,  and  Max  Miiller  and 
his  wife  settled  themselves  in  a  small  furnished  house  in  New 
College  Lane  for  a  few  months,  till  they  could  find  something 
more  suitable. 

Pending  a  better  house,  Max  had  to  keep  his  books  and  do 
his  work  at  All  Souls. 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  Ghent,  October  20. 

'  We  both  long  for  a  litde  quiet,  and  I  for  my  work.  I  have  had 
nothing  but  pleasure  and  enjoyment  these  last  months,  and  I  am 
longing  for  my  usual  occupations.  The  time  we  spent  with  you  was 
delightful ;  how  few  enjoy  such  happiness  as  we  had  together  !  Take 
care  of  your  health,  that  you  may  not  make  us  anxious  this  winter.' 

Early  in  November  Max  MUller's  mother  was  suddenly 
taken  dangerously  ill,  and  his  anxiety  was  very  great.  It  was 
happily  relieved  before  November  17,  on  which  day  his  old 
friend  Theodore  Walrond  was  married  at  Bray  Church  to  his 
wife's  younger  sister.  Max  Miiller  and  his  wife  were  present, 
and  stayed  on  a  few  days.  '  They  would  like  to  keep  us  here 
altogether,'  he  writes  to  his  mother, '  but  that  cannot  be  during 
the  lectures,  and  I  am  so  happy  in  my  own  home.' 

The  committee  of  the  Athenaeum  Club  had  this  year  offered 
to  elect  Max  Miiller  without  a  ballot,  but  as  he  was  just  going 
to  be  married,  he  felt  he  could  not  afford  it  at  that  time.  He 
never  joined  any  London  club,  as  he  was  not  constantly  in 


230         Correspondent  of  Turin  Academy 

London,  and  used  to  say  ;iCio  a  year  was  too  much  to  pay  for 
a  biscuit,  or  even  a  glass  of  wine  ! 

This  year  being  the  centenary  of  Schiller's  birth,  Max 
M tiller  gave  a  public  lecture  on  Schiller,  which  was  very  well 
attended.  'All  Oxford  went  to  hear  him,'  wrote  a  friend. 
This  lecture  was  published  as  an  article  on  Schiller  in  the 
Times,  and  afterwards  expanded  into  a  longer  paper,  pub- 
lished in  Chips. 

Christmas  was  spent  at  Ray  Lodge  with  a  large  family 
party — Walronds,  Froudes,  and  others  ;  and  on  December  30 
Max  Muller  tells  his  mother  he  had  that  morning  received 
a  diploma  from  Turin,  as  Corresponding  Member  of  the 
Royal  Sardinian  Academy  ;  and  the  same  day  there  was 
a  very  flattering  review  in  the  Times  of  his  Ancient  Sanskrit 
Literat2ire,  of  which  the  first  edition  was  already  sold  out. 

It  was  during  this  winter  that  our  King  was  resident  in 
Oxford,  as  a  Gentleman  Commoner  of  Christ  Church.  Max 
Muller  was  often  invited  to  dine  at  Frewin  Hall,  the  Prince's 
residence,  and  the  foundation  was  then  laid  of  that  kindly 
feeling  which  the  Prince  ever  after  evinced  for  Max  MUller, 
and  to  which  he  alluded  in  such  gracious  terms  in  his  speech 
at  the  opening  of  the  School  of  Oriental  Studies  in  1890, 
speaking  of  Max  Muller  '  as  one  whom  ever  since  my  under- 
graduate days  at  the  University  I  have  had  the  advantage 
and  privilege  of  knowing.' 


CHAPTER   XII 

1860-1861 

Mother's  illness.  Death  of  Wilson.  Move  to  High  Street.  Sanskrit 
election.  Birth  of  first  child.  Wife's  illness.  Spring  at  Ray  Lodge. 
Lectures  on  '  Science  of  Language.'  Visit  from  his  mother.  Death 
of  Prince  Consort. 

The  early  days  of  this  year  found  Max  Miiller  again  in 
deep  anxiety  about  his  mother,  who  had  gone  to  her  daughter 
at  Chemnitz  for  Christmas,  where  she  was  taken  suddenly 
and  alarmingly  ill,  and  for  a  day  or  two  there  seemed  but 
small  hope  that  her  life  would  be  spared.  Her  son's  anxiety 
was  piteous,  so  far  away  from  her,  and  unable  to  do  anything 
for  her,  or  go  to  her  for  fear  of  exciting  her.  On  February  i:^ 
he  writes  to  her  : — 

Translation. 

'  It  was  a  serious  warning,  and  the  years  God  has  added  to  your  life 
should  be  all  the  more  valuable  and  blest.  How  we  suffered  with  you 
I  need  not  say.  The  loss  of  our  parents  is  the  heaviest  sorrow  we 
have  to  bear  in  life,  and  nothing  can  ever  blot  it  out.  The  separation 
must  come  sooner  or  later,  but  when  it  comes  something  breaks  in 
the  heart  which  can  never  be  the  same  again.' 

To  Bryan  Hodgson,  Esq.  (formerly  Resident  in  Nepal). 

New  College  Lane,  Oxford,  February  6,  i860. 
'  My  dear  Sir, — I  have  to  thank  you  for  your  valuable  papers  on 
the  Vayu  and  Kiranti  languages.  They  arrived  here  during  my 
absence.  I  was  obliged  to  stay  away  from  Oxford  as  my  wife 
was  very  unwell,  and  I  am  only  just  beginning  to  resume  my 
work.  When  I  shall  be  able  to  go  through  the  results  of  your 
immense  labours  I  cannot  tell  at  present.  My  time  is  so  much 
taken  up  with  necessary  work  that  I  cannot  allow  myself  much  leisure 


232  Lectures  [ch.  xn 

for  my  favourite  studies,  I  have  to  print  text  and  commentary  of  the 
Ri'g-veda,  and  a  second  edition  of  my  History  of  Ancient  Sanskrit 
Literature.  Then  I  have  to  prepare  lectures  on  the  Literature  of 
Modern  Europe  for  my  Chair  here,  not  to  mention  a  Sanskrit 
Grammar,  which  I  promised  to  finish  before  the  summer.  Add  to  all 
this  the  duties  of  a  newly-married  man,  and  you  will  believe  me 
if  I  tell  you  that  I  have  but  few  moments  left  for  following  up  my 
researches  into  the  history  of  the  numberless  Turanian  languages. 
I  am  very  glad,  however,  to  know  that  your  important  labours,  though 
interrupted,  were  not  left  incomplete,  and  I  trust  you  will  find 
leisure  in  England  for  writing  a  resume'  of  all  your  discoveries  in 
the  Himalayan  Babel.  A  linguistic  map  of  that  country  would  be 
very  useful,  and  no  one  could  do  this  as  well  as  you.  Some  day  or 
other  I  hope  to  return  to  those  steep  regions  of  philology,  and 
nothing  could  be  a  better  guide  than  a  physical  and  ethnological 
map  drawn  by  you.' 

The  lectures  for  this  term  were  called  'Principles  of 
Etymology,'  but  were  really  on  the  English  language  traced 
back  through  Anglo-Saxon  to  Gothic.  They  were  a  very 
popular  course,  and  though  attendance  at  Professors'  lectures 
was  no  longer  compulsory,  Max  Miiller  had  a  large  audience. 
He  had  talked  over  these  lectures  with  his  wife,  and  explained 
them  to  her,  as  they  walked  together  in  the  beautiful  Taplow 
Woods  in  the  clear  winter  weather,  and  on  their  return  to 
Oxford  he  dictated  the  whole  course  to  her.  It  was  like  the 
unfolding  of  a  new  world,  ever  reaching  back  and  back,  till 
lost  in  the  hoary  distance,  where  the  forefathers  of  the 
European  nations  still  dwelt  together  with  the  forefathers 
of  the  Persians  and  Hindus,  before  the  great  dispersion  west 
and  south. 

To  Professor  Bernays. 

Translation.  New  College  Lane,  Felruary  6,  i860. 

'  Oh  yes,  a  sign  of  life  is  always  good,  and  so  I  thank  you,  my  best 
friend,  for  your  Child  of  Care.  But  I  should  like  to  know  still  more 
how  you  are,  body  and  soul,  and  I  should  also  like  to  know  what  you 
think  of  me  and  of  my  happiness.  Our  missing  each  other  at 
Heidelberg  was  a  fatality,  for  I  so  wished  to  show  you  my  wife. 
I  really  am  as  happy  as  a  "  Child  of  Care "  can  be  and  may  be ; 
I  often  fear  the  envious  Nemesis.  What  is  beautiful  is  that  I  have 
to  labour  for  my  bread  again,  and  that  also  succeeds  fairiy.     I  am 


i86o]  Humboldfs  Correspondence  233 

just  printing  the  second  edition  of  my  History  of  Ancie7it  Sanskrit 
Literature.  Have  you  received  it  ?  I  sent  two  copies  to  Bunsen,  one 
of  them  was  meant  for  you.  The  Veda  proceeds  slowly,  and  other 
things  ripen.  Tell  me  what  you  are  doing  and  planning.  I  have 
not  heard  from  Bunsen  for  a  very  long  time.  George  is  in  London, 
and  I  hope  to  meet  him  there  the  day  after  to-morrow.  Nothing 
new  happens  here.  As  a  married  man  I  can  but  tell  you  one  thing, 
stop  being  a  "  single "  and  become  a  "  double "  {^Einsiedlcr  and 
Zweisiedler).  You  can  find  in  all  women  what  is  worthy  of  love, 
and  the  one  who  finds  it  in  you  is  sure  to  be  worthy  of  your  love. 

'  I  am  reading  Phaedrus  with  my  wife,  and  we  often  think  of  you  in 
our  readings.' 

To  THE  Same. 

Translation.  New  College  Lane,  March  29. 

'As  far  as  I  can  see,  we  have  no  MS.  of  the  Historia  Sacra  of 
Sulpicius  Severus ;  something  by  him  about  Saint  Martin,  but  nothing 
else.  If  I  knew  that  you  would  come  over  here,  if  such  a  MS. 
existed,  I  should  write  to  Simonides^  but  I  am  afraid  nothing  will 
induce  you  to  come  over  again.  It  is  tiresome  that  you  have  not 
received  my  History  of  Sanskrit  Literature,  the  more  so  as  it  is  my 
fault.  Now  the  edition  is  out  of  print  and  I  am  printing  a  second 
one.  My  enemies  praise  the  book,  and  go  so  far  as  to  say  that 
it  did  not  come  up  to  their  expectations ;  what  ideas  people  must  have 
of  me  !  Well,  something  better  is  sure  to  come,  when  I  have  come 
out  somew^hat  from  my  present  bliss.  In  summer  I  hope  to  go  to  my 
new  house,  where  I  shall  arrange  my  library,  and  then  I  look  for 
a  calm  sea  (JMeeresstiUe). 

'  I  hope  to  send  you  something  about  Monotheism  soon ;  I  do  not 
think  you  will  like  it,  and  therefore  perhaps  it  will  bring  me  a  letter. 
What  about  your  appointment  ?  When  you  have  received  that,  your 
double  state  {Zweisiedelung)  must  certainly  assume  another  shape. 

'And  what  do  you  think  of  Humboldt's  Correspondence  ?  No  poetry, 
but  much  truth.  The  old  gentleman  has  sat  for  his  biography  to 
Varnhagen,  and  has  shown  himself  as  Varnhagen  could  understand 
him.  Unfortunately  Varnhagen  dies  soon  after,  and  the  whole  matter 
comes  undigested  before  the  public.  I  am  glad  to  see  that  Humboldt 
on  his  part  has  justified  Bunsen,  though  he  has  not  put  a  stop  to 
Varnhagen's  chattering.  But  what  do  the  court  ladies  say  ?  Will  there 
be  more  of  this  sort .?  I  have  no  time  for  writing ;  but  it  will  be 
better  when  I  am  in  my  own  house  and  get  all  things  into  order. 
In  faithful  friendship,  yours,  '  ]\I.' 

^  The  famous  forger  of  MSS. 


234  Home  in  High  Street  [ch.  xn 

To  M.  Renan. 

New  College  Lane,  March  27. 
'  If  you  think  the  chapter  on  the  Introduction  of  Writing  Ukely  to 
interest  the  larger  public,  I  shall  be  very  happy  to  see  it  in  the  Revue 
Germaiiique.  Boehtlingk  has  sent  me  an  article  of  his  in  answer  to 
my  arguments.  It  does  not  contain  anything  to  make  me  change  my 
opinion,  or  rather  to  remove  the  difficulties  which  I  feel  myself  on  the 
subject.  If  my  article  is  to  be  printed  in  the  Revue  Germanique, 
it  might  be  civil  to  mention  B.'s  objections.  I  am  printing  a  second 
edition  of  my  History  of  Sanskrit  Literature,  and  find  that  all  my 
time  is  taken  up,  as  I  have  been  appointed  Examiner  in  Indian 
History  and  Geography  and  the  Sanskrit  language  for  the  Civil 
Service  of  India.  I  have,  however,  made  time  to  review  your 
Histoire  des  Langues  Semitiques,  or  rather  one  chapter  of  it,  on  Semitic 
Monotheism.  There  were  two  long  articles  in  print  which  were  to 
appear  in  the  Ti?}ies  at  Christmas,  but  political  subjects  left  no  space, 
and  so  they  had  to  be  postponed  till  Easter  \  We  both  agree  and 
differ,  as  you  will  see,  and  I  feel  quite  relieved  after  having  expressed 
what  I  long  wished  to  say  on  the  subject.  I  am  delighted  to  hear 
that  you  are  so  hard  at  work,  your  second  volume  progressing,  and 
your  Etude  sur  le  Cantique  des  Cantiques  finished.  I  have  promised 
to  write  a  review  of  Barthelemy-St.-Hilaire's  researches  on  Buddhism, 
for  the  Edifihurgh  Review,  but  it  will  not  be  out  before  the  autumn, 
as  all  the  numbers  till  then  are  filled  up.     With  sincere  regard.' 

Max  vi^rites  to  his  mother  in  April  that  he  has  at  last  found 
a  house  in  High  Street,  near  Magdalen,  and  that  he  will 
move  in  in  July.  In  all  his  letters  he  exhorts  her  to  lead 
a  quiet,  comfortable  life,  and  tells  her  that  he  always  has 
enough  and  to  spare  for  her,  and  that  at  her  age  she  ought 
to  give  herself  more  comforts.  But  it  was  difficult  to  induce 
her  to  do  so,  after  the  long  years  of  frugal  living,  and  to  the 
end  she  saved  more  of  the  money  her  son  sent  her  than  she 
spent. 

Translation. 

'  Do  not  be  always  thinking  how  you  can  spare  a  few  shillings,  but 
enjoy  the  precious  years  God  has  added  to  your  life,  with  constant 
gratitude,  with  quiet  and  purity  of  soul,  looking  more  to  the  heavenly 
than  to  the  earthly;  that  gives  true  joyfulness  of  soul,  if  we  every 
moment  recollect  what  is  eternal,  and  never  quite  lose  ourselves  in  the 
small  or  even  the  large  cares  of  life.     My  love  to  Auguste  and  Krug, 

^  Reprinted  in  Chips,  Vol.  I,  first  edition. 


i86o]  Death  of  Professor  Wilson  235 

who  nursed  you  so  carefully,  whilst  I  could  do  nothing  to  help. 
May  God  send  His  warm  sunshine  on  you,  and  make  your  lives  as 
happy  as  He  has  made  mine,  so  far  beyond  all  I  deserve ! ' 

To  M.  Renan. 

6,  New  College  Lane,  May  6. 
'  I  have  been  expecting  to  hear  from  you  for  some  time,  and  I  am 
almost  afraid  from  your  silence  that  you  did  not  quite  approve  of  my 
review  of  your  work  which  I  sent  you  at  the  time  of  its  appearance  in 
the  Times.  The  articles  have  certainly  attained  their  object  in  England, 
as  I  have  heard  from  many  quarters.  They  have  drawn  general  atten- 
tion to  your  work,  and  they  have  inspired  others  with  the  same  feelings 
of  respect  and  admiration  for  your  labours  which  I  sincerely  entertain 
myself.  Your  works  stand  too  high  to  be  made  the  object  of  a 
merely  laudatory  review,  and  I  believe  that  where  I  have  ventured  to 
express  a  difference  of  opinion  I  have  done  so,  not  only  Avith  that 
respect  which  is  due  to  you  from  everybody,  but  with  the  warmest 
acknowledgement  of  the  value  of  your  researches,  even  where  they 
did  not  seem  to  me  completely  to  confirm  the  results  which  you 
derive  from  them.  I  still  hope  I  may  be  mistaken  in  my  misgivings, 
but  if  there  should  be  any  expression  which  could  have  given  you 
offence,  I  trust  you  will  tell  me  openly,  and  believe  beforehand  that 
it  was  used  unintentionally.  I  am  anxious  to  hear  what  you  think  on 
the  main  point  on  which  we  differ,  though  in  form  rather  than  in 
substance,  and  I  look  forward  to  your  second  volume  for  the  full 
discussion  of  this  question.  My  hopes  of  spending  part  of  the 
summer  at  Paris  have  vanished  again ;  my  wife  is  not  well,  and  we 
shall  have  to  stay  quietly  at  Oxford.  Have  you  seen  a  volume  called 
Essays  and  Reviews  ?  It  would  interest  you  and  somewhat  surprise 
you,  if  you  consider  that  all  the  writers  are  clergymen  of  the  Church 
of  England.' 

Two  days  after  this  letter  was  written,  Professor  H.  H. 
Wilson,  Boden  Professor  of  Sanskrit  at  Oxford,  died  almost 
suddenly  after  an  operation.  It  has  been  already  mentioned 
that  his  last  piece  of  work  was  a  review  of  Max  Miiller's 
Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature,  which  was  published  in  the 
October  number  of  the  Edinhirgh,  and  was,  as  the  editor 
says  in  a  note,  '  a  posthumous  testimonial  by  the  first  San- 
skrit scholar  of  the  age  to  the  erudition  and  worth  of  the 
most  eminent  of  his  followers.'  When  the  funeral  was  over, 
Max  MUller  announced  himself  as  a  candidate  for  the  vacant 
Chair,  and  soon  issued  his  testimonials,  which  included  the 


236  Letter  from  Bishop  of  Calcutta      [ch.  xn 

names  of  nearly  every  Oriental  scholar  of  real  eminence  in  the 
world.  Though  the  election  was  not  to  be  before  December, 
the  canvass,  which  was  begun  at  once,  occupied  nearly  the 
whole  year.  On  May  19  Mr.  W.  S.  W.  Vaux,  of  the  British 
Museum,  wrote  to  Max  Muller  : — 

'  On  many  occasions,  and  especially  the  last  time  (about  two 
months  since,  in  the  East  India  House)  when  I  had  the  pleasure  of 
seeing  him  (Professor  Wilson),  he  stated  that  in  his  judgement  you 
were  the  first  Sanskrit  scholar  in  Europe.  I  remarked  that  I  was 
glad  to  hear  him  give  so  decided  an  opinion,  as  I  and  several  others 
naturally  were  anxious  that  his  successor  at  Oxford  should  be  the 
fittest  man  we  could  procure.  To  this  he  said,  "  You  will  be  quite 
right  if  your  choice  should  fall  on  Max  Muller."  ' 

The  two  following  letters,  from  the  Bishop  of  Calcutta  and 
Dr.  Pusey,  are  of  interest  as  showing  the  good  they  expected 
from  Max  Miiller's  election  to  the  cause  of  Christian  missions, 
though  Mr.  Jowett  wrote  much  about  the  same  time  that  he 
could  not  make  up  his  mind  whether  Max  MUller  or  his 
opponent  would  do  most  for  missions : — 

Ravenswood,  Simla,  y?^^  13,  i860. 

'  My  dear  Sir, — When  I  heard  of  the  great  loss  which  Sanskrit 
literature  had  sustained  by  the  death  of  Professor  Wilson,  my  thoughts 
naturally  turned  to  you  as  his  obvious  successor,  and  it  will  give  me 
great  pleasure  to  hear  that  the  University  make  an  election  which  is 
certainly  expected  and  will  be  approved  by  every  one  to  whom  I  have 
spoken  on  the  subject  in  this  country. 

'  I  feel  considerable  interest  in  the  matter,  because  I  am  sure  that 
it  is  of  the  greatest  importance  for  our  missionaries  to  understand 
Sanskrit,  to  study  the  philosophy  and  sacred  books  of  the  Hindus, 
and  to  be  able  to  meet  the  Pundits  on  their  own  ground. 

'  Among  the  means  to  this  great  end,  none  can  be  more  important 
than  your  edition  and  Professor  Wilson's  translation  of  the  Rig-veda. 
It  would  be  most  fitting  in  my  opinion  for  a  great  Christian  Univer- 
sity to  place  in  its  Sanskrit  Chair  the  scholar  who  has  made  the 
Sanskrit  scriptures  accessible  to  the  Christian  missionary. 

*  I  am  glad  to  have  this  opportunity  of  thanking  you  for  the  clear 
and  satisfactory  letter  which  you  wrote  to  me  a  year  ago,  w'hen  I  con- 
sulted you  on  a  theological  difficulty  which  had  arisen  between  two 
missionaries,  as  to  the  translation  of  some  expressions  in  our  Articles 
into  Bengali.     Such  questions  are  likely  to  multiply,  and  it  will  be 


i86o]  Letter  from  Dr.  Pusey  237 

a  great  point  to  have  the  Sanskrit  Professorship  occupied  by  one  who 
takes  an  interest  in  them,  and  from  thoroughly  understanding  the 
Hindu  theological  terms,  is  able  to  give  advice  on  the  subject, 
so  that  it  may  express  our  meaning  in  a  manner  which  will  be  at 
once  accurate  and  will  avoid  the  pantheistic  notions  which  abound  in 
Hindu  philosophy,  and  might  by  an  ignorant  translator  be  transferred 
to  Christian  teaching. 

'  You  are  at  liberty  to  make  any  use  that  you  please  of  this  letter. 
'  With  every  wish  for  your  success, 
'  I  remain,  my  dear  Sir, 

'  Yours  very  sincerely, 
'  Professor  Max  Muller.  '  G.  E.  L.  Calcutta.' 

From  Dr.  Pusey. 

Christ  Cylvkcu,  Jmie  2,  i860. 
'  My  dear  Professor, — On  the  first  election  to  the  Sanskrit  Chair, 
you  will  have  heard  that  we  were  divided  before  two  great  names. 
Professor  Wilson,  whose  first-rate  Sanskrit  knowledge  was  in  the 
mouth  of  every  one,  and  Dr.  Mill,  who,  many  of  us  thought,  might 
fulfil  the  object  of  the  founder  better  by  giving  to  the  Professorship 
a  direct  missionary  turn.  The  same  thought  would  naturally  recur 
to  us  now,  and  I  have  kept  myself  in  suspense  since  our  sudden  loss 
of  Professor  Wilson.  I\Iy  first  impression,  however,  is  my  abiding 
conviction,  that  we  should  be  best  promoting  the  intentions  of  the 
founder  by  electing  yourself,  who  have  already  done  so  much  to 
make  us  fully  acquainted  with  the  religious  systems  of  those  whom 
we  wish  to  win  to  the  Gospel.  It  is  obvious  that  without  this  know- 
ledge a  missionary  must  be  continually  at  fault,  ignorant  alike  of  the 
points  of  contact  of  which,  after  the  manner  of  St.  Paul,  he  may  avail 
himself,  or  of  those  which  present  the  chief  obstacles  to  the  reception 
of  the  Gospel  in  the  minds  of  those  whom  he  would  win.  I  cannot 
but  think  then  that  your  labours  on  the  Vedas — while  they  attest  your 
wonderful  power  in  mastering  this  ancient  Sanskrit  (and  of  course  of 
the  more  modern  Sanskrit,  through  which  you  had  access  to  the 
older),  and  while  they  evince,  as  I  understand,  great  philological 
talent,  beyond  the  knowledge  of  Sanskrit  itself — are  the  greatest 
gifts  which  have  been  bestowed  on  those  who  would  win  to  Chris- 
tianity the  subtle  and  thoughtful  minds  of  the  cultivated  Indians. 
We  owe  you  very  much  for  the  past,  and  we  shall  ourselves  gain 
greatly  by  placing  you  in  a  position  in  which  you  can  give  your 
undivided  attention  to  those  labours  by  which  we  have  already  so 
much  profited.  You  know  that  I  have  felt  it  my  duty  to  confine 
myself  to  a  different  class  of  languages,  those   which  bear  directly 


238  British  Association  [ch.  xn 

upon  Hebrew.  I  have  written,  therefore,  on  that  upon  which  I  am 
alone  competent  to  write — not  your  great  knowledge  of  Sanskrit,  of 
which  we  have  such  eminent  testimony,  but  of  the  great  value  of  that 
special  line  of  study  to  which  you  have  devoted  yourself.  Your  work 
will  form  a  new  era  in  the  efforts  for  the  conversion  of  India,  and 
Oxford  will  have  reason  to  be  thankful  that,  by  giving  you  a  home, 
it  will  have  facilitated  a  work  of  such  primary  and  lasting  importance 
for  the  conversion  of  India,  and  which,  by  enabling  us  to  compare 
that  early  false  religion  with  the  true,  illustrates  the  more  than 
blessedness  of  what  we  enjoy. — Yours  very  faithfully,  E.  B.  Pusey.' 

The  middle  of  June  Max  writes  to  his  mother  : — 

'  My  time  is  quite  taken  up  with  the  election  business,  and  I  some- 
times wish  I  had  not  thought  of  it.  It  will  absorb  my  time  till 
December,  and  if  I  don't  win  I  shall  be  very  cross  !  Only  think  of 
4,000  electors,  scattered  all  over  England,  and  each  must  be  written 
to!  In  a  week  the  British  Association  meets  here,  as  in  1847,  t^^ 
first  time  I  made  an  address  in  English.' 

His  old  friend  Carus  came  over  for  the  meeting,  and  stayed 
with  Dr.  Acland.  Max  Mliller  was  far  too  much  occupied  to 
take  any  part  in  the  discussions,  even  in  opposing  the  fierce 
attack  of  Mr.  Crawfurd  (the  famous  Objector-General)  on  the 
doctrine  of  the  Aryan  race,  and  the  connexion  between  Hindus 
and  the  nations  of  Europe. 

Early  in  July  Max  was  busy  in  London  examining  the 
candidates  for  the  Indian  Civil  Service  in  Sanskrit,  Indian 
History  and  Geography.  On  his  return  to  Oxford,  the  move 
to  the  new  house,  64,  High  Street,  took  place,  but  his  wife  was 
so  unwell  that  he  sent  her  away  to  her  father's,  undertaking 
all  the  trouble  himself. 

To  HIS  Wife. 

July,  i860, 

'  Surely  everything  is  ordered,  and  ordered  for  our  true  interests. 
It  would  be  fearful  to  think  that  anything,  however  small  in  appear- 
ance, could  happen  to  us  without  the  will  of  God.  If  you  admit  the 
idea  of  chance  or  unmeaning  events  anywhere,  the  whole  organization 
of  our  life  in  God  is  broken  to  pieces.  We  are,  we  don't  know 
where,  unless  we  rest  in  God,  and  give  Him  praise  for  all  things. 
We  must  trust  in  Him,  whether  He  sends  us  joy  or  sorrow.  If  He 
sends  us  joy,  let  us  be  careful.  Happiness  is  often  sent  to  try  us, 
and  is  by  no  means  a  proof  of  our  having  deserved  it.  Nor  is  sorrow 
always  a  sign  of  God's  displeasure,  but  frequently,  nay  always,  of  His 


i86o]  Life  in  High  Street  239 

love  and  compassion.  We  must  each  interpret  our  life  as  best  we 
can,  but  we  must  be  sure  that  its  deepest  purpose  is  to  bring  us  back 
to  God  through  Christ.  Death  is  a  condition  of  our  life  on  earth,  it 
brings  the  creature  back  to  its  Creator.  The  creature  groans  at  the 
sight  of  death,  but  God  will  not  forsake  us  at  the  last,  He  who  has 
never  forsaken  us  from  the  first  breath  of  our  life  on  earth.  If  it  be 
His  will,  we  may  live  to  serve  Him  here  on  earth  for  many  happy  years 
to  come.  If  He  takes  either  of  us  away,  His  name  be  praised.  We 
live  in  the  shadow  of  death,  but  that  shadow  should  not  darken  the 
brightness  of  our  life.  It  is  the  shadow  of  the  hand  of  our  God  and 
Father,  and  the  earnest  of  a  higher  brighter  life  hereafter.  Our 
Father  in  heaven  loves  us  more  than  any  husband  can  love  his  wife, 
or  any  mother  her  child.  His  hand  can  never  hurt  us,  so  let  us  hope 
and  trust  always.' 

On  his  wife's  return  they  settled  down  to  their  quiet  busy- 
life,  feeling  for  the  first  time  really  at  home,  in  their  own 
house,  with  his  books  and  all  their  wedding  gifts  round  them. 
His  joyous,  happy  temperament,  and  thankfulness  for  every 
trifle,  made  life  very  bright,  notwithstanding  the  anxiety  and 
hard  work  connected  with  the  coming  election.  His  little 
garden  was  a  constant  pleasure  to  Max  Miiller,  and  he  often 
worked  in  it.  A  flight  of  steps  led  to  it  from  his  study 
window,  so  that  he  could  step  out  at  any  moment  when 
tired  with  work,  and  enjoy  his  roses,  of  which,  next  to  violets 
and  lilies  of  the  valley,  he  was  passionately  fond. 

It  was  about  this  time  that  Max  Muller  received  an  invita- 
tion to  deliver  a  course  of  lectures  the  following  spring  at  the 
Royal  Institution  on  Comparative  Philology.  He  at  once 
accepted  the  invitation,  and  continued  to  lecture  at  the 
Institution  from  time  to  time  for  above  thirty  years,  his 
last  course  there  being  delivered  in  March,  1894,  on  the 
Vedanta  Philosophy.  Beyond  bringing  out  the  second  edition 
of  Ancteni  Sanskrit  Literature,  writing  a  very  few  articles  for 
the  Sattirday  Review,  and  preparing  his  lectures,  Max  Miiller 
got  through  but  little  literary  work  this  year.  The  sunshine 
within  the  house  was  a  delightful  contrast  to  the  weather 
without,  for  it  had  been  a  summer  of  almost  ceaseless  rain, 
and  at  the  usual  time  of  hay-harvest  the  hay-fields  round 
Oxford  were  all  flooded. 

Max  Miiller  had  been  kept  in  constant  anxiety  about  his 


240  Love  of  Swimming  [ch.  xh 

mother's  health  all  through  the  spring  and  early  summer,  and 
at  the  end  of  August  wrote  and  offered  to  pay  her  a  short 
visit,  but  she  felt  hardly  well  enough  for  the  excitement. 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  Septernber  7. 

'  I  think  you  are  right  in  being  quiet  and  alone.  To  see  you  again, 
and  then  to  have  to  leave  after  a  week,  would  be  almost  too  much  for 
me,  how  much  more  for  you  ?  Our  lives  are  in  the  hands  of  a  Father 
who  knows  what  is  best  for  all  of  us.  Death  is  painful  to  the  creature, 
but  in  God  there  is  no  death,  no  dying ;  dying  belongs  to  life,  and  is 
only  a  passage  to  a  more  perfect  world,  into  which  we  all  go  when 
God  calls  us.  When  one's  happiness  is  as  perfect  as  mine  is,  then  the 
thought  of  death  often  frightens  one,  but  even  then  that  is  conquered 
by  the  feeling  and  the  faith  that  all  is  best  as  it  is,  and  that  God  loves 
us  more  than  even  a  father  and  mother  can  love  us.  It  is  a  beautiful 
world  in  which  we  live,  but  it  is  only  beautiful,  and  only  really  our 
home,  when  we  feel  the  nearness  of  God  at  each  moment,  and  lean  on 
Him  and  trust  in  His  love.  And  so  I  trust  God  will  spare  you  to  us, 
as  long  as  it  is  good  for  us ;  and  when  the  hour  of  parting  comes,  we 
know  that  love  never  dies,  and  that  God,  who  bound  us  so  closely 
together  in  this  life,  will  bring  us  together  where  there  is  no  more 
parting.  ...  I  wish  you  could  see  us  here  :  our  home  is  charming, 
and  when  I  remember  how  I  arrived  here  with  one  "  box,"  my  heart 
runs  over  when  I  see  hovi^  God  has  blessed  me.' 

In  September  Max  Midler  and  his  wife  went  to  Brighton, 
where  he  enjoyed  the  sea-bathing,  and  renewed  his  old  love 
of  swimming.  There  were  several  swimming  competitions 
during  their  stay,  and  he  always  joined  the  competitors,  and 
was  glad  to  find  that  he  kept  up  his  former  power  of  rapid 
and  strong  swimming. 

To  Professor  Bernays. 

Translation.  64,  High  Street,  October  21. 

'  I  found  your  letter  on  my  return,  and  I  write  at  once  to  thank  you 
for  the  beautiful  and  flattering  proof  of  your  friendship.  All  that 
comes  from  you  I  read  with  true  joy,  as  far  as  I  can  understand  it, 
and  I  look  forward  heartily  to  the  fresh  feast.  Till  the  middle  of 
December  I  shall  have  no  leisure.  December  7  is  the  election : 
whether  I  am  to  succeed  is  doubtful,  but  I  hope  I  shall,  especially  as 
I  have  lost  six  months  with  canvassing.  We  are  all  well  here ;  my 
wife  is  in  good  health,  our  house  is  all  in  order,  nothing  is  wanting 


i86o]     Death  of  Biinsen — Sanskrit  Election       241 

any  more,  and  I  thank  God  if  all  remains  as  it  is  now.  It  is  true, 
happiness  drives  nails  into  our  soul,  but  all  is  for  the  best. 

'  I  hear  nothing  but  sad  things  about  Bunsen.  I  should  grieve  to 
lose  that  man. 

'  When  will  you  come  to  England  again  ?     In  faithful  friendship.' 

In  the  last  days  of  November  he  heard  of  the  death  of  his 
friend  and  benefactor,  Baron  Bunsen,  who  passed  away  at 
Bonn,  after  many  months  of  suffering,  so  that  at  first  the 
thought  that  he  was  at  rest  overpowered  the  sense  of  loss. 
But  the  feeling  of  loss  grew  ever  stronger  as  time  went  on, 
and  a  year  later  Max  MuUer  wrote  to  M.  Renan :  '  I  miss 
Bunsen  more  every  day.  I  feel  as  if  I  had  lost  a  limb,  and 
I  can  hardly  believe  sometimes  that  one  is  never  to  see  him 
again  here  below.' 

On  December  7  the  election  to  the  Sanskrit  Professorship 
took  place,  and  Max  Miiller  was  rejected.  A  few  days  before 
the  election  an  unknown  friend  wrote  to  one  of  the  papers 
summing  up  the  difference  between  the  candidates,  as  '  the 
difference  between  respectable  and  honourable  proficiency, 
and  the  complete  and  masterful  knowledge  of  the  subject 
possessed  by  a  rare  genius  and  profound  scholar,  from  whose 
authority  on  the  subjects  of  Indian  philology  and  philosophy 
there  is  no  appeal  in  Europe/  and  then,  adverting  to  the 
objection  to  Max  Miiller  as  not  being  an  Englishman,  the 
same  supporter  adds  : — 

'  Mr.  Max  Miiller's  English  is  perfect.  Many  who  have  not  heard 
the  wonderful  force  and  clearness  of  his  public  lectures  must  have 
read,  without  knowing  it,  some  of  his  many  contributions  to  periodical 
literature.  Nothing  that  I  know  of — of  thought  or  expression — exists 
to  differentiate  Max  Miiller  from  the  highest  type  of  refined  and  edu- 
cated Englishman. 

*  But  the  implied  charge  of  un-English  religion,  and  even  of  irre- 
ligion,  is  at  once  the  most  serious,  the  most  gratuitous,  and  the 
most  cruel.  If  the  country  clergy  have  been  persuaded,  as  has 
been  wittily  said,  to  smell  rationalism  in  the  dots  over  the  ii  in 
Mr.  Miiller's  name,  I  cannot  hope  to  dissipate  the  detested  odour. 
I  can  only  submit  that  there  is  not  the  slightest  particle  of  ground  for 
the  suspicion,  not  the  faintest  show  for  the  pretext  that  Mother  Church 
is  in  danger.  Surely  the  support  and  deferential  testimonials  of  the 
men  of  highest  character  and  well-known  religious  opinions  in  the 

I  R 


242  Dr.  Pusey  [ch.  xii 

University  should  suffice  to  dispose  of  such  a  vague  and  ungenerous 
insinuation.  A  man's  personal  character  must  stand  very  high,  and 
his  theological  opinions  can  afford  but  little  ground  for  animadver- 
sion on  either  hand,  when  he  unites  as  his  unhesitating  supporters 
Dr.  Pusey  and  Dr.  Macbride.' 

Dr.  Pusey  had  worked  day  and  night  for  Max  Miiller,  and 
when  helping  to  send  out  the  final  notices  of  the  election, 
wrote  in  his  own  hand  above  those  he  sent :  '  Max  Miiller  has 
already  done  more  for  the  Gospel  in  India  than  any  other 
Sanskrit  scholar,  by  opening  to  our  missionaries  their  sacred 
books.  His  election  would  enable  him  to  devote  himself  to 
that  work.     He  is  the  first  Sanskrit  scholar  living.' 

It  was  observed  by  an  elector  that  could  the  votes 
have  been  taken  by  weight,  there  was  no  doubt  how  the 
matter  would  have  ended.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  it 
was  a  keen  disappointment  to  Max  Miiller,  but  he  lived  long 
enough  to  trace  his  almost  unique  position  later  in  the  world 
of  letters,  and  the  influence  he  was  able  to  exert  on  religious 
thought  in  England,  to  this  very  disappointment.  Had  he 
been  successful,  he  must  have  devoted  his  great  powers  almost 
exclusively  to  Sanskrit,  and  by  doing  so  would  no  doubt  have 
remained  to  the  last  what  Wilson  pronounced  him  to  be  at 
the  time  of  his  (Wilson's)  death,  'The  first  Sanskrit  scholar  in 
Europe.'  It  was  the  Chair  of  Philology,  founded  some  six 
years  later  specially  for  him,  his  name  being  mentioned  in  the 
statute  of  foundation,  that  led  him  on  from  the  Science  of 
Language  to  the  Sciences  of  Thought  and  Religion.  As 
Professor  Macdonell  says,  in  his  admirable  obituary  notice  in 
the  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society —  \ 

'Nothing  was  known  about  Comparative  Philology  when  Max 
Miiller  came  to  this  country.  He  introduced  and  popularized  the  new 
science,  and  soon  came  to  be  regarded  as  its  chief  exponent.  He 
was,  moreover,  the  first  to  inaugurate  the  study  of  Comparative 
Mythology  in  this  country.  ...  It  was  not  till  the  latter  half  of  the 
century  that  the  necessary  conditions  were  at  hand  for  founding  a 
science  of  religion.  Max  Miiller  was  there  to  apply  the  needful 
stimulus  .  .  .  and  to  collect  the  requisite  materials  in  his  Sacred  Books 
of  the  East.  Thus  there  was  a  great  opening  in  these  highly  im- 
portant branches  of  learning,   but  no  one  man   could   have  taken 


i86o]  Letters  on  Sanskrit  Election  243 

advantage  of  them .  . . ,  had  he  not  been  one  of  the  most  talented  and 
versatile  scholars  of  the  nineteenth  century.' 

The  following  letters  vi^ere  received  soon  after  the  election, 

and   were    kept    together   and    always    treasured    by   Max 

Muller  :— 

From  his  Father-in-law. 

'  I  know  not  when  I  have  felt  more  deeply  for  the  trials  of  others  or 
had  more  reason  to  admire  patience  and  resignation  to  God's  will 
than  in  the  spirit  you  have  shown,  in  what  I  know  to  be  a  most  severe 
trial  and  bitter  disappointment.  But  now  that  all  is  over,  and  I  have 
time  to  think,  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  with  such  unscrupulous 
opponents  we  could  not  have  won.  They  had  every  element  of 
success  on  their  side,  but  one,  and  that  they  disavowed  as  affecting 
the  claims  of  the  candidates,  namely  the  vast  inferiority  of  one  to  the 
other.  It  must  be  a  bitter  disappointment  to  feel  that  the  path  of 
usefulness  you  had  proposed  to  follow  has  been  cut  from  under  your 
feet,  .  .  .  but  it  is  God's  will,  and  the  time  may  come  when  you  will 
see  His  wisdom  in  disappointing  your  hopes  and  wishes,' 

From  Dean  (then  Canon)  Stanley. 

Christ  Church,  December  8. 
'  You  must  allow  me  to  write  a  few  words  to  express  what  I  cannot 
say.  I  have  never  experienced  the  peculiar  trial  under  which  you  are 
suffering,  but  I  believe,  from  my  own  bitter  disappointment  on  your 
behalf,  I  can  feel  what  it  is  for  you.  You  will  have  many  consolations. 
I  need  not  dwell  upon  them.  But  you  must  also  give  us  the  best 
consolation  that  we  can  have,  and  that  is  the  assurance  that  we  have 
not  been  mistaken  in  the  high  expectations  we  had  formed  of  you. 
You  have  it  still  in  your  power,  thank  God,  to  turn  your  energies  from 
this  wretched  turmoil  to  the  pursuits  which  have  made  your  name 
what  it  is.  You  can  still  show  that,  although  not  Boden  Professor, 
you  are  and  will  remain  the  oracle  of  all  who  wish  to  know  the 
secrets  of  Indian  literature  and  religion.  You  can  still  by  your 
writings  show  what  the  Christian  religion  may  be  to  India  and  the 
world,  as  you  could  not  do  before,  lest  you  should  be  suspected  of 
unworthy  motives.  You  can  still  show  us  how  the  Christian  scholar 
and  philosopher  can  put  to  silence  by  Christian  magnanimity  "the 
ignorance  of  foolish  men."  [Can  one  not  hear  the  beloved  little  Dean's 
inimitable  chuckle  as  he  penned  these  words?]  You  can  in  this 
crisis  of  your  life  rise  to  the  greatness  of  the  occasion,  and  make  your 
friends  more  proud  of  you,  than  if  they  had  brought  you  into  the 
Professorship  by  a  majority  of  hundreds.     "  Leave  off  wrath  and  let 

R  a 


244  Attacks  on  Max  Muller  [ch.  xn 

go  displeasure ;  fret  not  thyself,  else  shalt  thou  be  moved  to  do  evil." 
With  bitter  regrets  at  not  having  exerted  myself  more,  with  the  truest 
sympathy  for  you  and  yours.  Ever  your  sincere  friend, 

'A.  P.  Stanley.' 

It  was  not  easy  to  carry  out  his  friend's  advice,  for  not 
content  with  the  signal  victory  they  had  gained,  his  opponents 
brought  various  utterly  unfounded  accusations  against  Max 
Muller,  as  that  he  had  inspired  an  article  in  his  favour  which 
had  appeared  in  the  Times,  and  other  equally  vexing  and 
untrue  allegations,  which,  though  triumphantly  disproved  by 
men  like  Dr.  Pusey,  the  Provost  of  Queen's,  Dr.  Jacobson, 
Professor  Mountague  Bernard,  and  Mr.  Dasent,  the  editor  of 
the  Times,  were  at  the  time  distressing  as  tokens  of  personal 
animosity  and  malice.  To  a  man  of  so  loving  and  truthful 
a  character,  these  attacks  were  peculiarly  painful.  His  friend 
Regnier  expressed  the  unanimous  feeling  of  continental 
scholars  in  a  letter  in  which  he  says,  '  I  kept  on  declaring, 
in  spite  of  what  any  one  could  say,  that  your  defeat  was 
impossible.' 

To  his  mother  he  wrote,  December  i6  : — 

'  The  last  days  have  been  full  of  disturbance.  You  will  have  seen 
by  the  papers  that  I  did  not  get  the  Sanskrit  Professorship.  The 
opposite  party  made  it  a  political  and  religious  question,  and  nothing 
could  be  done  against  them.  All  the  best  people  voted  for  me,  the 
Professors  almost  unanimously,  but  the  vulgus  pro/antim  made  the 
majority.  I  was  sorry,  for  I  would  gladly  have  devoted  all  my  time 
to  Sanskrit,  and  the  income  was  higher ;  but  we  shall  manage.' 

Of  this  election  Mr.  Tuckwell  writes  : — 

'  I  remember  the  contest  for  the  Sanskrit  Professorship,  wherein 
I  voted  and,  as  far  as  I  could,  worked  for  him  (Max  Muller) :  an  inferior 
candidate  being  preferred  before  him,  first  because  Max  was  a  German 
and  therefore  a  "  Germaniser  "  ;  secondly,  because  a  friend  of  Bunsen 
must  of  necessity  be  heretical ;  thirdly,  because  it  was  unpatriotic  to 
confer  an  English  Chair  on  any  but  an  Englishman.' 

Canon  Farrar  thus  describes  this  event : — 

'  Muller  himself  was  made  to  feel  the  prejudice  in  Oxford  against 
any  novelty  in  i860,  when  he  was  passed  over  for  election  to  the 
Sanskrit  Professorship.     It  is  fair  indeed  to  allow  that  it  was  not 


i86o]     Birth  of  First  Child — Wife^s  Illness      245 

strictly  political  or  religious  opposition  that  was  made  to  him;  but 
the  Englishman's  dislike  to  an  adopted  son,  and  the  feeling  that  it  was 
not  necessary  to  go  afield  to  choose  the  absolutely  best  man,  provided 
the  candidate  was  respectable.  I  was  of  course  on  Mtiller's  committee ; 
but  I  soon  found  that  there  was  no  solid  ground  for  hoping  for 
his  success ;  and  hardly  expected  that  he  would  poll  so  many  votes 
as  he  did.  But  in  truth  Miiller's  claims  were  incomparable,  as 
having  really  performed  for  early  Sanskrit  literature  that  which  the 
Alexandrian  scholars  of  the  second  century  b.  c.  had  performed  for 
Homer,  editing  the  text  and  reconstructing  the  antique  grammar. 
Miiller  himself  (this  shows  his  goodness  of  heart)  could  not  imagine 
why  any  other  motive  could  outbalance  the  sole  question  as  to  who 
was  the  best  candidate.  He  did  not  realize  the  stubborn  fixedness 
of  English  and  Oxford  preference  for  an  old  Oxford  man.  Miiller 
felt  his  disappointment.  He  was  especially  grieved  with  some  of  his 
opponent's  committee;  for  he  was  a  man  of  spirit  and  sensibility. 
He  could  feel  the  virtue  of  resentment,  but  was  too  noble  to  display 
the  vice  of  revenge.' 

But  all  other  feelings  were  swallowed  up  by  the  terrible 

anxiety   that   fell    upon    Max    Miiller   very  soon    after    the 

election.     On  December  30  his  first  child,  a  girl,  was  born, 

and  for  two  days  his  wife  lay  between  life  and  death,  and  the 

doctors  gave  up  all  hope  of  saving  her.     The  horror  of  that 

time  he  never  forgot,  and  six  months  afterwards,  writing  to 

his  friend  Palgrave,  who  had  lost  his  father,  speaks  thus  of  his 

experience : — 

Oxford,  July  8,  1861. 

'  My  dear  old  Palgrave, — I  should  have  tried  to  see  you  again 
to-day,  but  I  know  from  experience  that  in  the  presence  of  great 
grief  I  have  nothing  to  say,  and  for  a  loss  like  yours  there  is  no 
comfort  till  we  can  say  by  ourselves,  "  Thy  will  be  done."  I  remember 
but  one  time  in  my  whole  life  when  1  could  not  say  that,  and  my 
trials  have  been  hard  at  times,  harder  than  I  thought  I  could  have 
borne.  But  when  my  wife,  whom  I  had  loved  for  six  years  without 
the  faintest  hope  of  ever  calling  her  my  wife,  when  she,  after  one  year 
of  a  blessed  life,  was  for  two  days  given  up  as  hopeless  by  the  doctors, 
then  I  broke  down,  and  I  could  not  say,  "  Thy  will  be  done."  And 
yet  what  is  the  tenure  of  all  our  happiness  ?  Are  we  not  altogether 
at  the  mercy  of  God  ?  Would  it  not  be  fearful  to  live  for  one  day 
unless  we  knew,  and  saw,  and  felt  His  presence  and  wisdom  and  love 
encompassing  us  on  all  sides  ?  If  we  once  feel  that,  then  even 
death,  even  the  death  of  those  we  love  best  and  who  love  us  best, 


246  Essays  and  Reviews  [ch.  xn 

loses  much  of  its  terror :  it  is  part  and  parcel  of  one  great  system  of 
which  we  see  but  a  small  portion  here,  and  which  without  death, 
without  that  bridge  of  which  we  see  here  but  the  first  arch,  would 
seem  to  me  a  mere  mockery.  That  is  why  I  said  to  you  it  is  well 
that  human  art  cannot  prolong  our  life  for  ever,  and  in  that  senti- 
ment I  should  think  we  both  agree.  I  have  felt  much  for  you,  more 
than  I  cared  to  say.  We  are  trained  differently,  but  we  are  all  trained 
for  some  good  purpose,  .  .  .  and  the  suffering  which  you  have  under- 
gone is  to  me,  like  deep  ploughing,  the  promise  of  a  rich  harvest.' 

As  soon  as  his  wife  was  sufficiently  recovered,  Max  Muller 
took  her  and  his  child  to  Ray  Lodge,  where  they  remained 
until  June,  he  going  once  a  week  to  Oxford  for  his  lectures 
there.  He  joined  the  Maidenhead  Company  of  the  Berkshire 
Volunteers,  to  which  his  father  and  brothers-in-law  already 
belonged,  drilled  and  marched  out  regularly,  and  was  soon 
an  excellent  marksman ;  though  his  drill-sergeant  used  to 
complain  of  his  drill,  and  declare  over  and  over  again  that 
*  those  gentlemen  who  think  were  a  difficulty,'  as  they  did 
not  readily  become  the  mere  machines  which  even  now  is 
still  considered  the  perfection  of  a  private  soldier.  Later  in 
the  summer,  and  in  subsequent  years,  he  camped  out  with  his 
company.  This  he  particularly  enjoyed,  and  often  in  after 
years  laughed  over  their  experiences  on  the  Downs  and  else- 
where with  his  kind  friend  Lord  Wantage,  who  was  Colonel 
of  the  Berkshire  Volunteers. 

The  agitation  about  Essays  a7td  Reviews^  which  had  been 
going  on  ever  since  the  publication  of  the  book,  reached  its 
high-water  mark  in  this  spring,  when  Canon  (afterwards 
Dean)  Stanley's  famous  article  on  that  work  appeared  in 
the  April  number  of  The  Edmburgh  Review.  Max  M tiller, 
knowing  many  of  the  contributors  to  Essays  and  Reviews^ 
had  taken  a  keen  interest  in  the  whole  affair,  and  discussed  it 
in  many  a  walk  with  Canon  Stanley ;  but  the  following  is 
the  only  letter  found  on  the  subject : — 

To  Canon  Stanley. 

Ray  Lodge,  April  17, 
'  I  have  not  divulged  the  authorship,  but  I  have  just  finished  the 
article,  and  there  is  but  07ie  man  in  England  that  would  have  written 
it.     I  think  that,  next  to  Garibaldi,  you  are  the  bravest  man  in  Europe, 


i86i]  Lectures  on  Language  247 

and  the  liberty  you  are  fighting  for  is  worth  more  than  the  freedom  of 
Italy.  I  am  proud  to  be  mentioned  by  you  in  your  article  and  in 
your  preface.  As  to  myself,  I  try  all  I  can  to  forget  December  7,  and 
I  begin  to  feel  that  I  shall  do  more,  as  I  am  now,  than  if  I  were 
in  the  easy-chair  of  Sanskrit.  But  I  am  afraid  I  shall  never  feel  at 
home  in  Oxford  again,  though  it  was  the  place  I  loved  most  in 
all  the  world.  I  feel  very  nervous  about  my  lectures  in  London ; 
I  am  afraid  they  won't  be  interesting  to  many  people.  I  shall  publish 
them  as  soon  as  they  are  delivered.' 

In  April  began  the  lectures  at  the  Royal  Institution. 
There  are  doubtless  some  still  who  remember  the  enthusiastic 
interest  they  excited,  the  lecture-room  being  more  and  more 
crowded  as  the  course  went  on,  whilst  Albemarle  Street 
was  filled  with  the  carriages  of  those  who  attended  them. 
Max  Miiller  was  very  nervous  beforehand,  but  by  the  end 
of  his  first  lecture  he  felt  that  he  carried  his  audience  with 
him,  and  the  interested  faces  of  Bishop  Thirlwall,  the  late 
Duke  of  Argyll,  Dean  (then  Canon)  Stanley,  F.  D.  Maurice, 
Dean  Milman,  Faraday,  and  John  Stuart  Mill,  not  to  mention 
many  others,  were  an  incentive  to  him  to  give  of  his  very  best. 

An  intimate  friend  who  was  present  at  the  lectures  reported  : 
'Max  Miiller  was  quite  self-possessed,  his  wife  proudly 
humble.'  A  lady  who  attended  these  lectures  thus  recorded 
her  recollections  years  afterwards  :  '  I  remember  him  then  as 
a  slight,  intellectual,  and  interesting-looking  young  man,  with 
a  very  clear  enunciation,  and  a  perfect  command  of  language, 
and  it  was  amusing  to  meet  him  again  a  few  years  ago  as 
a  square-shouldered,  elderly  grandfather.' 

'These  lectures,' says  Professor  Macdonell  in  J/aw,  February,  1901, 
'afterwards  published  in  an  extended  form,  passed  through  a  large 
number  of  editions,  and  soon  raised  their  author  to  the  rank  of  the 
standard  authority  on  philology  in  the  estimation  of  the  English 
public.  Though  much  of  what  is  contained  in  these  lectures  is  now 
out  of  date,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  they  not  only  for  the  first 
time  aroused  general  interest  in  the  subject  of  comparative  philology 
in  England,  but  in  their  day  also  exercised  a  valuable  stimulating 
influence  on  the  work  of  scholars  in  the  sixties  and  seventies.  Here 
Max  Miiller  first  displayed  that  power  of  lucid  popular  exposition, 
and  of  investing  a  dry  subject  with  abundant  interest,  which  has  more 
than  anything  else  contributed  to  make  his  name  at  least  as  famous 
as  that  of  any  other  scholar  of  the  past  century.' 


248  Success  of  Lectures  [ch.  xn 

In  a  most  interesting  lecture  given  on  December  2,  1900, 
before  the  University  of  Allahabad,  by  Pundit  Satish  Chandra 
Banerjee,  these  lectures  are  thus  described  : — 

'Nearly  four  decades  have  now  rolled  away  since  Max  Miiller 
delivered  at  the  Royal  Institution  in  London  his  "  Lectures  on  the 
Science  of  Language,"  and  so  much  has  been  done  since,  and  mainly 
by  the  learned  lecturer  himself,  to  educate  the  popular  consciousness, 
that  it  is  difficult  for  us  to  realize  to-day  the  value  and  importance 
of  these  lectures.  As  I  turn  over  the  pages  of  these  volumes,  I  come 
across  much  that  I  feel  disposed  to  characterize  as  the  A  B  C  of 
the  science,  much  that  seems  scarcely  to  require  the  abundance  of 
explanation  and  illustration  with  which  Max  IMiiller  has  thought  fit 
to  enforce  and  support  it.  But  we  have  to  remember  that  when 
these  lectures  were  first  delivered,  much  of  this  was  new,  novel,  and 
startling ;  it  was  in  fact  a  new  light  which  was  breaking  forth  upon 
the  dark  and  then  uninviting  fields  of  Comparative  Grammar  and 
Philology.' 

*  It  is,'  said  a  contemporary  review,  '  a  fact  of  no  ordinary 
significance  that,  in  the  height  of  the  London  season,  an 
enthusiastic  audience  of  both  sexes  crowded  the  benches  and 
endured  the  heat  of  a  popular  lecture-room,  not  to  witness 
the  brilliant  experiments,  or  be  fascinated  by  the  revelations 
of  a  Faraday  or  an  Owen,  but  to  listen  to  a  philosophical 
exposition  of  the  inner  mysteries  of  language.' 

Max  Miiller  has  told  in  Atild  Lang  Syne  of  several 
amusing  incidents  connected  with  the  delivery  of  his  lectures, 
particularly  of  the  slight  estimation  in  which  he  was  held  by 
Anderson,  Faraday's  demonstrator,  who  was  so  well  known 
to  frequenters  of  the  Royal  Institution  forty  years  ago,  who 
could  not  understand  a  man  wanting  no  gas  or  experiments, 
not  even  a  blackboard  at  first.  As  soon  as  the  lectures  were 
over,  the  Max  Mullers  returned  to  Oxford.  The  printing  of 
the  lectures  began  at  once,  and  the  book  was  out  by  July  9. 
It  passed  through  fourteen  editions,  and  was  rapidly  trans- 
lated into  French,  German,  Italian,  Russian,  Swedish,  and 
Dutch,  and  became  a  most  popular  book  in  America.  It 
was  chosen  by  Cardinal  Newman  as  a  favourite  prize-book 
for  boys. 

On  July  I  Max  Miiller  had  the  delight  of  welcoming  his 
mother  to  his  home,  and  showing  her  his  child.    She  remained 


i86i]  Visit  of  Mother  249 

until  the  middle  of  October,  thoroughly  enjoying  her  son's 
pretty  house,  and  going  with  her  children  to  stay  at  Ray  Lodge, 
and  Rugby,  where  one  of  the  masters,  Mr.  Charles  Arnold, 
with  his  German  wife,  were  old  friends  of  hers  from  1856. 

The  summer  passed  quietly  and  happily  away.  Max  Miiller 
preparing  the  second  edition  of  his  Lectures  on  Language^ 
and  working  at  the  fourth  volume  of  the  Rig-veda,  which  had 
been  delayed  for  a  time — first,  by  the  change  of  power  from 
the  East  India  Company  to  the  Crown,  and  the  doubt 
whether  Her  Majesty's  Government  would  continue  the 
publication  of  the  work,  and  secondly,  by  the  loss  of  so 
many  months  in  i860  through  the  Sanskrit  election. 

The  following  letter  is  given  as  among  the  first  of  the  long 
correspondence  with  Messrs.  Longmans,  Max  Miiller's  valued 
publishers,  the  last  letter  of  which,  in  his  own  handwriting,  is 
dated  August  25,  1901 : — 

To  William  Longman,  Esq. 

Oxford,  October  21,  1861. 
'  I  am  much  pleased  to  hear  of  the  very  rapid  sale  of  my  Lectures. 
I  hardly  expected  a  second  edition,  certainly  not  so  soon.  Some  of 
the  best  reviews  I  believe  are  still  to  come,  in  the  Times,  Eraser, 
Edinburgh  Review,  Journal  des  Savants,  &c.  You  must  know  best 
whether  it  is  prudent  to  make  as  large  an  edition  as  the  first.  ...  I 
fully  appreciate  the  advantage  of  publishing  my  books  with  a  firm 
such  as  yours,  and  I  ascribe  not  a  little  of  the  success  of  my  Lectures, 
as  compared  with  the  success  of  my  earlier  publications,  to  the 
popularity  of  your  house,  and  your  experience  and  judicious  arrange- 
ment. So  I  hope  we  shall  have  no  difficulty  in  coming  to  an  equitable 
arrangement  with  regard  to  this,  or  any  other  books  which  I  still 
have  in  petto,  and  hope  to  finish  if  all  goes  well.' 

To  Professor  Bernays. 

Translation.  64,  High  Street,  November  1. 

'  Some  time  ago  I  sent  you  a  sign  of  life,  i.  e.  my  Lectures,  and  I 
should  much  like  to  hear  by  letter  how  you  are  and  what  are  your 
plans  for  your  life.  I  am  well,  and  I  should  much  wish  for  you  the 
same  sunshine  which  Heaven  has  bestowed  upon  me,  though  a  few 
dark  clouds  and  storms  belong  to  it  also. 

'  How  delightful  if  we  could  have  you  here !  Germany  is  beautiful, 
but  England  is  free,  and  I  know  how  peculiarly  such  an  atmosphere 


250  Trials  and  Successes  [ch.  xn 

would  agree  with  you.  I  have  had  lately  a  visit  from  George  Bunsen 
— a  brave  fellow — but  his  father  I  miss  more  and  more,  and  I  am  sure 
you  do  too.  I  have  only  just  read  the  essay  on  Bunsen  by  Abeken, 
but  something  much  more  complete  is  to  be  desired.  I  have  just 
begun  to  print  a  second  edition  of  my  Lectures  on  the  Science  of 
Language,  and  a  very  large  one  indeed.  Can  you  send  me,  when  you 
have  read  it,  some  corrections  and  additions  ?  But  it  would  have  to 
be  by  return  of  post,  as  I  have  begun  the  printing  already.  I  should 
like  to  talk  to  you  about  some  points  in  it,  but  letter-paper  is  not 
sufficient  for  spiritual  intercourse. 

'  Nothing  new  from  here.  Jowett  has  not  been  burnt,  and  the 
spark  has  not  caught  fire  yet.  But  when  it  begins  to  burn,  it  will  burn 
thoroughly.  Pattison  has  married  a  young  wife,  and  is  now  Rector  of 
Lincoln  College.  Is  there  anything  new  to  read  in  Germany  ?  I  have 
only  just  read  Strauss's  Ulrich  von  Hutten  with  great  interest.' 

To  M.  Renan. 

Oxford,  November  17. 
'  I  heard  the  other  day  of  your  return  from  the  East,  and  should 
have  written  to  you  at  once  to  congratulate  you  and  your  friends  on 
your  safe  arrival,  if  M.  Durand,  who  mentioned  your  being  at  Paris, 
had  not  told  me  at  the  same  time  that  you  were  in  deep  affliction  \ 
and,  as  far  as  I  could  understand  him,  suffering  also  yourself  from 
illness.  Those  afflictions  aje  too  sacred  to  allow  any  one  to  intrude  on 
the  sufferer,  with  the  expression  of  even  the  most  sincere  sympathy. 
They  bring  us  face  to  face  with  our  Father  in  Heaven,  and  when  we 
speak  and  struggle  with  Him  we  want  to  be  alone,  quite  alone.  I 
speak  from  what  I  felt  myself  about  a  year  ago,  when  my  wife  was 
given  up  by  all  physicians,  and  at  last  restored  to  me  miraculously, 
I  mean  through  the  mercy  of  God.  I  have  gone  through  much 
trouble  since  I  last  wrote  to  you,  but  yet  I  feel  more  like  myself  again, 
and  begin  to  see  that  all  was  as  it  ought  to  be.  We  both  lost  a  true 
friend  in  Bunsen.  ...  I  had  another  severe  trial  in  failing  to  obtain 
the  Chair  of  Sanskrit  at  Oxford :  calumnious  falsehood  and  vulgar 
electioneering  tactics  caused  the  result,  and  deprived  me  of  the  one 
sphere  where  I  might  have  worked  with  all  my  heart  and  souL  How- 
ever, I  have  got  over  that ;  I  dare  say  it  would  have  made  my  life  too 
perfect,  and  disappointments  are  good  discipline.  Lastly,  I  want  to 
send  you  a  book,  my  Lectures  on  the  Science  of  Language :  I  gave 
them  in  London,  and  they  were  well  attended.  I  have  now  printed 
them,  and  am  preparing  a  second  and  very  large  edition.     I  need  not 

'  The  sister  who  had  educated  Renan  died  at  Beyrout  of  fever. 


i86i]  Letter  from  Dean  Liddell  251 

say  I  am  anxious  to  have  your  opinion  more  than  that  of  any  one  else. 
Whether  for  good  or  evil,  the  book  has  struck  root  in  England,  and 
there  is  to  be  a  German  translation  in  a  very  short  time.  I  believe  it 
contains  some  things  that  are  new,  some  that  are  true,  and  some  that 
will  have  to  be  given  up  as  we  advance  towards  the  truer  knowledge 
of  the  mysteries  of  human  speech.' 

Kind  permission  has  been  given  to  insert  this  letter : — 

From  Dean  Liddell. 

Christ  Church,  Oxford, 

November  i6,  1861. 

'  My  dear  Muller, — Few  things,  of  late,  have  given  me  so  much 
satisfaction  as  reading  your  Lectures,  though  perhaps  I  should  have 
had  yet  more  satisfaction  if  the  book  had  been  addressed  to  readers 
and  not  hearers.  Will  you  bear  with  me  if  I  jot  down  one  or  two 
points  which  I  think  require  more  precision  or  fullness  of  statement, 
in  a  new  edition,  which  I  hope  will  be  (as  I  am  sure  it  ought  to  be) 
wanted  soon.  It  is  humiliating  to  hear  that  these  lectures  have  been 
delivered  to  the  heedless  ears  of  Oxford  hearers. 

*  (i)  In  the  last  chapter,  you  use  "  as  an  illustration  only,  not  as  an 
explanation,"  the  fact  that  metals,  &c.,  ring  a  sound,  each  with  its 
proper  sound. 

'  How  far  do  you  mean  the  analogy  with  human  speech  to  go .?  Do 
you  mean  that  each  attribute  denoted  by  a  Root — as  ma,  ku,  &c. — is 
expressed  by  that  Root  as  peculiarly  and  properly  as  gold  or  silver  by 
their  respective  ring?  or  do  you  mean,  generally,  that  man  as  naturally 
expresses  each  general  idea  by  some  sound,  as  gold  is  betrayed  by  its 
peculiar  ring,  &c.  ?  Has  each  general  idea  its  own  sound,  or  only  a 
sound  ?  I  am  unable  to  collect  from  your  statements  which  you 
intend.  For,  while  your  argument  seems  to  imply  that  each  idea  has 
its  own  proper  sound,  I  cannot  but  doubt  that  you  really  mean  to 
carry  the  analogy  so  far.  If  you  do,  I  think  a  good  deal  more  is 
required  to  prove  the  statement.  If  you  do  not,  a  few  words  are 
needed  to  guard  against  such  a  conclusion. 

'  (2)  Is  not  the  term  "  Theoretical  Stage"  of  science  somewhat  in- 
accurate ?  Theoretical  questions  arise  in  the  infancy  of  all  sciences, 
and  doubtless  they  cannot  be  answered  till  the  process  of  classification 
is  far  advanced  or  even  completed.  If  this  is  what  you  mean,  I  think 
your  general  and  absolute  statements  respecting  the  three  stages 
require  modification.  I  am  aware  that  (p.  20)  you  admit  that  "  there 
have  been  instances  "  in  which  theoretical  questions  have  arisen  even 
in  the  first  stage.     I  have  my  doubts  whether  this  is  not  the  rule, 


252  American  Languages  [ch.  xn 

rather  than  the  exception.     Look  for  instance  at  the  ancient  Physics. 
Look  at  Smith's  and  Stewart's  Theories  of  Language,  &c. 

'(3)  I  note  a  few  special  points  that  have  caught  my  eye — (p.  21): 
"I  expect  we  shall  have  to  do  something  else."  This,  I  think,  is 
hardly  a  classical  use  of  the  term  "  expect!'  It  would  be  impertinent 
in  me  to  express  admiration  of  the  almost  uniform  precision  of  your 
English.  .  .  .     [Various  other  small  corrections  follow.] 

'  Yours  very  truly,  '  Henry  G.  Liddell.' 

Max  MUller's  mother  left  him  when  the  autumn  weather 
set  in,  and  he  writes  to  her : — 

Translation.  64,  High  Street,  Novemler  20. 

*  I  have  not  been  well  enough  to  write  much  lately,  but  have  read 
a  good  deal,  among  other  books  Varnhagen's  new  work.  It  is 
wonderfully  interesting,  and  shows  signs  of  a  ver}'  noble  nature, 
though  weak  and  cross-grained.  He  misunderstands  many  people, 
and  therefore  dislikes  them — as  specially  Bunsen.  His  expressions 
with  regard  to  him  are  really  infamous,  but  I  don't  care  for  that: 
words  do  not  make  truth,  and  what  he  says  is  not  true.  One  must 
not  mind  such  false  judgement  of  really  noble  impulses.  As  a  picture 
of  political  and  mental  efforts,  of  the  stupidity,  even  madness,  of  the 
Government,  the  book  is  invaluable.  How  furious  the  people  in 
Berlin  will  be  !  That  the  publication  has  been  allowed  at  all  shows  the 
advance  made  since  1848.' 

Early  in  December,  Max  Miiller  received  a  letter  from 
a  gentleman  in  California,  who  had  read  his  Lectures,  urging 
him  to  study  '  the  philological  connexion  of  the  Indian 
languages  of  Mexico  and  the  Alta  California,  and  thus 
possibly  find  a  key  to  trace  its  ante-Columbian  history.' 
Though  Max  always  felt  a  keen  interest  in  the  North 
American  Indian  languages,  and  when  the  Mohawk  under- 
graduate Oronhyatakha  was  in  Oxford,  prepared  a  skeleton 
Mohawk  grammar  from  what  he  learnt  from  him,  the  subject 
was  too  remote  from  his  own  special  line  of  study,  and 
required  far  too  much  time  for  him  to  take  it  up,  though 
he  was  constantly  urging  the  duty  of  doing  so  on  American 
students,  and  was  always  very  much  interested  in  the  publica- 
tions of  the  Smithsonian  Institute  of  Washington. 

To  HIS  Wife. 

Oxford,  November,  1861. 
'  It  is  so  difficult  not  to  grow  very  fond  of  this  life  and  all  its 
happiness,  but  the   more  we  love   it    the    more    we   suffer,  for  we 


i86i]  Death  of  Baron  <£ Eckstein  253 

know  we  must  lose  it,  and  it  must  all  pass  away.  Does  love  pass 
away  too?  I  cannot  believe  it.  God  made  us  as  we  are,  many, 
instead  of  one  ;  Christ  died  for  all  of  us  individually,  and  such  as  we 
are — beings  incomplete  in  themselves,  and  perfect  only  through  love 
to  God  on  one  side,  and  through  love  to  man  on  the  other.  We  want 
both  kinds  of  love  for  our  very  existence,  and  therefore  in  a  higher 
and  better  existence  too  the  love  of  kindred  souls  may  well  exist 
together  with  our  love  of  God.  We  need  not  love  those  we  love 
most  on  earth  less  in  heaven,  though  we  may  love  all  better  than 
we  do  on  earth.  After  all,  love  seems  only  the  taking  away  those 
unnatural  barriers  which  divide  us  from  our  fellow  creatures — it  is 
only  the  restoration  of  that  union  which  binds  us  altogether  in  God, 
and  which  has  been  broken  on  earth  we  know  not  how.  In  Christ 
alone  that  imion  was  preserved,  for  He  loved  us  all  with  a  love 
warmer  than  the  love  of  a  husband  for  his  wife,  or  a  mother  for  her 
child.  He  gave  His  life  for  us,  and  if  we  ask  ourselves  there  is 
hardly  a  husband  or  a  mother  who  would  really  suffer  death  for  his 
wife  or  her  child.  Thus  we  see  that  even  what  seems  to  us  the  most 
perfect  love  is  very  far  as  yet  from  the  perfection  of  love  which 
drives  out  the  whole  self  and  all  that  is  selfish,  and  we  must  try  to 
love  more,  not  to  love  less,  and  trust  that  what  is  imperfect  here 
is  not  meant  to  be  destroyed,  but  to  be  made  perfect  hereafter.  With 
God  nothing  is  imperfect ;  without  Him  everything  is  imperfect.  We 
must  live  and  love  in  God,  and  then  we  need  not  fear  :  though  our  life 
seem  chequered  and  fleeting,  we  know  that  there  is  a  home  for  us 
in  God,  and  rest  for  all  our  troubles  in  Christ.' 

To  M.  Renan. 

Oxford,  November  30,  1861. 
'  I  was  touched  when  I  saw  to-day  in  the  Journal  des  Debats  your 
thoughtful  and  sorrowful  lines  on  the  death  of  our  old  friend  d'Eckstein. 
I  had  long  been  without  news  from  him,  and  now  that  he  is  gone 
I  regret  and  I  reproach  myself  for  not  having  written  to  him  more 
frequently.  His  death  reminds  me  of  the  happy  time  in  1846  when 
I  was  at  Paris  attending  Burnoufs  lectures,  and  when  d'Eckstein  helped 
me  and  encouraged  me,  and  when  I  was  fighting  my  way  through 
difficulties  which  now  would  seem  to  me  almost  insurmountable. 
And  yet  I  was  never  so  happy  as  in  those  days,  when  sometimes 
I  had  to  go  without  a  dinner  because  I  could  not  pay  for  it,  and 
when  I  used  to  copy  for  d'Eckstein,  who  paid  me  for  my  work  in  his 
own  generous  way.  Yes,  we  have  lost  many  men  whom  we  can 
hardly  afford  to  spare ;  we  still  suffer  from  Burnoufs  death,  we  shall 
long  miss  the  presence  of  our  friend  Bunsen,  but  when  I  think  of 


254  Death  of  Prince  Consort  [ch.  xn 

what  we  have  lost  I  feel  it  all  the  more  a  duty  to  live,  to  work  in 
their  spirit,  and  thus  to  keep  alive,  as  it  were,  some  small  portion  of 
their  spirit.  I  am  sure  you  will  feel  the  same,  for  you  have  a  great 
work  before  you ;  you  are  wanted  and  you  will  not  fail.  I  should  like 
to  hear  from  you  that  you  are  well,  in  body  and  mind,  and  that 
you  do  not  lose  your  faith  in  the  work  which  you  have  begun,  and  in 
the  work  which  is  still  before  you.  The  revival  of  learning  in  the 
fifteenth  century  was  the  dawn  of  Reformation,  and  I  believe  a  similar 
era  is  approaching  to  fulfil  what  the  Reformers  intended,  but  which 
was  frustrated  by  political  events.  You  have  an  element  in  France 
which,  if  properly  advised  and  directed,  might  become  a  most  powerful 
engine  for  good,  as  it  may  be,  if  left  in  bad  hands,  for  evil.  Germany 
must  follow  the  example  of  Italy,  and  must  look  not  only  for  political 
union,  but  for  religious  union  on  high  and  neutral  ground.  In 
England  too  there  is  a  yearning  after  real  Christianity,  though  the 
struggle  will  be  a  hard  one.  It  is  a  time  worth  living  for,  and  I  feel 
convinced  that  you  will  be  wanted  even  for  a  greater  work  than  that 
of  finishing  your  Histoire  des  Langues  Semitiques^ 

Max  Mliller  and  his  wife  were  at  Brighton  at  the  time  of 
the  Prince  Consort's  death.  Though  he  had  seen  but  little 
of  the  Prince,  Max  had  the  truest  admiration  for  his  character, 
and  seems  to  have  felt  strongly  how  much  the  country  which 
misunderstood  and  misrepresented  the  noble  Prince  to  the 
last,  really  owed  him.  He  had  sent  his  Lectures  to  the  Prince 
as  soon  as  published,  and  they  had  been  most  kindly  acknow- 
ledged. They  were  by  the  bedside  of  the  Prince  at  the 
beginning  of  his  illness,  as  if  lately  read.  Gracious  permission 
has  been  given  to  insert  the  following  letter,  written  nearly 
twenty  years  later,  when  the  Queen  sent  Max  Miiller  the  last 
volume  of  the  Prince  Consort's  Life.  The  five  volumes,  each 
with  Max  Miiller 's  name  written  and  signed  inside  by  the 
gracious  Sovereign  whose  subject  he  was  proud  to  be,  will 
remain   a   precious   heirloom  to  his  children  and  children's 

children. 

'Oxford,  den  13*^°  Mai  1880. 

'EuRER  Majestat  lege  ich  meinen  tiefgefiihlten  Dank  unter- 
thanigst  zu  Fiissen  fiir  den  letzten  Band  des  Life  of  the  Prince 
Consort  von  Sir  Th.  Martin. 

'  Der  Verfasser  hat  von  neuem  seine  sichere  Kunst,  seinen  richtigen 
Takt,  sein  tiefes  Verstandniss  und  seine  ehrfurchtsvolle  Auffassung 
der  ihm  gewordenen  Aufgabe  herrlich  bewahrt,  und   das  Geschick, 


■h' 


i86i]  Letter  to  the  Queen  255 

mit  dem  er  die  ihm  anvertrauten  "  goldenen  Faden  "  in  sein  eigenes 
Gewebe  hineingewebt,  so  dass  Jeder,  der  Augen  hat,  sie  sieht  und 
fiihlt,  und  sie  doch  nle  die  Harmonic  des  Ganzen  storen,  beweist  die 
geiibte  Hand  des  wahren  Meisters. 

'  Mit  ernsten  Gefiihlen  schliesst  man  das  Buch  und  trennt  sich  von 
ihm  wie  man  sich  schweren  Herzens  von  einem  lieben  Grabe  trennt, 
Wie  anders  hatte  die  Welt  sein  konnen,  wie  viel  Gutes  ware  moglich, 
wie  manches  Unrecht  unmoglich,  wenn  zwei  Augen  sich  nicht  so  friih 
geschlossen !  Auf  das  Warum,  das  immer  und  immer  wiederkehrt, 
kann  die  menschliche  Vernunft  keine  Antwort  geben.  Nur  ein  fester 
Glaube  an  eine  Weisheit  und  eine  Liebe,  die  Alles  ubersteigt,  was  wir 
Weisheit  und  Liebe  nennen,  bringt,  wenn  auch  nicht  Trost,  doch 
Ruhe  und  Frieden  auf  den  einsamen  Lebensweg.  Was  wirklich  unser 
war,  das  kann  keine  Macht  uns  rauben,  und  nichts  auf  Erden  bleibt 
uns  so  sicher  als  der  Besitz  vergangenen  Gliicks. 

'  Mit  wahrer  Verehrung  habe  ich  die  Ehre  zu  verbleiben 
'  Eurer  Majestat  dankbarer  und  unterthanigster  Diener, 

'  F.  Max  Muller.' 

Translation.  'OXFORD,  May  13,  1880.  YoUR  MAJESTY,— I  beg 
most  humbly  to  offer  the  expression  of  my  deeply-felt  gratitude  for  the 
last  volume  of  the  Life  of  the  Prince  Consort,  by  Sir  Theodore  Martin. 
The  editor  has  again  nobly  proved  his  sure  skill,  his  true  tact,  his  deep 
sagacity,  and  his  respectful  comprehension  of  the  task  committed  to  him. 
The  dexterity  with  which,  without  disturbing  the  harmony  of  the  whole, 
he  has  spun  the  "golden  thread"  entrusted  to  him  into  his  own  material, 
so  that  every  one  who  has  eyes  sees  and  feels  it,  shows  the  practised 
hand  of  the  true  master.  One  closes  the  book  with  solemn  feelings,  and 
leaves  it  with  a  heavy  heart  as  one  leaves  a  loved  grave.  How  different 
the  world  might  have  been,  how  much  good  had  been  possible,  if  two 
eyes  had  not  been  closed  too  soon  !  Human  reason  can  give  no  answer 
to  the  wherefore  that  returns  over  and  over  again.  Only  firm  faith  in 
a  wisdom  and  a  love  that  is  far  above  all  we  call  wisdom  and  love,  brings 
— if  not  comfort— yet  rest  and  peace  on  the  lonely  path  of  life.  What 
was  really  ours,  no  power  can  take  from  us,  and  nothing  on  earth  remains 
so  surely  ours  as  the  possession  of  bygone  happiness. — With  deep  respect, 
I  have  the  honour  to  be  your  Majesty's  grateful  and  most  obedient 
servant,  F.  Max  Muller.' 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  December  15. 

'  What  will  you  say  to  the  death  of  Prince  Albert  ?  He  died  last 
night  at  eleven  of  gastric  fever.  This  will  involve  great  changes. 
The  Queen  can  hardly  bear  the  whole  burden  alone,  so  there  may  be 
a  Regency,  probably  with  the  Prince  of  Wales,  at  first  for  three 
months  only.  It  is  a  fearful  loss  for  the  Queen,  who  has  no  one  who 
can  so  help  her :  and  the  whole  country  will  long  feel  his  loss.     So 


256       Religious  and  Philosophic  Struggles  [ch.xh 

everything  teaches  us  that  our  home  is  not  here,  but  beyond,  and  that 
here  there  is  no  lasting  happiness.  How  many  have  gone  before  us 
these  last  years  !  Would  that  we  were  convinced  that  we  must  soon 
follow,  and  that  everything  here  is  but  a  preparation  for  what  is 
better ! ' 

To  M.  Renan. 

Brighton,  December  16. 
*  My  dear  Friend, — I  have  read  your  letter  with  deep  interest 
and  sympathy.  Such  trials  as  you  have  had  to  pass  through  are  not 
sent  without  a  purpose,  and  if  you  say  that  they  have  changed  your 
views  of  life,  such  a  change  in  a  character  like  yours  can  only  be 
a  change  in  advance,  a  firmer  faith  in  those  truths  which  have  been 
revealed  to  the  dim  sight  of  human  nature,  a  stronger  will  to  resist 
all  falsehood  and  tampering  with  the  truth,  and  a  deeper  conviction 
that  we  owe  our  life  to  Him  who  has  given  it,  and  that  we  must  fight 
His  battle  when  He  calls  us  to  do  it.  I  am  not  afraid  that  you  could 
ever  desert  the  post  which  you  have  so  nobly  occupied,  and  though 
I  am  rejoiced  to  hear  that  a  sphere  of  honourable  activity  will  be  open 
to  you  as  a  successor  of  Quatrembre,  I  cannot  believe  that  Science 
alone  will  ever  fill  the  whole  of  your  heart.  I  cannot  help  believing 
that  we  are  on  the  eve  of  great  religious  and  philosophic  struggles. 
There  is  a  longing  after  true  and  primitive  Christianity  in  the  best 
spirits  of  England,  France,  and  Germany,  and  there  is  a  general 
desire  after  an  outward  union  and  communion,  which  is  possible  only 
on  the  basis  of  that  faith  which  was  in  Christ  as  the  Son  of  God,  and 
which  is  the  lifespring  of  all  religion,  however  diff"erent  the  wordings 
of  formulas  and  sects.  With  the  restitution  of  the  Papacy  to  its  true 
function,  a  great  step  will  have  been  made.  Germany  at  the  time  of 
the  Reformation  objected  to  an  Italian  Pope  much  more  than  to  the 
head  of  a  Church.  So  did  England,  so  to  a  great  extent  did  France. 
As  soon  as  the  Pope  has  ceased  to  be  Prince  of  Rome,  a  movement 
will  begin  in  which  the  true  purposes  of  the  Reformers  will  be  realized 
and  through  which  negative  Catholicism,  as  you  call  it,  will  become 
positive  Catholicity.  In  that  movement  much  will  turn  on  France, 
and  on  your  Emperor,  and  that  is  why  I  wish  to  see  at  his  side 
honest,  wise,  and  learned  men.  I  am  staying  at  Brighton  with  my  wife, 
who  has  been  very  ill,  but  is  now  much  better.  I  have  just  finished  my 
second  edition  o^  my  Lectures  on  the  Science  of  Language.  I  should 
like  to  know  what  you  think  of  them.  I  know  we  differ,  and  in  my 
second  volume  I  shall  have  to  fight  with  you,  but  I  hope  and  trust  that 
our  literary  differences  will  only  draw  us  more  closely  together.  There 
is  that  charm  about  your  views  and  opinions,  that  they  are  carved  out 
of  marble  and  not  out  of  plaster.     They  stand  out  clearly  and  firmly 


i86i]    Lectures  on  Language,  Second  Edition     257 

and  one  may  grapple  with  them,  but  when  I  read  a  work  of  Stein- 
thal's,  and  even  many  parts  of  Humboldt,  I  feel  as  if  walking  through 
shifting  clouds.  It  may  be  my  fault,  there  may  be  much  depth  of 
wisdom  in  all  that  darkness  and  vagueness,  but  I  cannot  help  thinking 
that  there  is  nothing  that  cannot  be  made  clear,  and  bright,  and 
simple,  and  that  obscurity  arises  in  all  cases  from  slovenly  thinking 
and  lazy  writing.     Adieu.    Yours  with  sincere  regard.' 

To  Professor  Benfey. 

Translation.  Oxford,  December  17. 

'  Though  I  have  put  my  Oxford  address  at  the  head  of  this  letter, 
I  am  sitting  in  reality  in  Brighton,  and  from  my  window  I  look  upon 
the  sea  about  twenty  steps  from  here.  Both  of  us,  I  as  well  as  my 
wife,  needed  sea-air,  and  so  we  hope  to  enjoy  this  refreshing  atmo- 
sphere here  till  Christmas.  Many  thanks  for  your  letter.  I  have  also 
made  use  of  Strabo's  remarks  about  the  population  of  the  Caucasus. 
In  a  few  days  a  second  edition  of  my  Lectures  on  Language  will  be 
ready.  My  chief  aim  has  been  reached :  the  book  has  been  read  and 
has  excited  great  interest  in  the  science  of  language.  It  is  my  con- 
viction that  we  know  nothing  really  which  we  cannot  teach  (I  think 
Aristotle  was  of  the  same  opinion),  and  that  nothing  exists  which 
cannot  be  clearly  and  intelligibly  expressed.  It  requires  time  and 
trouble  indeed,  but  it  is  effective,  and  that  is  the  greatest  reward  of  all 
work  and  study. 

'  The  death  of  Prince  Albert  is  an  incalculable  loss.  It  is  only 
now  people  seem  to  realize  that  something  good  can  come  even  from 
Germany.' 

Christmas  was  spent  at  Ray  Lodge,  quietly,  as  it  was 
throughout  England.  The  thought  of  their  widowed  Queen, 
and  the  sad  Christmas  at  Osborne,  weighed  on  all  hearts, 
and  the  universal  mourning,  not  only  in  the  upper  classes,  but 
among  servants,  tradespeople,  and  even  the  poor,  showed  how 
the  nation  was  sorrowing  with  their  loved  Sovereign. 


CHAPTER   XIII 
1862-1863 

Birth  of  second  child.  Exhibition.  Stay  in  London.  Ewald.  Ranke. 
Fourth  volume  of  Rig-veda.  Second  course  of  lectures  on  Science 
of  Language.  Paris.  Germany.  North  Italy.  Lectures  at  Edin- 
burgh.    First  visit  to  Windsor. 

On  their  return  from  Ray  Lodge  to  Oxford,  Max  Miiller 
settled  down  to  work  at  the  Rig-veda,  determined  that  the 
fourth  volume  should  appear  this  year.  In  fact,  the  whole 
year  was  one  of  strenuous  work,  for  a  second  edition  of  his 
Lectures  on  Language  came  out  before  the  end  of  January, 
and  a  third  in  May,  before  the  book  had  been  out  eleven 
months,  each  edition  being  of  1,250  copies. 

Towards  the  end  of  January  he  went  to  Lord  Ashburton's 
for  a  couple  of  days,  and  from  there  he  writes  to  his  wife  : — 

The  Grange,  Alresford,  January  24,  1862. 
'  I  had  a  miserable  day  for  travelling,  pouring  all  the  time.  How- 
ever, I  found  all  my  trains  quite  right,  and  arrived  at  Winchester  about 
one.  There  I  went  to  Mr.  Moberly,  one  of  the  masters,  and  had 
luncheon.  They  have  a  baby  five  days  older  than  ours,  but  she 
cannot  run  yet.  Then  we  went  to  Dr.  Moberly's,  and  with  him  all 
over  the  school  and  cathedral.  He  explained  it  all  most  excellently, 
but  we  must  go  there  together.  The  cathedral  is  magnificent,  but 
when  I  have  you  with  me,  and  sunshine,  it  will  be  much  more 
magnificent.  ...  At  half-past  three  I  started  for  a  nine  miles'  drive,  and 
arrived  here  in  time  for  tea.  Lady  Ashburton  seems  very  pleasant, 
and  he  is  a  perfect  English  nobleman — I  mean  what  he  ought  to  be. 
I  got  your  letter  this  morning,  and  I  hope  you  got  mine.  Yes,  we  are 
very  happy^  and  I  feel  as  if  this  life  could  give  us  no  greater  happiness 
than  has  been  ours  these  two  bright  years,  and  that  if  we  are  called 
away  sooner  or  later  we  ought  to  part  cheerfully,  knowing  that  this 
earth  could  give  no  more  than  has  been  ours,  and  looking  forward  to 


1862]  Birth  of  Second  Child  259 

our  new  home  as  to  a  more  perfect  state,  where  all  that  was  good  and 
true  and  unselfish  in  us  will  live  and  expand,  and  all  that  was  bad  and 
mean  will  be  purified  and  cast  off.  So  let  us  work  here  as  long  as  it 
is  day,  but  without  fearing  the  night  that  will  lead  us  to  a  new  and 
brighter  dawn  of  life.  I  wish  you  had  been  here  with  me,  for  it  is 
a  delightful  place,  and  very  pleasant  people.  Mrs.  Sartoris  is  the 
Mrs.  S.  Adelaide  Kemble,  and  she  still  sings  most  beautifully.  The 
Bishop  of  London,  too,  appeared  at  dinner,  and  is  staying  here. 
To-night  I  hear  the  Bishop  of  Winchester  is  expected.  The  house  is 
full  of  the  most  exquisite  treasures  of  art,  such  pictures !  Van  Dyck, 
Titian,  Velasquez,  Andrea  del  Sarto,  &c.  This  morning  it  was 
bright,  and  we  had  a  long  ride  ;  we  started  with  about  twelve  horses, 
and  such  beauties  they  all  were,  and  even  your  old  husband  had 
a  splendid  gallop,  but  came  home  quite  drenched  with  rain.  We  were 
caught  by  a  pouring  shower,  and  when  I  came  home  I  had  no  second 
coat,  and  had  to  appear  at  luncheon  in  my  Volunteer  cape — a  splendid 
figure.  Then  I  found  I  had  not  got  my  grey  trousers,  but  had  taken 
an  old  pair.  However,  I  contrived  to  hide  them  in  my  cape,  and 
looked  a  regular  night  watchman.  In  the  afternoon  I  sat  in  my  room 
and  read,  and  now  I  am  looking  forward  to  to-morrow,  when  I  shall 
have  you  and  the  little  one  again.  They  have  a  little  one  here, 
eighteen  months  old,  a  very  nice  girl,  but  no  boy  coming — and  that 
must  be  a  disappointment  with  such  a  place  to  leave.  We  have  had 
a  very  pleasant  time,  and  if  they  ask  us  both  I  shall  be  very  glad  to 
come  again.' 

On  February  31  his  second  child,  another  little  girl,  was 

born,  and  he  writes  to  give  his  mother  the  good  news,  adding, 

'A  little  boy  would  have  been  nicer,  but  I  am  quite  as  pleased 

with  a  little  daughter,  and  girls  give  less  trouble  and  anxiety 

than  boys.' 

To  Professor  Bernays. 

Translation.  64  High  Street,  February  23. 

'  Sooner  than  I  expected  I  have  received  from  my  publisher  the 
prospect  of  a  third  edition  [of  the  Lectures],  and  I  write  therefore  to 
remind  you  of  your  kind  promise  to  send  me  some  "corrections  and 
additions";  it  would  be  the  more  welcome,  as  a  translation  into  German 
by  Professor  C.  Bottger  in  Dessau  is  to  appear  at  the  same  time,  and 
the  German  reviewers  have  sharper  eyes  than  the  English  ones.  Last 
week  I  lived  in  great  disquietude,  and  the  day  before  yesterday  I 
became  father  for  the  second  lime.  Thank  God,  all  passed  over 
happily,  but  the  anxiety  and  trouble  is  so  great,  I  feel  quite  exhausted 
and  ill,  and  the  doctor  sent  me  to  bed,  but  I  did  not  stay  there  long. 

S  a 


26o  Oronhyatakha  [ch.  xm 

'  I  had  a  visit  to-day  from  a  Mohawk  Indian ;  he  has  learnt  Latin 
and  Greek,  he  has  come  to  Oxford  to  study  here,  but  fancy!  he  has 
brought  his  feather  garb  with  him,  but  according  to  the  statutes  of  the 
University,  I  am  afraid  he  may  not  wear  it.  I  found  the  man  very 
intelligent,  and  the  savages  more  tolerant  than  many  a  civilized  man. 

'  Aufrecht  has  got  the  Professorship  of  Sanskrit  in  Edinburgh.  It 
was  offered  to  me  (£500),  but  I  could  not  make  up  my  mind  to  leave 
Oxford,  and  I  am  so  glad  to  know  that  Aufrecht  is  now  so  w^ell 
provided  for.  I  do  not  know  whether  you  have  ever  met  him.  He  is 
just  thinking  of  publishing  a  new  edition  of  his  Umbrian  and  Oscan 
Inscriptions. 

'  Have  you  read  the  hyper-sceptic  and  somewhat  arrogant  book  of 
Sir  Cornewall  Lewis,  Historical  Survey  of  A  ncient  A  stronomy  ?  Lepsius 
and  Mommsen  ought  to  answer  him.' 

Oronhyatakha,  the  Mohawk  mentioned  above,  vv^as  a  most 
interesting  man.  Dr.  Acland  had  met  him  when  he  was  in 
Canada  with  the  Prince  of  Wales,  and  said  something  which 
the  Indian  interpreted  as  an  invitation  to  Oxford.  At  all 
events,  early  in  1862  he  appeared,  having  been  helped  in  his 
passage-money  by  friends.  With  a  wild  man's  feelings  about 
hospitality,  he  expected  Dr.  Acland  to  receive  him  in  his 
house,  and  provide  for  him.  He  had  been  well  taught  in 
Canada  at  a  missionary  school,  and  funds  were  soon  collected 
to  enable  him  to  study  at  Oxford.  He  used  to  come  regularly 
to  Max  Muller,  who  by  dint  of  much  questioning  extracted 
a  skeleton  grammar  of  the  Mohawk  tongue  from  him.  Not 
that  he  knew  what  grammar  meant,  but  by  getting  him  to 
translate  the  English  equivalents,  a  student  could  arrange  the 
grammatical  framework.  One  day,  when  writing  down  some 
declension  or  conjugation,  Max  Miiller  suddenly  saw  an 
irregularity,  and  stopping  him,  said,  '  Why  do  you  say  that  ? 
It  ought  to  be  so-and-so.'  The  Mohawk  looked  puzzled  at 
first,  and  said,  'What  you  say  is  the  way  my  old  grandmother 
talked,  but  we  now  say  as  I  have  told  you,'  thus  showing  the 
rapidity  with  which  an  unwritten  language  may  change. 
Oronhyatakha  went  on  very  well  in  Oxford,  but  some 
unfavourable  accounts  were  received  of  him  from  some  of 
the  missionaries  to  the  Red  Indians,  and  it  was  thought 
best  to  send  him  back  to  Canada.  He  was  very  unhappy, 
and  the  day  he  came  to  say  good-bye  to  Max  Miiller  he 


1862]  Letter  to  Baroness  Bunsen  261 

looked  very  fierce,  and  said,  '  I  buried  my  tomahawk,  but 
I  know  where  to  find  it.'  He  quieted  down,  however,  on 
arriving  in  Canada,  where  he  trained  as  a  medical  man,  and 
as  such  has  done  good  work  among  the  settled  portion  of  his 
own  people. 

The  following  letter  was  written  by  Max  Muller  to  his  old 
friend  Baroness  Bunsen,  on  hearing  of  the  death  of  her 
daughter,  Baroness  Ungern-Sternberg :  it  shows  that  in  the 
midst  of  his  own  happiness  he  did  not  forget  to  '  weep  with 
those  that  weep.' 

64,  High  Street,  April  2. 

'  I  saw  in  the  papers  the  sad  news  of  the  new  loss  you  have  suffered, 
and  though  I  fear  almost  to  intrude  on  your  grief,  which  is  sacred 
ground,  yet  I  cannot  but  send  you  a  few  words  of  sympathy  to  tell 
you  how  deeply  I  share  in  your  affliction.  Your  husband's  death 
I  feel  to-day  as  keenly  as  when  I  first  heard  of  it.  I  feel  it  as  an 
affliction  that  has  fallen,  not  on  you  only,  but  on  all  of  us ;  the  world 
is  changed  since  he  has  left  it.  Life  has  lost  something  of  its  bright- 
ness since  those  bright  eyes  and  that  bright  sound  of  his  voice  closed. 
Some  part  of  ourselves  is  dead  in  his  death.  I  did  not  write  to  you 
then,  because  words  are  such  poor  things,  but  I  have  mourned  for 
him ;  I  always  shall,  not  only  as  for  a  friend,  but  as  for  a  man  such  as 
I  shall  never  see  again.  When  I  saw  the  loss  of  your  young,  blooming 
daughter,  all  the  happy  days  of  Carlton  Terrace  came  back  like 
a  dream.  How  perfectly  happy  your  life  was  then ;  it  was  happiness 
even  to  watch  it.  And  yet  God  knows  that  we  want  rain  and  storm 
as  much  as  sunshine,  and  He  sends  us  both  as  seems  best  to  His  love 
and  wisdom.  When  all  breaks  down.  He  lifts  us  up.  I  have  myself 
suffered  deep  grief — for  three  days  my  wife's  life  was  despaired  of. 
But  when  we  feel  quite  crushed  and  forsaken  and  alone,  we  then  feel 
the  real  presence  of  our  truest  Friend,  who,  whether  by  joys  or  sorrows, 
is  always  calling  us  to  Him,  and  leading  us  to  that  true  Home  where 
we  shall  find  Him,  and  in  Him  all  we  loved,  with  Him  all  we  believed, 
and  through  Him  all  we  hoped  for  and  aspired  to  on  earth.  Our 
broken  hearts  are  the  truest  earnest  of  everlasting  life.  May  He  who 
alone  can  send  comfort  help  you  to  bear  the  affliction  which  He  has 
sent.  ]\Iy  wife  begs  me  to  add  the  expression  of  her  deep  sympathy, 
and  I  remain,  with  sincere  regard,  yours  very  truly,  '  M.  M.' 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  Oxford,  April  6. 

'  I  am  hard  at  work,  and  am  printing  my  Veda  and  a  third  edition 

of  my  Lectures.     Our  garden  is  very  gay,  full  of  tulips  and  hyacinths. 


262  Prix  Volney  [ch.  xm 

and  is  a  great  amusement  to  us.  I  get  but  little  time  for  reading. 
I  read  the  Mendelssohn  letters  with  great  delight.  They  are  interesting 
to  those  who  knew  the  man,  and  show  his  great  amiability,  but  the 
right  pith  is  wanting  sometimes.  They  have  been  translated  into 
English.  I  have  not  yet  seen  Varnhagen's  new  volume.  The  weather 
here  is  very  bad,  and  Oxford  is  surrounded  with  water.' 

To  HIS  Wife, 

Oxford,  April  19. 
'  It  is  so  difficult  not  to  lead  a  selfish  life,  placed  as  we  are,  with  all 
our  duties  at  home  and  with  hardly  any  duties  to  fulfil  which  are  really 
painful.  I  feel  I  ought  to  work,  and  do  nothing  but  work,  but  then 
I  like  my  work,  and  though  I  believe  in  the  end  it  will  answer  some 
good  and  important  purpose,  yet  whatever  I  do  redounds  to  my  own 
benefit  too.  ...  I  sometimes  think  I  ought  to  give  more  time  to  you 
and  to  society,  but  I  have  a  feeling  that  time  is  so  precious,  and  I  have 
a  good  work  before  me,  and  I  should  like,  with  God's  assistance,  to 
finish  it.  It  will  serve  to  show  the  glory  of  God  in  the  government  of 
the  world  from  the  beginning ;  it  will  show  that  there  was  no  portion 
of  mankind  ever  forsaken  by  our  common  Father ;  and  though  His 
ways  with  the  various  races  of  men  are  wonderful,  and  at  first  very 
perplexing,  we  must  learn  from  God  and  not  attempt  to  prescribe  to 
Him  how  He  might  better  have  brought  about  His  mysterious 
purposes  with  the  sons  of  men.  Well,  I  feel  I  ought  not  to  forsake 
that  work  ;  small  as  it  may  seem,  it  will  be  an  important  element  here- 
after for  a  true  appreciation  of  the  history  of  the  world — that  great 
drama  in  which  nothing  is  without  a  purpose  and  a  meaning,  from  the 
beginning  to  the  end.  Much  of  my  work  at  present  is  only  clearing 
away  rubbish,  and  would  not  interest  you,  but  there  is  a  temple  under- 
neath, as  will  appear  by-and-by.' 

M.  Stanislas  Julien  had  persuaded  him  to  send  in  his 
Lectures  on  Language  in  competition  for  the  Prix  Volney. 
On  July  29  he  received  the  following  letter  from  M.  Flourens, 
the  head  of  the  Commission,  announcing  his  success : — 

Institut  de  France,  July  28. 
'  Monsieur, — Permettez-moi  de  vous  annoncer  que  la  Commission 
du  Prix  Volney  a  decern^,  tout  d'une  voix,  le  prix  a  votre  bel  ouvrage. 
'  Le  plus  ignorant  de  vos  juges,  et  le  plus  heureux  de  votre  succ^s, 

'  Flourens.' 

Translation.  *  SiR, — Allow  me  to  announce  to  you  that  the  Com- 
mission of  the  Prix  Volney  have  unanimously  adjudged  the  prize  to  your 
beautiful  work.  The  most  ignorant  of  your  judges  and  the  most  happy 
at  your  success,— Flourens.' 


1862]  Jenny  Lind  263 

It  will  be  remembered  this  was  the  second  time  the  prize 
had  been  awarded  to  Max  MUller,  as  author  of  the  best  work 
on  language,  written  in  any  language  during  the  year. 

To    HIS    IMOTHER. 

Translation.  Oxford,  May  29. 

'  I  am  very  well,  though  I  have  so  much  work.  I  do  not  know 
often  how  I  shall  get  through  it  all.  I  have  so  many  examinations — 
six  to  get  through  in  the  next  two  months.  It  is  tedious  work,  but 
brings  in  money.  How  I  wish  you  could  see  our  garden  !  The  roses 
and  pinks  are  coming  out,  and  all  looks  so  fresh,  and  is  a  great  delight 
to  us.  The  middle  of  June  we  think  of  going  to  London  for  a  fort- 
night to  see  the  Exhibition.' 

The  Kingsleys  came  to  stay  with  the  Max  Miillers  this 
year  for  Commemoration,  bringing  their  eldest  daughter. 
Jenny  Lind,  who  came  for  one  of  the  concerts,  dined  one 
evening  at  the  Max  Midlers',  and  as  many  people  were  asked 
to  meet  her  as  the  rooms  would  hold.  Deichmann,  the  violinist, 
was  of  the  party,  and  there  was  also  some  good  amateur 
singing,  but  the  host  and  hostess  could  not  ask  their  distin- 
guished guest  to  sing.  At  last,  she  herself  walked  to  the 
piano,  and  sang,  accompanied  by  her  husband,  five  songs  by 
Schumann,  one  after  another.  It  was  very  hot  weather,  and 
the  windows  were  all  open,  and  High  Street  filled  rapidly 
at  the  first  sound  of  the  great  singer's  voice,  which  rang  out 
into  the  night,  and  was  heard  for  a  considerable  distance. 
Mr.  Tuckwell  recalls  the  scene  in  his  reminiscences : — 

'  I  was  his  guest  sometimes  in  his  pretty  house  opposite  the  Mag- 
dalen elms,  where  played  Deichmann — 

Whose  bowing  seemed  made 
For  a  hand  with  a  jewel — 

where   Jenny   Lind   warbled,   and   Charles   Kingsley   stammered  in 
impassioned  tete-a-tele! 

Another  reminiscence  of  Mr.  Tuckwell's  belongs  to  this 
year.  Max  Midler  '  consulted  me  about  two  matters  in 
which,  strange  to  say,  I  was  better  informed  than  he — the 
art  of  budding  roses,  and  the  conduct  of  marine  aquaria.  He 
watched  me  one  day  in  our  garden  putting  in  some  buds,  and 
tried  his  hand,  but  gave  it  up  presently,  saying,  "  While  you 


264  Bishop  Patteson  [ch.  xm 

are  budding  a  dozen  standards,  I  can  earn  £^  by  writing  an 
article." ' 

During  this  year  more  than  one  letter  passed  between 
Max  Muller  and  his  old  friend  Dr.  Patteson,  the  Missionary 
Bishop  of  Melanesia,  who  had  found  the  Lectures  on  Language 
a  great  help  to  him  in  studying  the  many  dialects  of  his 
scattered  diocese. 

The  Rev.  R.  H.  Codrington  writes : — 

To  Mrs.  Max  Muller. 

St.  Richard's  Walk,  Chichester, 
March  6,  1901. 
.  .  .  '  One  thing  I  very  well  remember,  and  that  was  the  Bishop's 
personal  affection  for  your  husband.  I  don't  see  that  Miss  Yonge 
has  mentioned  in  her  Lt/e  of  the  Bishop  that  they  met  at  Dresden 
when  both  were  young  men.  The  Bishop  certainly  cherished  the 
memory  of  those  times,  and  when  he  talked,  as  he  often  used,  of  the 
great  work  of  the  Professor  at  Oxford,  he  used  always  to  speak  as 
a  warm  friend,  not  as  fellow  worker  in  languages  or  a  learner.  He 
always  gave  a  copy  of  the  Lectures  on  the  Science  of  Language  (when 
he  could  get  one)  to  men  who  joined  the  mission,  and  he  advised  us 
to  start  with  as  much  knowledge  of  that  book  as  we  could  get.  For 
my  own  part,  I  am  sure  that  I  never  should  have  made  any  progress 
in  the  study  of  Melanesian  languages  but  for  the  help  and  encourage- 
ment that  I  got  in  that  way,  and  afterwards  when  on  my  return  for 
a  time  to  England  I  was  wishing  to  write  something.  My  own 
gratitude  will  never  fail.  .  .  .  Yours  very  sincerely, 

'  R.  H.  Codrington.' 

From  Bishop  Patteson. 

Auckland,  N.  Z.,  May  30,  1862. 

'My  dear  Muller, — I  am  very  glad  to  have  your  book,  and  more 
glad  still  to  have  a  copy  of  it  from  you.  Edwin  Palmer  sent  me 
a  copy  two  or  three  months  ago.  I  have  not  read  it  yet,  reserving  it 
as  a  treat  for  my  sea  life,  which  begins  again  now  in  about  ten  days. 
I  wish  I  could  write  to  you  fully  about  these  Melanesian  languages. 
I  don't  know  enough  of  them  to  write  briefly,  and  I  don't  want  to  take 
up  your  time.  Gabelentz  has  sent  me  his  Grammar.  I  am  in  com- 
munication with  him.  He  is  on  the  right  track,  and  has  done  a  great 
deal  with  exceedingly  scanty  materials. 

'  The  division  usually  made  between  Polynesian  and  IMelanesian 
dialects  is  an  arbitrary  one.  It  is  true  that  east  of  the  Fiji  group  the 
Polynesian  language  is  met  with  in  a  much  purer  form  than  in  the 


1862]  Melanesian  Languages  265 

West  Pacific,  but  Fiji  is  more  than  half  Polynesian ;  its  structure 
almost  wholly  so  ;  and  the  Polynesian  element  is  carried,  to  my  certain 
knowledge,  through  all  the  Banks  Islands  and  all  the  New  Hebrides, 
and  it  comes  out  very  clearly  in  several  of  the  Solomon  group ;  and 
I  found  it  well  developed  the  other  day  when  I  first  landed  at  Ysabel, 
and  found  that  I  could  talk  somewhat  to  the  people  after  a  short  time. 

'  I  believe  I  might  say  almost  as  much  of  the  Santa  Cruz  Archi- 
pelago, but  I  don't  know  as  much.  The  Loyalty  Islands  contain 
but  few  affinities  with  the  Polynesian.  I  don't  mean  to  say  that 
these  dialects  cannot  be  classified  by  one  who  knows  a  little  of 
philology  ;  I  could  prove  it  to  you,  if  you  were  here,  in  five  minutes, 
I  am  sure;  and  I  am  satisfied  that  if  a  man  had  the  ability  and 
knowledge  of  all  the  dialects,  he  could  reconstruct  the  original  language, 
or  something  very  near  it,  just  as  one  puts  together  a  child's  puzzle. 
Practically,  till  one  knows  a  good  many  of  them,  they  of  course  appear 
to  be,  and  have  to  be  learnt  as,  separate  unconnected  languages ;  the 
difference  of  dialect  being  often  very  wide. 

'  What  an  indication  of  the  jealousy  and  suspicion  of  their  lives  the 
extraordinary  multiplicity  of  these  languages  affords  !  In  each  genera- 
tion, for  aught  I  know,  they  diverge  more  and  more;  provincialisms 
and  local  words,  &c.,  perpetually  introduce  new  causes  of  perplexity. 

'  Well,  enough  of  this ;  and  indeed  I  have  no  time  to  study  these 
languages  scientifically,  so  how  can  I  write  about  them  ?  I  need  not 
tell  you  that  I  heartily  regret  the  blunder  about  the  Sanskrit  Professor- 
ship. From  Sir  Wm.  IMartin  I  have  heard  something  of  you ;  he  met 
you,  you  may  remember,  at  Oxford.  If  you  can  find  time  to  send  me 
a  line,  I  shall  be  very  glad ;  but  I  know  you  are  much  occupied. 
'  I  am,  my  dear  IMiiller,  very  sincerely  yours, 

'  J.  C.  Patteson,  Missionary  Bishop.' 

When  the  Commemoration  was  over,  the  Max  Miillers 
spent  a  fortnight  in  London,  to  see  the  Exhibition.  They 
dined  out  constantly  with  their  many  friends.  At  a  dinner 
at  Mr.  William  Longman's,  a  Frenchman  who  was  of  the 
party,  and  was  particularly  anxious  to  make  Max  Miiller's 
acquaintance,  was  overheard  in  the  course  of  the  evening  to 
say^  '  I  did  not  know  a  man  so  learned  shall  be  so  very 
young ! ' 

To  Mr.  William  Longman. 

Oxford,  July  27. 

'  I  know  that  you  will  be  glad  to  hear  that  my  Lectures  have  just 
been  awarded  the  Prix  Volney  by  the  French  Academy.  The  prize  is 
given  for  the  best  work  on  Comparative  Philology,  and  it  is  open  to 


266  Professor  Ewald  [ch.  xm 

all  countries.     The  prize  is  only  1,200  francs,  but  it  is  very  pleasant 
to  have  got  it,  and  I  hope  it  will  help  to  sell  the  third  edition.' 

To  HIS  Wife. 

London,  y«/v  7. 

'  All  I  can  say  is  that  I  have  heard  and  read  the  worst  that  can  be 
said  against  our  religion — I  mean  the  true  original  teaching  of  Christ ; 
and  I  feel  that  I  am  ready  in  mind,  if  not  in  body,  to  lay  down  my 
life  for  the  truth  of  His  teaching.  All  our  difficulties  arise  from  the 
doctrines  of  men,  not  from  His  doctrine.  There  is  no  outward 
evidence  of  the  truth  of  His  doctrine,  but  the  Spirit  of  God  that  is 
within  us.  He  testifieth  to  its  truth.  If  it  does  not,  we  are  not  yet 
disciples  of  Christ,  but  we  may  be  hereafter.  But  more  of  that  later. 
Be  certain  of  this,  that  to  repress  a  doubt  is  to  repress  the  spirit  of 
truth  ;  a  doubt  well  spoken  out  is  generally  a  doubt  solved.  Only  all 
this  requires  great  seriousness  of  mind — it  must  assume  an  importance 
greater  than  anything  else  in  life,  and  then  we  can  fight  our  way 
through  it.     God  is  with  us  in  our  struggles.' 

To  Rev.  Charles  Kingsley. 

August. 

'  Ranke  {T/ie  Popes,  &c.)  is  staying  here  for  a  week,  and  very  anxious 
to  make  your  acquaintance.  Could  you  come  here  for  a  day  to  see 
him  ?  He  dines  with  us  next  Saturday,  but  any  other  day  will  do. 
Next  Monday  Ewald  will  be  here ;  he  has  been  here  for  a  fortnight, 
but  comes  back  all  the  way  from  Penrith  to  see  Stanley.  If  our  spare 
room  is  occupied  (we  expect  the  Walronds),  we  can  always  get  you 
a  bed  close  by.  I  think  you  would  like  Ewald — more  even  than 
Ranke.' 

Ewald's  visit  has  been  fully  described  in  the  Autobiography, 
and  the  way  he  was  cross-examined  by  some  of  the  younger 
M.A.'s.  He  was  a  most  lovable  old  man  in  private  inter- 
course, though  a  fiery  opponent  of  anything  like  political 
tyranny.  His  power  of  work  was  almost  phenomenal :  he 
would  spend  the  whole  day  at  the  Bodleian,  moving  across 
to  the  Camera  w}ien  the  great  library  closed,  sometimes 
returning  there  again  after  a  late  dinner.  Canon  Farrar 
records  an  incident  of  this  visit  of  Ewald  to  Oxford : — 

'  Ranke  and  Ewald  were  both  in  Oxford  in  the  middle  of  the  Long 
Vacation.  I  determined  to  ask  them  to  dinner  together,  though  I 
dreaded  a  little  friction  between  them,  of  Gottingen  versus  Berlin,  and 
of  Theology  versus  Modern  History.     I  asked  Canon  Stanley  and 


1862]  Dr,  Hang  267 

Miiller  to  meet  them.  It  was  due  to  Miiller's  extreme  tact  that  con- 
versation was  kept  up  and  yet  friction  avoided.  Ranke,  oddly  enough, 
had  his  head  full  of  the  probable  danger  to  be  apprehended  in  refer- 
ence to  European  politics  from  Servia  and  Bulgaria  (which  afterwards 
proved  true),  and  we  could  not  get  him  to  talk  with  interest  on  any- 
thing else.  Miiller  showed  his  cleverness  and  shrewd  common  sense 
by  imparling  a  vein  of  humour  to  the  conversation,  which  prevented 
a  painful  outburst  of  disagreement ;  for  Miiller  had  a  vein  of  true 
humour.  It  was  not  sallies  of  wit,  abrupt  outbursts  of  the  comic, 
but  a  playful  fun  which  flowed  like  a  purling  brook,  intertwining  itself 
with  conversation,  and  which  put  crooked  spirits  in  harmony. 

'  I  have  already  implied  that  Miiller  had  remarkable  powers  of  con- 
versation :  he  was  always  lively  and  always  instructive.  His  mastery 
of  English,  both  in  voice  and  pronunciation,  and  of  purity  of  style  in 
writing,  was  a  marvel.  To  this  ought  to  be  added  a  pellucid  clearness 
of  exposition  and  description,  even  in  most  abstract  subjects,  which  is 
seen  to  some  extent  in  his  German  tracts  as  well  as  more  con- 
spicuously in  his  English  writings.  His  syntax  was  so  free  from 
entanglement,  and  his  language  so  forceful  and  expressive,  that  no 
reader  had  to  halt  to  ask  himself  the  meaning  of  what  he  read.' 


'O 


It  was  in  the  course  of  the  summer  that  Max  Miiller 
received  an  interesting  account  from  Dr.  Martin  Haug, 
director  of  Sanskrit  studies  at  the  College  of  Poona,  of 
a  great  assembly  of  Brahmin  Pundits  held  outside  the  town, 
in  order  to  correct  their  MSS.  of  the  Rig-veda  by  the  three 
first  published  volumes  of  his  great  edition.  The  Pundits 
would  not  touch  the  books  themselves,  as  the  printing  made 
them  impure,  an  idea  having  got  abroad  that  cows'  blood  was 
used  in  mixing  the  ink  employed.  But  they  sat  in  solemn 
conclave  for  some  days,  and  Max  Miiller's  carefully  prepared 
text  was  read  aloud,  and  the  MSS.  corrected  by  it.  '  Their 
judgement,'  says  Dr.  Haug,  '  is  to  this  effect.  This  edition 
must  be  written  by  a  great  Pundit  versed  in  the  Vedas  and 
Sdstras  {veda-sdstra  sainpaimvi),  the  highest  title  of  honour 
of  a  learned  man  in  India.'  Dr.  Haug  then  speaks  of  the 
difficulty  of  getting  trustworthy  copies  of  ancient  Sanskrit 
MSS.  '  Not  that  there  are  no  good  MSS.  existing,  but  they 
are  to  be  found  generally  in  the  possession  of  rich  super- 
stitious Brahmans,  who  do  not  admit  Europeans  to  their 
libraries,  and  when  copies  are  made  for  Sahibs,  they  are  made 


268  Letter  to  Mr.  Gladstone  [ch.  xm 

intentionally   bad   and    incomplete.     One    of    my   Brahman 
friends  told  me  this  the  other  day.' 

The  following  letter  is  the  first  of  a  correspondence  which 
was  carried  on  till  within  a  few  months  of  Mr.  Gladstone's 
death.  An  ardent  Liberal  from  his  University  days,  Max 
Muller  was  a  great  admirer  of  Mr.  Gladstone,  and  a  member 
of  his  Oxford  committees  till  his  rejection  by  the  University 
in  1865,  But  Max  Muller  could  not  follow  Mr.  Gladstone's 
Home  Rule  policy,  and  was  a  determined  Unionist,  a  Liberal 
Unionist,  and  in  the  contests  in  the  borough  of  Oxford  voted 
'blue'  for  the  last  ten  years  of  his  life,  though  his  deep 
respect  for  Mr.  Gladstone's  intellectual  gifts,  and  the  spell 
cast  by  his  personality,  remained  in  full  force  to  the  last. 

To  THE  Right  Hon.  W.  E.  Gladstone. 

64,  High  Street,  September  7,  1862. 
'  My  dear  Sir, — I  beg  to  thank  you  for  your  kind  letter.  It  was 
a  true  gratification  to  me  to  hear  that  my  Lectures  have  attracted  your 
attention,  and  that  on  the  whole  you  approved  of  them.  I  am  fully 
and  painfully  aware  of  the  many  and  doubtful  points  in  them,  but 
I  am  quite  satisfied  if  I  have  only  succeeded  in  engaging  the  interest 
of  a  few  thoughtful  scholars  in  favour  of  a  science  which  I  feel 
convinced  has  still  to  teach  us  many  important  lessons.  The  sooner 
my  book  is  superseded  by  a  better  one  the  better.  I  hope  next 
spring  to  give  a  new  series  of  lectures  on  the  same  subject,  and 
intend  then  to  enter  more  fully  into  the  relation  between  Language 
and  Thought,  particularly  in  ancient  times.  One  of  the  most  im- 
portant fields  where  the  influence  of  language  on  thought — the 
Tartar's  bow,  as  Bacon  calls  it — has  been  at  work,  is  Ancient 
Mythology,  but  at  the  same  time  nothing  is  so  beset  with  difficulties 
as  the  scientific  analysis  of  mythological  names.  They  belong  to 
a  very  primitive  stratum  of  language,  and  are  full  of  anomalies  ; 
yet  even  these  anomalies  point  to  laws  which  determine  their  for- 
mation. Until  these  laws  are  discovered,  until  we  can  account  for 
every  letter,  whether  radical  or  formative,  in  the  names  of  the  Arian 
gods,  all  guesses  at  their  original  conception  must  be  checked.  It 
is  almost  a  truism,  but  nevertheless  a  very  important  truth  in  the 
Science  of  Language,  that  the  first  meaning  of  every  word  is  its 
etymological  meaning.  That  meaning  may  grow  and  change,  it  may 
shift  to  the  opposite  pole  of  the  compass ;  yet,  if  we  want  to  know 
the  first  impulse  which  led  to  the  formation  of  certain  names  and 
notions — of  nomina  or  numina — the  only  answer,   if  any,  must  be 


'*'. 
*% 


i862]  Ares  269 

given  by  etymology.  Now  as  to  the  name  of  Ares  to  which  you 
refer  in  your  letter,  I  confess  that  I  know  nothing  at  all  satisfactory 
as  to  its  etymology.  I  cannot  find  out  (i)  whether  *A/j?;f  shows  any 
signs  of  an  initial  digamma,  viz.  whether  the  root  from  which  it  is 
derived  began  with  a  semi-vowel  or  with  a  vowel ;  (2)  I  am  puzzled 
by  the  accent  of  "Ap?;?,  for  in  adjectives  in  tjs  the  accent  is  generally  on 
the  last ;  (3)  I  am  perplexed  by  the  declension,  where,  as  far  as 
I  know,  no  crasis  ever  takes  place  in  the  gen.  eos,  &c.  Till  these 
difficulties  are  removed,  it  is  impossible  to  fix  on  any  etymology,  or 
rather,  I  should  say,  no  etymology  can  be  satisfactory  which  does 
not  account  for  all  these  anomalies.  I  think  it  was  in  your  book  on 
Homer  that  I  read  the  last  account  of  Ares  (I  have  not  got  it  by 
me  to-day),  but  I  have  no  doubt  that  you  are  right  in  representing 
Ares  as  a  Thracian  god.  The  coincidence  between  Aria  as  the 
name  of  Thrace  and  Ares  is  therefore  curious.  But  how  are  the 
two  words  to  be  reconciled.?  If  Ares  shows  traces  of  an  initial 
digamma  it  could  not  come  from  the  root  from  which  we  have  Aria ; 
nor  could  Ares  be  an  adjective  or  other  derivative  of  Aria.  I  know 
of  no  god  named  originally  from  a  country,  rather  are  the  names  of 
countries  derived  from  the  names  of  gods.  But  again  in  this  case^Apijs 
would  never  lead  to  "Apia,  it  would  be  "Apeia.  These  are  nothing  but 
doubts  and  misgivings,  and  I  have  nothing  else  to  say  on  the  subject, 
but  as  to  ("ippT]v  its  etymology  is  clear.  It  has  the  initial  digamma  and 
is  identical  with  the  Sanskrit  vrzshan.  'Ai^T^p  again  is,  I  believe,  the 
Sanskrit  nara  or  nn,  man.  In  Greek  words  there  is  frequently 
a  vowel  prefixed  to  an  initial  N,  D,  L,  Bh  ;  for  instance  : — 

Sk.  naman,  name,  opofia. 

Sk.  nakha,  nail,  6W|. 

Sk.  bhrfi,  brow,  o(f)pvs. 

Sk.  navan,  nine,  twea. 

Sk.  rudhira,  red,  ipv6p6s. 

Sk.  laghu,  light,  eXaxvs. 

I  confess  I  know  of  no  instance  where  in  Greek  an  a  is  prefixed 
to  an  initial  rj;  it  is  always  e  or  o,  but  we  find  a  before  s,  in 

Sk.  star,  Engl,  star,  da-Trjp  (stella  =  sterula). 

Whatever  therefore  may  be  the  etymology  of  Ares,  app7i'  and  dvT]p 
point  to  two  distinct  roots,  and  neither  of  these  would  yield  a  satis- 
factory explanation  of  Ares.  I  should  have  answered  your  note 
before,  but  I  had  promised  to  send  the  IMS.  of  the  fourth  volume  of 
my  edition  of  the  Veda  to  the  Press  by  Saturday  night,  and  I  had  to 
work  from  morning  till  evening  to  keep  my  promise.  I  hope  you 
will  excuse  the  delay  of  my  answer,  and  I  only  regret  that  it  is  so 


270  Fourth   Volume  of  Rig-veda         [ch.  xm 

little   satisfactory.      Believe  me   to  be,  my  dear  sir,  your  obedient 
servant  and  sincere  admirer.' 

The  fourth  volume  of  the  Rig-veda  was  now  finished.  The 
preface  had  required  long  and  careful  work,  as  Max  MUller 
had  to  answer  various  criticisms  on  his  Ancicjit  Sanskrit 
LiteraUirc^  and  the  dates  he  had  there  assigned  to  the  Hymns 
of  the  Rig-veda  ;  Wilson  and  Whitney  agreeing  in  considering 
these  limits  as  too  narrow,  whilst  other  critics  considered 
them  too  wide.  In  his  preface  therefore  Max  Miiller  felt  it 
necessary  to  enter  fully  into  the  question  as  to  whether  the 
age  of  the  Vedic  Hymns  could  be  fixed  by  astronomical 
evidence — and  this  led  to  the  further  question  whether  the 
Indian  Nakshatras  or  divisions  of  the  heavens  into  twenty- 
seven  equal  parts  were  of  Indian  origin,  or  derived  from 
a  foreign  country ;  a  controversy  which  had  been  carried  on 
with  some  acrimony,  Biot  the  great  astronomer  claiming  to 
have  proved  the  Chinese  origin  of  the  Nakshatras,  in  which 
he  was  supported  by  Lassen. 

The  theory  which  now  counts  the  greatest  number  of 
supporters  attributes  to  the  Nakshatras  a  Babylonian  origin, 
whence  they  spread  eastward  to  both  Hindus  and  Chinese. 
Max  Miiller  in  his  preface  tried  to  establish  the  Indian  origin 
of  the  Nakshatras,  and  adds  some  valuable  notes  from 
Professor  Donkin  and  Mr.  Main,  the  Radcliffe  Observer, 
giving  the  positions  of  the  moon  and  planets  1424  B.C.  All 
this  was  reprinted  as  a  separate  pamphlet  under  the  title  of 
Ancient  Hindu  Astronomy  and  Chronology.  He  further  defends 
himself  against  various  critics  who  complained  that  he  '  did 
not  enter  into  all  the  controverted  points,  the  theories,  guesses, 
doubts,  assertions,  and  counter-assertions  of  various  scholars,' 
and  assures  them  that  he  did  not  shrink  from  the  trouble 
of  examining  them,  but  that  he  believed  it  '  to  be  our  duty 
to  learn  to  distinguish  between  what  is  important  and  what 
is  not.  We  only  retard  the  discovery  of  truth  by  entering 
into  every  bypath  on  the  right  and  on  the  left.  The  straight 
line  is  always  the  best,  the  simplest  machinery  the  most 
perfect.  If  we  can  prove  our  point  without  a  great  apparatus 
of  so-called  learning,  it  is  our  duty  to  do  so.  He  sweeps 
cleanest  that  makes  the  least  dust.' 


i862]  Visit  to  Tenby  271 

Max  Miiller  apologizes  for  the  delay  in  bringing  out  this 
volume  in  these  words  : — 

*  For  a  time  it  was  doubtful  whether  the  funds  necessary  for  the 
completion  of  the  Rig-veda  would  be  provided.  This  caused  uncer- 
tainty and  delay.  When  I  resumed  my  work,  my  time  was  no  longer 
my  own,  and  there  were  more  urgent  occupations  which  left  me 
but  scant  leisure  for  the  prosecution  of  my  Sanskrit  studies.  Had 
I  been  allowed  to  devote,  I  do  not  say  the  whole,  but  at  least  one- 
half  of  my  time  to  the  study  of  Sanskrit  and  the  carrying  on  of  my 
edition  of  the  Rig-veda,  the  present  volume  would  have  been  pub- 
lished long  ago.  The  MSS.  of  the  Commentary  of  Sayana  are  very 
inferior  for  these  later  portions,  the  number  of  passages  hopelessly 
corrupt  and  imperfect  is  constantly  increasing.  There  is  many 
a  short  line  in  these  notes  which  represents  the  results  of  hours,  nay 
of  days  and  weeks  of  hard  work.' 

Max  Miiller  again  acknowledges  the  help  given  him  by 
Dr.  Aufrecht,  who,  though  he  had  long  ceased  to  be  his 
secretary,  had  been  living  on  in  Oxford.  The  preface  contains 
a  warm  tribute  to  the  memory  of  Professor  Wilson  :  '  Wilson 
had  lived  through  almost  the  whole  history  of  Sanskrit 
scholarship,  and  had  taken  part  in  nearly  every  important 
work  that  marked  an  epoch  in  the  study  of  Indian  literature, 
history,  and  religion.  Every  one  of  his  own  works  represents 
a  new  conquest.  He  never  followed,  he  was  always  first.' 
Finally,  in  dwelling  on  the  translation  of  the  Rig-veda,  begun 
by  Wilson,  to  be  carried  on  by  Ballantyne,  Max  Miiller 
points  out  the  great  difficulty  of  making  a  thoroughly  clear 
translation  of  the  whole  : — 

'  Some  portions,  I  confess,  I  consider  as  hopeless,  as  likely  to 
resist  all  attempts  at  interpretation,  but  there  is  no  reason  to  despair. 
The  Rig-veda  is  the  most  ancient  book  of  the  Aryan  world.  Every 
Hymn,  every  verse,  every  word  that  can  be  deciphered  in  it  is  a  gain. 
These  Hymns  represent  the  lowest  stratum  in  the  growth  of  the 
human  mind  that  can  be  reached  anywhere  by  means  of  contempora- 
neous literature.' 

Max  Miiller  was  so  thoroughly  exhausted  by  the  summer's 
work,  that  he  found  it  necessary  to  get  a  change  before  term. 
He  and  his  wife  went  for  a  fortnight  to  Tenby,  which  he 
thoroughly  enjoyed,  visiting   Manorbier,   Carew,    Pembroke, 


272  Welsh  Music  [ch.  xm 

and  other  ruins  with  keen  interest,  and  searching  for  sea 
animals  for  his  aquarium  in  Oxford  with  the  zest  of  a  boy. 
On  their  way  back  a  visit  was  paid  to  a  relative  near  Swansea, 
where  the  large  copper-works  of  his  wife's  family  were 
inspected  with  great  interest,  Max  Miiller  particularly  enjoying 
the  part-singing  of  the  men  employed  at  the  works,  during 
their  dinner  hour.  He  had  not  heard  Welsh  singing  and 
voices  before,  and  was  much  struck  with  the  natural  and 
national  turn  for  music,  as  a  strong  contrast  to  the  absence  of 
it  in  the  English  labourer  and  artisan. 

To  Professor  Bernays. 
Tra?islalwn.  December  14. 

'  I  will  not  let  the  old  year  slip  past  without  once  more  shaking  hands 
with  you — as  well  as  it  is  possible  from  this  great  distance.  It  is  so 
long  since  I  heard  from  you,  or  from  any  of  my  German  friends. 
I  am  afraid  it  may  be  my  fault.  I  wanted  to  finish  the  fourth 
volume  of  my  Veda,  and  so  I  could  not  find  time  for  anything  else, 
nor  did  I  think  of  anything  else.  But  now  I  have  finished,  and  I  feel 
like  a  snake  that  has  just  cast  her  skin,  and  is  now  going  forth  for 
further  prey.  In  the  new  Germany  I  see  no  sign  of  life,  and  I  doubt 
whether  we  shall  live  to  see  what  our  fathers  hoped  for,  realized. 
Uhland,  one  of  the  last  noble,  faithful,  patriotic  men,  had  been  hoping 
for  so  long,  but  he  too  has  been  called  away  without  having  lived  to 
see  the  morning  dawn.  When  I  think  of  Bunsen  in  1848,  and  of 
his  sure,  prophetic  hopes !  and  he  too  is  gone,  and  owls  sit  in  the 
eagle's  nest  which  he  had  built  up  here  in  London.  Here  in 
England  we  possess  personal  and  political  freedom,  and  that  is  such 
a  blessing — it  is  like  the  fresh  sea-air,  but  it  is  habeas  corpus,  not 
habeas  animum.  The  spiritual  struggle  proceeds  slowly,  and  the 
dogged  resistance  is  great,  and  the  passion  of  persecution  would  do 
honour  to  the  sixteenth  century.  Bishop  Colenso  appeals  to  the 
English  mercantile  understanding  ;  it  makes  more  impression  than 
all  that  tastes  of  mind. 

'  The  book  will  amuse  you.  Jowett  has  somewhat  retired,  and  is  at 
work  at  his  edition  of  Plato's  Republic.  Stanley  fights  very  bravely ; 
he  has  just  published  Lectures  on  the  Jewish  Church,  first  series,  which 
produce  an  eflfect  in  England,  but  will  hardly  be  appreciated  in 
Germany. 

'  Pattison  sits  still,  says  litde,  but  thinks  so  much.  His  young  wife 
is  a  little  too  young  for  him,  I  am  afraid,  but  he  is  well  and  of  good 
cheer.     To-morrow  night  there  will  be  some  acting  at  his  house  in  the 


1863]  Famine  in  Lancashire  273 

College  !  How  is  your  work  getting  on,  and  what  are  your  plans 
for  the  future  ?  Shall  we  meet  anywhere  next  year  ?  I  hope  to  go 
to  Germany  next  summer,  but  before  that  I  have  to  give  a  course  of 
lectures  in  London,  about  the  material  and  spiritual  element  in 
Language.  My  old  lectures  are  appearing  now  in  a  German  trans- 
lation, also  Italian  and  French  translations  are  to  appear,  and  I  am 
reproduced  in  America.  I  hope  the  next  volume  will  be  an  improve- 
ment, but  whether  people  will  like  it  is  another  question. 

*  How  I  wish  you  could  see  my  home  here  in  Oxford !  I  wish 
indeed  for  no  better.  I  have  altogether  given  up  having  any  wishes 
at  all,  and  I  enjoy  the  most  beautiful  happiness  which  life  has  to  offer 
■ — a  good  wife  and  two  healthy  children. 

'  Aufrecht  is  Professor  in  Edinburgh,  happily  married  to  a  pretty, 
cultured  wife  with  independent  means ;  he  writes  most  happily,  and 
the  sunshine  has  driven  away  the  old  clouds  of  envy  and  suspicion. 
In  old  friendship.' 

The  Christmas  was  spent  at  Ray  Lodge,  but  very  quietly, 
for  the  awful  distress  in  Lancashire,  owing  to  the  '  cotton 
famine '  caused  by  the  American  War,  weighed  on  all  hearts 
and  all  purses.  Superfluous  luxuries  were  cut  off  in  almost 
every  household,  and  except  a  tiny  Christmas  tree  for  the 
children,  there  were  no  presents,  all  money  that  could  be 
spared  going  weekly  to  the  fund  for  the  thousands  starving 
in  the  North  from  no  fault  of  their  own. 

By  the  middle  of  January  Max  Miiller  was  quietly  settled 
again  in  Oxford,  and  busy  with  the  preparation  of  the  second 
course  of  lectures  on  '  The  Science  of  Language'  for  the  Royal 
Institution.  His  course  of  lectures  this  term  in  Oxford  were 
on  '  Bopp's  Comparative  Grammar^  Towards  the  close  of  the 
month  he  heard  that  the  fourth  volume  of  the  Rig-veda,  the 
first  dedicated  to  the  Queen,  had  been  received  at  Osborne, 
and  that  '  Her  Majesty  appreciated  the  learning  and  erudition 
that  must  have  been  employed  in  its  production,  and  that  it 
and  the  three  first  volumes  sent  at  the  same  time  (beautifully 
bound  in  morocco  and  gold)  would  form  a  valuable  addition 
to  the  Royal  Library.'  Soon  after  he  heard  from  his  old 
friend  and  teacher  Professor  Brockhaus  in  Leipzig  :  '  Your 
LecUires  on  the  Science  of  Language  have,  as  you  know,  found 
many  admirers  here,  and  every  one  is  looking  forward  to 
your  new  volume.' 

I  T 


274    Lectures  on  Language,  Second  Course  [ch.  xm 

The  London  lectures  were  even  more  crowded  than  the 
first  course.  Max  Miiller  found  them  more  fatiguing,  for 
the  course  was  longer,  and  he  went  up  and  down  from 
Oxford,  only  sleeping  in  London  if  engaged  to  dine  out. 
Towards  the  close  of  the  course  he  delivered  a  Friday- 
evening  lecture  on  '  The  Vedas'  to  an  enormous  audience, 
people  sitting  on  every  step  of  the  staircases,  and  standing 
in  the  gangways.  This  lecture  was  repeated  in  substance 
two  years  later  at  Leeds,  and  will  be  found  in  the  first  edition 
of  Chips ^  Volume  L 

To  Professor  Bernays. 

Translation.  Oxford,  March  3,  1863. 

'  What  you  say  about  the  German  translation  is  just  what  I  feel. 
I  have  not  wished  for  a  translation,  but  cannot  prevent  it  being  done, 
and  therefore  have  to  leave  the  rest  to  the  judgement  of  the  pub- 
lisher. In  no  case  should  I  undertake  to  write  differently  for  Germany 
than  for  England.  My  manner  of  writing  may  look  learned  or 
unlearned,  that  is  the  same  to  me.  I  know  it  costs  more  labour  to 
think  out  a  subject  so  that  it  can  be  clearly  stated,  than  to  bring  it  to 
light  half  digested  and  with  all  its  threads  entangled.  I  work  for  no 
class  in  particular,  nor  for  a  definite  purpose,  and  I  recognize  only 
one  duty  which  renders  our  work  responsible,  i.e.  the  promoting  of 
truth;  and  nothing  is  true  which  is  not  perfectly  clear.  There  are 
some  hard  nuts  hidden  in  my  lectures,  the  cracking  of  which  has 
tried  the  teeth  of  some  obscure  scholars  ;  but  the  honest  ones  among 
them  will  confess  this,  and  will  gratefully  accept  the  cleanly  peeled 
kernel,  I  could  have  made  an  immense  noise,  had  I  cracked  all  my 
hard  nuts  before  the  public,  and  many  empty  ones  might  have  been 
mixed  up  with  them  without  the  readers  noticing  it.  But  that  sort 
of  thing  I  consider  wrong,  and  I  shall  never  be  infected  by  the 
aristocratic  arrogance  of  scholars.  I  can  well  believe,  that  if  I  had 
written  five  unreadable  volumes  instead  of  one  small  volume,  the  sale 
in  Germany  would  have  been  more  rapid. 

'  What  I  have  worked  out  may  be  good  or  bad,  but  each  cultivated 
man,  be  he  an  Englishman  or  a  Kaffir,  knows  what  I  am  driving  at 
and  how  matters  stand.  That  was  not  always  the  case  with  Bunsen. 
With  all  respect  for  his  knowledge,  his  proofs  were  not  always 
absolutely  convincing,  firm  or  healthy.  But  I  am  quite  prepared  to 
see  my  translation  abused  in  Germany ;  never  mind,  failure  with  an 
honest  conscience  is  better  than  success  with  a  sacrifice  of  what  one 
really  thinks.     If  you  want  to  read  obscure  books  about  language, 


1863]  Summer  Plans  275 

read  Humboldt,  or  should  you  wish  to  read  obscure,  superficial 
books,  read  Steinthal,  &c.,  &c.  How  such  things  can  be  endured  in 
Germany,  I  do  not  understand,  and  I  expect  no  political  or  religious 
freedom  till  the  literary  cobwebs  are  swept  away.  Now,  you  will 
say,  "Lion,  you  have  roared  effectively!"  [Lowe,  gut  gebriilll  !\  but 
I  think  we  understand  each  other  in  spite  of  it  all.  I  have  not  yet 
seen  Bunsen's  Letters,  but  I  will  try  to  get  them.  I  sit  here  toiling 
away  at  the  Veda,  and  feel  heartily  tired  of  the  whole  business. 
In  faithful  love.' 

To  HIS  Wife. 

Oxford,  March  14. 

'  I  shall  live  this  week  like  a  hermit  and  try  to  get  on  with  my 
lectures.  You  see,  I  must  work  hard,  for  that  is  what  we  are  all 
meant  to  do,  and  though  it  may  seem  to  deprive  us  of  some  of  the 
enjoyment  of  life,  it  really  increases  real  happiness ;  it  makes  one  feel 
that  one  does  not  live  for  nothing,  and  one  enjoys  one's  holidays  with 
a  much  stouter  heart.  I  hope  our  summer  will  be  a  very  happy  one, 
but  till  then  there  is  still  a  good  deal  of  work  to  be  gone  through.' 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  Oxford,  March,  1863. 

'  I  live  in  one  perpetual  trot,  and  shall  be  glad  when  my  lectures 
in  London  are  over.  In  the  summer  I  will  amuse  myself.  If  I  can 
get  away  early  in  June  I  think  of  going  with  G.  to  Paris ;  the 
middle  of  July  I  must  return  for  the  examination  of  the  Indian 
civilians,  which  lasts  a  fortnight.  When  that  is  over  we  shall  go  to 
Germany.  But  I  must  have  good  air,  so  I  think  we  will  meet  you  in 
Dresden,  and  all  go  together  to  the  Lake  of  Geneva,  for  I  feel  in 
myself  that  I  want  bracing,  and  Dresden  does  not  do  for  that. 
I  only  grieve  that  we  shall  thus  see  so  little  of  Augusta  and  Krug. 
Our  great  difficulty  is  about  the  children.  The  little  one  certainly 
must  not  go — the  doctor  forbids  it — so  the  question  is  about  Ada. 
I  don't  think  I  could  bear  to  be  so  long  without  her,  nor  G. 
either,  and  yet  the  long  journey  is  not  good  at  her  age.  We  discuss 
it  every  day,  and  can  come  to  no  decision.  I  can  make  no  fixed 
plan  yet,  I  am  so  overpowered  with  work ;  but  I  hope  all  will  be  as 
we  wish,  and  that  we  may  enjoy  the  summer  happily  together.' 

To  Professor  Tyndall. 

Oxford,  March  14. 

'Accept  my  best  thanks  for  your  kind  help  in  providing  me  with 

a   most  excellent    Siren   for   my   lecture   yesterday.      My   audience 

seemed  delighted  with  it,  though  I  am  sorry  to  say  it  took  up  more 

of  my  time  than  I  had  to  spare.     I  shall  have  to  finish  my  lecture 

T   2 


276  Tales  of  Thebes  and  Argos        [ch.  xm 

next  Saturday,  but  I  shall  not  trouble  you  either  for  the  Siren  or  for 
any  other  experiment,  as  I  must  get  on  with  my  subject,  and  cannot 
afford  any  more  amusements.  I  am  much  pleased  with  Helmholtz's 
book,  and  should  give  a  great  deal  to  be  able  to  hear  your  lectures 
on  "  Sound,"  and  to  see  some  of  the  experiments  which,  though  so  well 
described  by  Helmholtz,  are  yet  imperfect  and  unsatisfactory  on  paper. 
*  Do  you  not  think  that  if  our  scales  were  properly  constructed,  all 
harmonies  would  be  necessarily  harmonious,  and  not  inharmonious, 
as  they  now  are  after  the  7th  ?' 

Easter  was  spent  at  Ray  Lodge,  with  many  old  friends 

staying  in  the  house,  who  all  '  enjoyed  MUller 's  music,'  says 

a  contemporary  Diary. 

To  HIS  Wife. 

April  7. 

'  When  I  ordered  your  fly,  I  found  Mrs. in  great  distress : 

her  baby  had  died  on  Sunday  quite  suddenly.  I  went  to  see  the 
little  child,  and  it  looked  so  calm  and  peaceful,  and  yet  that  poor 
mother  would  have  given  her  very  life  to  have  had  that  little  soul 
back.  It  was  heartrending  to  see  her,  and  I  could  give  her  but  little 
comfort,  but  it  was  a  solemn  sight.  What  a  small  line  it  is  that 
separates  us  and  all  that  we  love  here  from  that  life  w^hich  waits  for 
us,  and  why  should  we  be  so  unwilling  to  go  home,  for  here  our  home 
is  not,  and  the  great  wrench  must  come,  and  happy  are  those  who 
have  passed  through  it.  Yet  when  I  looked  on  that  little  child  that 
had  been  playing  about  but  a  few  days  ago,  and  then  thought 
of  our  little  darlings,  I  felt  it  must  be  fearful  to  part  with  them,  if  one 
did  not  feel  that  a  happier  life  is  in  store  for  them  than  what  they 
would  have  found  here.  And  with  all  this  misery  going  on  every- 
where, one  lives  on  and  laughs  and  takes  it  all  as  a  matter  of  course, 
whereas  if  one  looks  into  life  as  it  is,  one  wonders  how  one  can  ever 
forget  it  again,  and  ever  care  again  for  the  littlenesses  of  which  our 
pleasures  and  our  pride  consist  here.  Ernst  ist  das  Leben,  so  says 
the  German  proverb,  and  very  true  it  is.' 

It  was  at  this  time  that  Max  MUller  first  met  with  Sir 
George  Cox's  admirable  books  on  mythology.  Sir  George 
seems  to  have  sent  him  The  Tales  of  Thebes  and  Argos, 
and  the  following  letter  is  the  beginning  of  a  correspondence 
on  Comparative  Mythology,  spread  over  many  years.  The 
editor  owes  these  letters  to  Sir  George  Cox  to  the  kindness 
of  the  Rev.  R.  W.  Rees  of  Manchester,  into  whose  hands  they 
had  passed. 


1863]        Dr.  Pusey's  Attack  on  Kingsley  277 

To  Rev.  G.  Cox. 

Ray  Lodge,  April  i6,  1863. 
'  Dear  Sir, — ...  I  was  delighted  when  reading  your  Tales  ',  and 
I  feel  convinced  that  in  the  form  in  which  you  have  given  them  these 
myths  are  nearer  to  what  they  originally  were  than  in  any  of  the 
works  of  the  mythographer,  whether  ancient  or  modern.  I  never  felt 
so  strongly  that  on  the  whole  the  principles  of  Comparative  Mytho- 
logy are  right  than  when  I  saw  them  applied  as  you  have  applied 
them.  I  do  not  despair  that  we  shall  discover  and  disentangle  many 
more  of  the  complicated  myths  of  the  Aryan  nations,  though  I  know 
but  too  well  that  the  ground  is  treacherous  and  requires  great 
caution.     Yours  with  sincere  regard,  '  Max  Muller.' 

The  end  of  April  Max  Miiller  went  to  London  as  one  of 
the  deputation  from  the  University  of  Oxford,  to  present  the 
address  of  congratulation  to  the  Prince  of  Wales  on  his 
marriage.  The  Prince  of  Wales  graciously  promised  to  honour 
his  Alma  Mater  with  his  presence  at  Commemoration,  accom- 
panied by  the  Princess.  As  is  the  custom  on  such  occasions, 
His  Royal  Highness  sent  in  the  names  of  those  whom  he 
desired  should  receive  the  honorary  degree  of  D.C.L.  Among 
these  appeared  the  name  of  Charles  Kingsley,  one  of  the 
Prince's  chaplains.  At  once  Dr.  Pusey  opposed  the  degree 
in  Council,  on  the  ground  that  Hypatia,  Mr.  Kingsley's  finest 
work,  was  immoral.  Charles  Kingsley's  friends,  among 
whom  may  be  mentioned  Dr.  Stanley,  Dr.  Rolleston,  and 
Max  Muller,  were  very  indignant,  and  the  day  that  the  name 
was  finally  to  be  voted  on  in  Council,  Dr.  Stanley  ap- 
peared armed  with  a  copy  of  Hypatia  borrowed  from  Max 
Muller,  which  still  has  all  the  passages  marked  in  it,  used  by 
Dr.  Stanley  in  opposing  the  Professor  of  Hebrew.  But  though 
the  name  might  have  been  carried  in  Council,  a  vote  of 
non  placet  was  threatened  in  the  Theatre,  in  the  very  presence 
of  the  Prince,  and  to  avoid  so  scandalous  a  scene,  Charles 
Kingsley's  friends  withdrew  his  name.  A  few  days  later 
Max  Miiller  had  a  letter  from  Mrs.  Kingsley  which  is  given 
here  by  permission.  In  sending  it  on  to  his  wife,  who  was 
away  from  home.  Max  says  :  '  I  enclose  an  excellent  letter 
from    Mrs.  Kingsley,  for   which   she   deserves  more  than  a 

^  Of  Thebes  and  Argos. 


278  Visit  to  Paris  [ch.  xm 


D.C.L.  degree.  I  am  curious  to  know  how  the  Prince  will 
take  it,  and  I  am  only  afraid  that  he  will  never  know  how 
badly  people  behaved.' 

From  Mrs.  Kingsley. 

EvERSLEY  Rectory,  Wednesday. 
'  My  dear  Max, — Charles  is  away  at  Whitchurch  fishing,  so  he  will 
not  receive  your  mosi  kind  letter  till  to-morrow.  I  have  written  by  this 
post  to  the  Rollestons  that  they  may  fill  up  their  rooms,  merely  saying 
that  unavoidable  circumstances  will  keep  us  at  home  on  June  15,  and 
I  do  hope  they  will  not  think  us  ungrateful  and  changeable.  I  have 
no  doubt  there  is  some  wise  reason  for  this  great  disappointment,  and 
perhaps  the  great  honour  under  all  circumstances  which  we  should  have 
felt  it  to  be,  would  have  been  very  bad  for  us.  It  is  so  difficult  to  be 
perfectly  single-minded,  even  in  a  little  parsonage,  that  perhaps  it  is 
a  great  blessing  to  be  saved  the  Theatre  of  Oxford,  which  may  not  be 
the  best  soil  for  the  growth  of  such  a  virtue  ;  and  I  am  sure  I  longed 
too  vehemently  for  the  sight  of  my  dear  husband  in  a  scarlet  gown 
for  it  to  have  done  me  any  good.  Depend  upon  us  both  for  not 
mentioning  the  subject.  It  will  always  be  associated  with  the  pleasant 
and  grateful  remembrance  of  your  kindness,  dear  Max,  and  Dr. 
Stanley's,  and  I  shall  try  hard  to  let  it  obliterate  Dr.  Pusey  and  his 
Christian  hatred.  Oh !  it  is  a  great  mercy  to  live  in  a  parsonage 
remote  from  courts  and  courtiers,  and  even  doctors  of  divinity.  Best 
love  to  dearest  G.  and  delicious  Ada.     Yours  ever  aflTectionately, 

'  F.  E.  Kingsley.' 

Early  in  June  the  Max  Miillers  went  to  Paris,  leaving 
their  children  at  Ray  Lodge.  Here  they  passed  a  delightful 
month  in  constant  intercourse  with  many  of  the  most  dis- 
tinguished members  of  the  literary  world  of  Paris,  a  world  that 
all  along  kept  entirely  aloof  from  the  brilliant  but  evil  Court 
of  Louis  Napoleon.  One  evening  was  spent  with  the  Mohls, 
Madame  Mohl  still  keeping  up  on  a  smaller  scale  the  Salon 
of  the  earlier  part  of  the  century.  On  this  occasion  Madame 
Mohl,  who  was  about  to  start  for  her  annual  visit  to  London, 
amused  her  guests  by  parading  all  the  bonnets  she  had 
provided  for  her  expedition,  and  trying  them  on,  one  after 
another.  Only  those  who  remember  Madame  Mohl's  quaint, 
almost  bizarre,  appearance  can  imagine  the  droll  effect  as 
one  by  one  the  smart  Parisian  bonnets  were  essayed,  and 
the  verdict  of  her  guests,  male  and  female,  eagerly  expected. 


1863]  Mignefs  Eloge  on  Macanlay  279 

Renan's  house  too  was  often  visited,  with  its  rooms  hung 
with  some  of  the  best  portraits  by  Ary  Scheffer,  Madame 
Renan  being  his  niece,  daughter  of  Henri  Scheffer,  whose 
fine  portrait  occupied  a  conspicuous  place.  Max  Muller 
attended  the  meetings  at  the  Institute  as  a  corresponding 
member,  and  he  and  his  wife  were  both  present  the  day  that 
M.  Mignet  pronounced  the  doge  on  Lord  Macaulay.  It  was 
a  fine  scene ;  the  hall  surmounted  by  its  great  dome  was  well 
filled  by  the  members  of  the  Institute,  all  wearing  the  beautiful 
habit  brode  chosen  by  Richelieu,  and  ladies  in  the  gayest  of 
summer  dresses.  Mignet 's  melodious  voice  sounded  clearly 
through  the  vast  assemblage,  and  his  words  were  so  distinctly 
pronounced,  they  were  like  words  cut  out  of  marble,  whilst  it 
was  a  pleasure  to  watch  each  movement  of  his  singularly 
beautiful  mouth.  The  oration  itself  was  magnificent. 
The  following  letter  must  be  about  this  date : — 

To  Rev.  F,  (now  Dean)  Farrar. 
'  My  dear  Sir, — I  am  so  sorry  that  we  can  never  meet  in  peace  and 
exchange  views  :  letters  and  books  are  cumbersome  ways  of  mutual 
explanation,  and  I  do  not  know  how  it  is  that  I  can  never  bring 
myself  to  believe  that  people  hold  different  views  on  matters  accessible 
to  scientific  treatment,  unless  for  some  reason  or  other  they  wish  to  do 
so.  When  I  read  your  books  I  can  fully  enter  into  all  you  mean,  and 
yet  I  do  not  feel  the  least  disturbed  in  my  own  views.  Our  real 
differences  refer  to  facts,  and  these  fortunately  are  amenable  to 
scientific  tests.  In  my  lectures,  as  you  say  quite  rightly,  I  have  not 
said  half  of  what  I  meant  to  say,  perhaps  what  I  ought  to  have  said. 
It  did  not  seem  to  me  the  place  for  it.  But  I  mean  to  give  another 
lecture  specially  on  the  Antiquity  of  Language,  and  then  you,  or  at  all 
events  your  friends,  will  be  surprised  to  see  how  little  we  differ, 
although  we  seem  to  be  diametrically  opposed.  I  could  have  explained 
this  to  you  in  half  an  hour  of  conversation,  but  I  cannot  do  it  by 
letter,  and  I  shudder  at  controversy,  and  have  had  that  horror  all 
my  life.' 

After  three  weeks  in  England  for  examination  work,  Max 
Miiller  and  his  wife  started  for  Germany,  leaving  both  of 
their  children  behind.  They  stopped  at  Bonn  to  see  Baroness 
Bunsen  and  Professor  Bernays,  but  Max  Miiller  was  again 
disappointed  in  making  his  intimate  friend  acquainted  with 
his  wife,  as  it  was  the  time  of  the  Black  Fast,  the  fall  of 


28o  Visit  to  Potsdam  [ch.  xm 

Jerusalem  ;    and  Bernays  could  not  go  anywhere,  and  only 
saw  Max  Muller  for  about  an  hour.     After  joining  his  mother 
at  Chemnitz,  and   taking  her  and  his   sister  with  them  to 
Leipzig   and  Dessau,  the   Max  Miillers  went   on  to  Berlin 
to  see  Max's  friend  Morier,  and  whilst  there  were  commanded 
to  Potsdam  to  dine  with  the  Crown  Prince  and  Princess  of 
Prussia.     Nothing   could   exceed   the   kindness   with   which 
they  were  received,  though  the  visit  was  shorter  than  had 
been   intended    by   the   royal    hosts,   as    the    Crown    Prince 
had  been  suddenly  summoned  to   Gastein,  where  the  King 
and    Bismarck   were   taking   the   waters.      On    arriving    the 
guests  were  driven  about  the  park  till  the  two  o'clock  dinner. 
It  was  intensely  hot  weather,  and  the  dinner  was  in  the  open 
air.     Afterwards  the  royal  children  were  brought  in  by  their 
English  nurses  :  Princess  Charlotte  of  Saxe-Meiningen,  the 
present  Emperor,  and  Prince  Henry,  hardly  a  year  old,  to 
play  round  the  table,  and  talk  to  the  English  guests.     The 
sight  of  this  happy  family  life  made  a  deep  impression  on 
the  visitors.     A  few  days  later   the  Crown  Princess  wrote, 
through  Countess  Briihl,  to  say  what  pleasure  it  had  been  to 
receive  the  Max  Mullers  in  her  own  home.     Things  at  that 
time  were  at  an  unhappy  pass  in  Prussia.    Old  Professor  Bopp 
mentioned  to  Max  Muller,  as  a  mere  on  dit^  something  about 
the  Court  which  had  appeared  as  a  fact  two  months  before  in 
the   English   Times,  adding,  '  It   is   impossible  here  to   find 
out  the  truth ' ;  and  in  one  of  the  confidential  talks  that  Max 
had   with   his    Paris   friend  von   Schlotzer  when   they  were 
alone,  for  in  public  it  was  not  safe  to  talk  of  politics,  von 
Schlotzer   said,  '  I   would    give  anything  to  be  English  for 
a  day,  to  know  what  political  freedom  means.' 

From  Berlin,  Max  Muller  and  his  wife  went  by  Nuremberg 
and  Munich  to  Leoni  on  the  Starnberger  See,  taking  his 
mother  and  his  eldest  niece  with  them.  Here  a  delightfully 
quiet  month  was  passed  in  a  comfortable  pension  close  to 
the  lovely  lake,  where  they  bathed  and  rowed  constantly, 
taking  long  walks  in  the  beautiful  country  round.  From  the 
higher  ground  behind  the  house  they  could  see  the  snow- 
covered  mountains  to  the  south  of  the  lake.  One  scene 
deserves  to  be  recalled.     The  Vocal  Club  {Sanger-  Verein) 


1863]  Venice  281 

from  Munich  came  out  for  the  day,  and  gave  an  open-air 
concert  on  the  summit  of  a  hill  crowned  with  pine  woods  that 
rose  over  the  lake.  It  was  a  picturesque  sight,  the  gay- 
banners,  the  club  members  in  their  many-coloured  scarves, 
and  the  groups  of  peasants  in  their  national  costumes — the 
men  in  high  hats,  and  their  coats  covered  with  large  silver 
buttons ;  the  women  with  their  bright  petticoats,  and  black 
bodices  with  gold  or  silver  embroidery,  with  chains  and 
earrings  of  gold  or  silver,  and  small  black  caps  with  em- 
broidery to  match.  The  part-singing  was  beautiful,  the 
voices  rich  and  melodious  in  themselves,  and  the  expression 
and  light  and  shade  carefully  observed.  Of  course  there  was 
plenty  of  eating  and  drinking,  and  at  last  dancing,  but,  though 
all  seemed  very  free  and  easy,  there  was  no  rudeness,  nothing 
objectionable  in  the  gathering. 

From  Leoni  the  mother  and  niece  returned  to  Chemnitz, 
the  Max  Mullers  going  across  the  Brenner  to  Italy.  It  was 
their  first  taste  of  Italy,  after  which  Max  had,  he  tells  us, 
hankered  all  his  life.  Venice  especially  was  like  a  dream 
realized,  though  the  sight  of  the  Austrian  soldiers  every- 
where roused  his  indignation.  It  was  found  on  visiting  the 
Doge's  Palace  that  many  of  the  best  pictures  were  being 
cleaned.  One  that  he  particularly  desired  to  see —  Venezia 
irio7tfantc,  by  Paul  Veronese — was  not  to  be  seen,  and  he 
was  lamenting  it  one  day  to  the  old  Italian  librarian,  a  true 
patriot,  who,  when  he  found  a  kindred  soul  in  Max  Muller, 
not  only  in  books  but  in  politics,  had  many  a  talk  with  him 
on  the  state  of  Venice.  At  his  last  visit  Max  MUlIer  said  he 
looked  forward  to  coming  again  to  Italy,  adding  significantly, 
'  And  then  I  hope  to  see  Venezia  trionfante  ! '  At  their  next 
visit  it  was  so,  but  the  old  librarian  had  passed  away,  though 
he  lived  long  enough  to  see  his  beloved  city  free  from  the 
hated  foreigner.  The  travellers  returned  by  Turin  and  the 
Italian  Lakes,  the  St.  Gothard,  where  the  first  snows  had 
fallen,  and  which  they  crossed  on  foot,  and  rapidly  through 
Switzerland  to  England. 

Max  M tiller's  lectures  began  as  soon  as  he  returned  to 
Oxford,  and  he  was  as  usual  overwhelmed  with  letters  on  all 
subjects. 


282  Lectures  in  Edinburgh  [ch.  xm 

To  Rev.  G.  Cox. 

Oxford,  November  4. 

'  I  was  not  at  Oxford  when  Dr.  Pusey  preached  his  last  sermon. 
I  have  not  read  it,  nor  have  I  heard  any  remarks  about  it.  But  I  can 
quite  understand  the  impression  which  it  made  on  you. 

'  There  are  not  a  few  points  on  which  Dr.  Pusey's  ideas  have 
become  perfectly  hardened  :  one  cannot  reason  with  him  about  them, 
nor  is  he  able  himself  to  handle  them.  They  have  become  fixed 
ideas — they  do  not  bend,  but  threaten  to  crack. 

'  With  all  that,  I  have  a  strong  personal  regard  for  Dr.  Pusey.  He 
is  a  man  of  great  learning  and  a  vast  experience  of  life,  in  fact,  one  of 
the  two  or  three  interesting  men  at  Oxford.  Besides  that,  he  has 
always  shown  me  great  kindness,  though  he  knows  my  opinions,  and 
though  in  University  matters  we  have  had  fierce  fights  together.  In 
spite  of  that,  and  though  we  were  hardly  on  speaking  terms  at  the 
time  of  the  election  for  the  Sanskrit  Professorship,  he  offered  me  his 
help  unasked,  he  sat  up  day  and  night  (in  the  literal  meaning  of  the 
words)  writing  letters  to  his  friends — whereas  my  liberal  friends,  for 
whom  I  had  worked  hard  on  several  occasions,  did  hardly  anything 
for  me,  and  some  of  them,  on  whom  I  thought  I  had  claims,  failed  me 
altogether.  Stanley  and  Pusey  were  my  chief  supporters,  and  the 
only  men  who,  I  believe,  felt  for  me  when  I  failed  to  obtain  that 
position  in  which  I  might  have  been  really  useful,  and  might  have  been 
able  to  finish  the  work  of  my  life.  However,  I  am  not  blind  to  the 
dangerous  consequences  of  Pusey's  teaching.  I  consider  his  alliance 
with  the  Low  Church  as  a  most  fatal  mistake.  But  I  look  at  all  these 
things  very  much  ab  extra  ;  I  keep  entirely  aloof  of  University  politics, 
and  I  look  more  and  more  to  Germany  as  my  real  home  and  the 
centre  which  attracts  my  interests.  I  shall  stay  in  England  to  finish 
the  work  which  brought  me  here,  but  I  look  forward  to  spending  the 
last  years  of  my  life  among  my  old  friends  in  Germany.' 

Max  Mijller  had  been  invited  in  the  spring  to  deliver 
two  lectures  at  Edinburgh  on  '  Language.'  He  accepted  the 
invitation  to  lecture,  but  begged  that  the  lectures  might  be 
on  '  The  Origin  of  Mythology.'  On  November  9  he  went  to 
Edinburgh  to  deliver  these  two  lectures  at  the  Philosophical 
Institution. 

To  HIS  Wife. 

Edinburgh,  NovetJiber  10. 

'  One  lecture  safely  over.  I  had  an  immense  audience ;  the  place 
was  as  full  as  it  could  hold.     Whether  people  were  pleased  or  not 


1863]  Lectures  in  Edinburgh  283 

I  don't  know;  they  applauded  and  all  that,  but  I  think  I  aimed 
a  little  too  high.  There  were  all  the  Professors  and  learned  men, 
however,  and  they  seemed  pleased  ;  also  Dr.  John  Brown,  a  charming 
man,  of  whom  I  shall  see  more.' 

November  ii. 

'  How  thankful  we  ought  to  be  every  minute  of  our  existence  to 
Him  who  gives  us  all  this  richly  to  enjoy  !  How  little  one  has 
deserved  this  happy  life,  much  less  than  many  poor  sufferers  to  whom 
life  is  a  burden  and  a  hard  and  bitter  trial.  But  then,  how  much 
greater  the  claims  on  us  ;  how  much  more  sacred  the  duty  never  to 
trifle,  never  to  waste  time  and  power,  never  to  compromise,  but  to  live 
in  all  things,  small  and  great,  to  the  praise  and  glory  of  God,  to  have 
God  always  present  with  us,  and  to  be  ready  to  follow  His  voice,  and 
His  voice  only.  Has  our  prosperity  taught  us  to  meet  adversity  when 
it  €omes .?  I  often  tremble,  but  then  I  commit  all  to  God,  and  I  say, 
"  Have  mercy  upon  me,  miserable  sinner  !  " 

'  Let  us  keep  up  our  constant  fight  against  all  that  is  small,  and 
common,  and  selfish  ;  let  us  never  lose  our  faith  in  the  ideal  life,  in  what 
we  ought  to  be,  and  in  what,  with  constant  prayer  to  God,  we  shall  be. 

'  My  work  here  will  soon  be  over.  We  had  a  pleasant  dinner  to- 
night at  Mr.  INIuir's.  I  had  a  drive  in  the  afternoon  with  Dr.  John 
Brown,  a  most  charming,  excellent  man,  with  whom  you  would  have 
been  delighted.  He  is  a  good  friend  of  Lady  A.  Bruce  and  of  Stanley, 
and  he  thinks  they  are  worthy  of  each  other.  I  shall  be  glad  when  my 
lecture  to-morrow  is  over.  People  are  very  civil  and  kind  here.  Prince 
Alfred  sent  me  a  message  to  say  how  sorry  he  was  he  could  not  come 
to  my  lectures,  but  that  every  one  of  his  evenings  had  been  engaged 
this  week.' 

The  following  description  was  sent  at  the  time  to  a  con- 
nexion of  Max  Miiller's  wife  in  London  : — 

'  I  went  on  Friday  night  to  hear  Max  Miiller  on  "  The  Origin  of 
Mythology."  It  was  most  interesting.  I  never  liked  a  lecture  more.  It 
required  close  attention,  yet  was  quite  clear  and  intelligible.  He 
seemed  to  open  new  worlds,  dim,  half-revealed,  mysterious,  and  this 
dimness  gave  a  fascination — wide  stretches  of  thought  and  conjecture 
retreating  into  darkness  yet  to  be  explored,  when  the  Veda,  "  still  with 
seven  seals  upon  it,"  shall  be  adequately  translated. 
11  '  His  inquiry  into  the  origin  of  the  name  of  the  Supreme  Being — 

alike  in  Sanskrit,  Greek,  Latin,  and  Teutonic — was  intensely  interesting, 
and  his  manner  was  so  reverential  on  these  subjects. 

'  He  looks  quite  young,  and  his  manner  and  voice  were  most 
pleasant.     The  hall  was  crowded.' 


284  Mythology  [ch.  xm 

To  Rev.  G.  Cox. 

Edinburgh,  November  10. 

'  Mythology  no  doubt  springs  from  scattered  tales,  and  to  single 
tales  it  should  be  reduced  before  we  attempt  to  explain  it.  This  is 
what  I  thought  so  particularly  happy  in  your  books,  that  you  should 
have  told  the  tales  singly,  as  they  might  have  been  told  by  any  grand- 
mother in  any  small  village  of  Greece,  long  before  the  encyclopaedic 
treatment  of  Greek  fables  began.  I  have  been  trying  my  hand  at 
something  of  the  same  kind  in  German,  on  the  pattern  of  Grimm's 
Aldrchcn,  but  I  have  failed.  The  story  of  Oedipus  has  just  been 
dissected  by  M.  Michel  Br^al  very  cleverly,  though  I  doubt  whether 
people  will  be  convinced  by  it. 

' "  Always  the  Sun,  and  always  the  Sun,"  people  exclaim,  and  yet  it 
is  not  our  fault  if  the  Sun  has  inspired  so  many  legends  and  received 
so  many  names.  And  what  else  do  you  expect  at  the  bottom  of 
mythology,  if  not  the  reflection  of  heaven  and  earth  in  the  mind  and 
language  of  man  ? ' 

To  THE  Same. 

Oxford,  November  29. 

' .  .  .  I  cannot  bring  myself  to  enter  into  or  to  adopt  Kuhn's  theory 
of  clouds  and  thunderstorms  being  at  the  bottom  of  all  Aryan  mytho- 
logy, a  view  which  I  see  has  just  been  strongly  advocated  by  Mr.  Kelle 
in  his  Indo-European  Traditions.  He  gives  a  most  incomplete 
representation  of  Kuhn's  labours.  I  should  have  thought  that  Grote 
had  entirely  dispelled  the  belief  that  there  was  any  historical  substratum 
in  the  legends  of  Troy,  or  at  least  any  more  than  in  the  legends  of 
Charlemagne  taking  Jerusalem,  &c.' 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  Oxford,  November  28. 

'  I  must  just  tell  you  we  are  very  well,  though  we  get  no  rest.  Last 
week  a  visit  from  Princess  Helena  and  Princess  Louise,  to  whom 
I  had  to  show  everything  ;  last  Wednesday  a  ball  at  the  Duke  of 
Marlborough's,  where  G.  and  I  danced  in  the  beautiful  library ;  and 
to-day  a  visit  from  the  Crown  Prince  and  Princess  of  Prussia.  They 
were  with  Dr.  Stanley,  and  we  went  there  for  luncheon,  and  have  been 
walking  about  with  them  till  now.  To-night  a  dinner,  where  we  are 
to  meet  the  Due  d'Aumale  and  Lord  Lawrence,  the  Viceroy  of  India. 
Then  next  week  I  am  ordered  to  Windsor  to  the  Queen,  then  my 
lectures  here — in  fact,  my  head  is  in  a  whirl,  and  I  am  longing  for 
rest.  I  am  happiest  when  quiet  with  my  children,  who  are  darlings 
and  thrive  so  well.' 


1863]  First  Visit  to  Windsor  285 

Just  before  this  letter  to  his  mother,  Max  Miiller  was 
graciously  commanded  to  Windsor  for  the  first  time.  A  day- 
was  named  for  him  to  go  to  luncheon  :  '  The  Queen  is  anxious 
to  see  him,'  and  it  was  considerately  added,  'if  the  day  men- 
tioned is  not  convenient  to  him  another  can  be  named.' 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  Oxford,  December  ii. 

•  I  was  with  the  Queen  for  three-quarters  of  an  hour,  quite  alone. 
Her  Majesty  received  me  in  Prince  Albert's  room,  and  said  she  had 
long  wished  to  see  me,  and  hoped  it  would  not  be  the  last  time,  and 
then  she  talked  in  the  most  brilliant  and  interesting  way,  and  spoke 
German  better  than  I  do.  The  Queen  asked  me  to  tell  her  about  my 
work,  spoke  a  good  deal  about  Bunsen,  about  Prince  Albert,  about 
Schleswig-Holstein,  and  I  could  often  hardly  believe  it  was  the  Queen 
of  England  talking  to  me  !  The  Crown  Princess  was  not  at  Windsor, 
but  sent  for  me  on  Tuesday,  and  we  talked  for  an  hour  and  a  half. 
She  too  was  most  charming.  The  Princess  soon  returns  to  Berlin, 
which  cannot  be  a  pleasant  place  to  her  at  present.  She  is  a  very 
remarkable  woman,  very  liberal,  and  full  of  enthusiasm  for  Germany.' 

To  Rev.  G.  Cox. 

Oxford,  December  10. 
'  The  Basque  is  a  most  interesting  language  to  study  as  the  type  of 
an  agglutinative  form  of  speech,  but  though  it  agrees  in  form  most 
strikingly  with  the  Turanian  language,  the  Finnic  more  particularly, 
no  one  has  yet  discovered  any  similarity  between  the  natural  elements 
of  the  Basque  and  any  other  language.  How  far  the  Basque  was 
spoken  in  former  days  has  been  shown  by  Humboldt  in  his  Essay  on 
the  Original  Inhabitants  of  Spain,  before  him  by  Hernas.  Michel's 
derivations  of  Basque  words  are  copied  from  earlier  writers ,  mostly 
theologians,  who,  in  a  language  such  as  the  Basque,  easily  found  all 
that  they  looked  for.  They  are  worth  nothing,  li  year  was  called 
inundation,  this  is  no  more  than  if  we  call  year  either  spring,  or 
autumn,  or  winter.  But  the  Basque  is  a  language  which,  in  the  hands 
of  an  unscrupulous  philologist,  will  be  made  to  say  anything.' 

On  December  21  Max  Miiller  writes  to  his  mother:  'I  am 
very  much  excited,  for  I  have  been  commanded  to  Osborne 
to  give  some  lectures  before  the  Queen  and  the  Princesses. 
The  days  are  not  fixed,  but  probably  early  in  January.' 

Christmas  was  spent  at  Ray  Lodge,  and  then  Max  Miiller 
went  back  alone  to  Oxford  to  prepare  the  royal  lectures. 


286  Lectures  for  Osborne 

To  HIS  Wife. 

Oxford,  December  28. 

*  Here  I  am  at  work,  and  getting  on  very  well,  I  hope.  I  dine  with 
Stanley  to-night,  to  hear  from  him  and  Lady  Augusta  what  to  observe 
and  what  to  avoid  at  Osborne.  I  am  sorry  to  be  away  from  you,  but 
I  feel  I  ought  to  do  my  very  best,  and  I  can  write  better  when  I  am 
here  alone  and  have  all  my  books.' 

To  his  mother  he  writes,  December  30 :'  I  go  to  Osborne 
on  the  third  and  stay  till  the  sixth,  so  you  can  think  of  me.' 


I 


* 


I 


CHAPTER   XIV 
1 864-1 865 

Lectures  at  Osborne.  Schleswig-Holstein  war.  Birth  of  third  child. 
Member  of  Royal  Irish  Academy.  Weymouth.  Visit  of  his  mother. 
Lecture  at  Leeds.  Member  of  Turin  Academy.  Last  visit  to  Ray 
Lodge.    Sub-Librarianship  of  Bodleian. 

•  Professor  Max  Muller  had  the  honour  of  delivering 
two  lectures  last  week  at  Osborne  before  Her  Majesty  and 
the  Royal  Family,  on  the  Science  of  Language.'  Such  was 
the  announcement  in  the  Court  Circular,  and  the  following 
letters  give  the  details  of  this  interesting  visit : — 

To  HIS  Wife. 

Osborne,  ya««i2ry  5. 
'  I  arrived  here  all  safe.  I  met  the  Queen's  messenger  at  South- 
ampton, and  we  went  to  Osborne  in  the  Elfin,  which  had  brought 
Prince  Alfred  over.  The  crossing  took  more  than  an  hour,  but  I  did 
not  feel  uncomfortable.  I  sat  in  the  cabin  with  Prince  Leiningen, 
who  commands  the  vessel,  and  we  had  a  pleasant  chat  together  in 
German.  I  was  very  tired  when  I  arrived  here,  and  full  of  cold  and 
headache,  so  I  laid  down  in  my  own  room,  which  was  warm  and 
cosy,  and  slept  till  dinner-time.  I  dined  with  the  household  at  eight. 
I  sat  between  Lady  Churchill  and  Mrs.  Ponsonby.  All  was  very 
pleasant.  Sir  James  Clarke  was  there,  Mr.  Ponsonby,  Sir  Thomas 
Biddulph,  and  some  more  ladies.  After  dinner  we  went  to  the  ladies' 
drawing-room,  where  a  message  arrived  from  the  Queen,  who  wished 
to  see  me.  So  I  was  conducted  into  the  royal  portion  of  the  palace, 
and  in  a  small  boudoir  there  were  the  Queen,  Princess  Hohenlohe, 
and  Princess  Helena  :  afterwards  Mrs.  Bruce  came  in.  I  did  my  best 
to  talk  sense,  but  oh!  my  poor  head.  The  Queen  was  very  kind, 
and  thanked  me  for  coming,  and  said  she  was  looking  forward  very 
much  to  my  lectures.  The  conversation  was  in  German,  and  you 
cannot  imagine  the  dignity  and  graciousness  of  the  Queen  when  she 
spoke  with  great  composure  of  Prince  Albert ;  and  the  reports  spread 
abroad  about  her  state  of  health  are  absolutely  absurd.  After  about 
twenty  minutes  the  Queen  bowed,  and  I  went  straight  to  bed.  I  feel 
much  better  to-day,  and  hope  to  get  through  my  lecture  without 


288  Osborne  [ch. 


XIV 


disgrace.  I  received  a  message  that  Princess  Helena  wished  to  walk 
with  me  in  the  afternoon.  Then  at  six  there  is  to  be  the  lecture, 
diagrams  and  all.  Prince  Arthur  will  be  there ;  he  was  kept  a  day 
longer  on  purpose.  The  palace  is  full  of  beautiful  works  of  art,  but 
I  have  hardly  had  time  to  look  at  them  yet.' 

January  6. 
'  I\Iy  first  lecture  is  over,  and  from  all  I  can  hear  it  has  not  been  a 
failure.  Yesterday  in  the  afternoon  I  had  a  very  pleasant  walk  with 
Princess  Helena  and  Mrs.  Bruce.  Princess  Helena  showed  me  their 
private  museum,  which  they  keep  in  a  Swiss  cottage,  full  of  curious 
things  which  have  been  given  them,  or  which  the  Princes  have  collected 
in  their  foreign  travels.  There  were  the  Queen's  former  playthings,  and 
a  kitchen  where  the  Princesses  cook  and  bake,  and  kitchen  gardens, 
one  for  each  of  them,  and  the  Princess  Royal  every  year  gets  her 
green  peas  from  her  own  plot  sent  to  Berlin,  and  enjoys  them  greatly. 
Everything  is  full  of  recollections  of  the  Prince,  and  they  all  talk 
about  him  as  if  he  were  still  among  them.  This  is  thoroughly 
German,  and  it  always  struck  me  in  England  how  carefully  all  con- 
versation on  those  who  have  gone  before  us  is  avoided,  and  how  much 
of  comfort  and  good  influence  derived  from  the  memory  of  those  we 
loved  is  thereby  lost.  After  we  came  home  from  our  walk,  I  had  just 
time  to  prepare  for  my  lecture,  and  to  get  my  diagrams  mounted.  At 
six  all  the  people  assembled  in  the  Council  Chamber,  and  after  a  time 
came  the  Queen  and  the  Princesses.  The  Queen  had  not  attended  a 
lecture  for  more  than  ten  years,  and  everybody  was  surprised  at  her 
appearing.  She  listened  very  attentively,  and  did  not  knit  at  all, 
though  her  work  was  brought.  After  the  lecture  the  Queen  conversed 
•with  me  for  a  long  time,  asking  many  shrewd  questions,  as  did  her 
sister.  Princess  Hohenlohe.  It  was  then  time  to  dress  for  dinner,  and 
then  to  bed.  This  morning  I  had  an  interview  with  Princess  Beatrice, 
who  however  was  a  little  shy  at  first,  but  became  after  a  time  very 
amusing.     She  talks  English,  French,  and  German.' 

January  6,  ii  p.m. 

'  Just  to  finish  the  account  of  my  visit  here,  I  must  tell  you  that  after 
I  had  sent  my  letter  to  you  to-day,  the  Queen  sent  for  me  again  to  her 
drawing-room,  and  brought  Princess  Beatrice  with  her  to  make  her 
read  to  me  in  German,  English,  and  French.  She  did  it  remarkably 
well,  and  the  Queen  talked  to  me  a  good  deal  about  education,  and 
how  she  taught  her  children.  Afterwards  Princess  Helena  showed 
me  all  the  family  pictures  by  VVinterhalter,  and  the  splendid  statues. 
The  Princess,  when  you  know  her,  reminds  you  much  of  the  Princess 
Royal.    We  walked  about  for  a  long  time  discussing  all  sorts  of 


1864]  Osborne  289 

things.  I  had  then  to  prepare  for  my  lecture,  to  which  the  Queen 
came  again,  but  without  any  work  at  all.  In  the  evening  Lord 
Granville  arrived,  and  the  Queen  was  very  busy.  She  sent  me  word 
she  hoped  to  see  me,  but  afterwards  sent  to  say  it  was  getting  too  late, 
and  that  she  w^as  sorry  she  could  not  have  seen  me,  and  thanked  me 
again.  In  the  evening  I  had  a  long  talk  with  Lord  Granville,  and  to- 
morrow morning  I  hope  to  start  at  9.30  with  Prince  Arthur  and  Sir 
James  Clarke.' 

These  are  the  concluding  words  of  the  last  lecture : — 

*  When  the  two  last  volumes  of  the  Veda  are  published  we  shall 
have  saved  from  destruction  a  work  older  than  the  Iliad,  older  than 
any  other  literary  document  of  that  noble  race  of  mankind  to  which 
the  greatest  nations  in  the  world's  history  have  belonged — a  race 
which  after  receiving  from  a  Semitic  race,  from  the  Jews,  its  best 
treasure,  its  religion,  the  religion  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments,  is 
now,  with  the  English  in  the  van,  carrying  on  slowly  but  irresistibly 
the  conquest  of  the  world  by  means  of  commerce,  colonization,  educa- 
tion, and  conversion.' 

On  Max  M tiller's  return,  he  heard  from  Sir  Charles  Phipps 
how  pleased  the  Queen  had  been  with  the  lectures — '  of  that 
you  must  be  fully  aware ' — and  Sir  Charles  added  how  much 
he  had  himself  valued  the  information  and  instruction  com- 
municated, whilst  three  days  later  Lady  Augusta  Stanley 
forwarded  the  following  extract  from  a  letter  from  Princess 
Helena,  now  Princess  Christian  of  Schleswig-Holstein. 
Gracious  permission  has  been  given  to  insert  it. 

'  We  have  had  two  most  interesting  and  charming  lectures  from 
Professor  Max  Miiller.  I  cannot  tell  you  how  much  I  enjoyed  them 
and  value  them.  Do  tell  him  so  when  you  see  him  again,  and  how 
much  I  regret  not  being  able  to  hear  any  more.  I  wish  there  was  a 
possibility  of  my  hearing  more  at  some  future  time ;  I  hope  so — and 
Mama  has  not  said  No !  You  cannot  think  how  pleasant  it  was  for 
me  to  be  able  to  talk  to  a  clever  man  like  Professor  M.  and  one 
who  does  not  inspire  me  with  fear,  as  some  very  learned  people  do. 
The  subject  he  treats  is  one  which  always  interested  me  so  much. 
Ever  with  much  love,  your  affectionate  friend,  *  Helena.' 

To  Rev.  G.  Cox. 

Ox^OKT),  Jatmary  22. 
'.  .  .  When  the  Rishis  first  perceived  the  necessity  of  one  Superior 
Power  is  difficult  to   say.      It  breaks  through  here  and  there,  but 
I  U 


290         Persian  Influences  in  the  Bible      [ch.  xiv 

their  religion  does  not  become  monotheistic,  for  this  involves  the 
denial  of  polytheism.  It  always  remains  henotheistic,  if  one  may 
coin  such  a  word.  I  mean  the  one  single  god  addressed  at  the  time 
shares  in  all  the  qualities  of  a  supreme  being,  but  soon  after  another 
god  is  addressed  equally  supreme,  and  their  logic  does  not  in  the  least 
revolt  at  this.  The  Etruscan  names  of  Greek  deities  have  about  the 
same  value  as  the  English  names  of  the  Indian  deities.  I  mean  they 
are  mere  corruptions,  pardy  owing  to  ignorance,  partly  to  the  imper- 
fections of  the  Etruscan  alphabet,  which  possessed  no  media,  and 
despised  vowels  almost  as  much  as  the  Semitic  languages.' 

To  THE  Same. 

January  26. 

' .  .  .  Much  as  I  admire  M.  Brdal's  essay  on  Cacus,  I  do  not  the 
least  feel  convinced  by  his  explanation  of  the  dualism  between  Ormuzd 
and  Ahriman,  nor  by  his  theory  of  Persian  influences  to  be  discovered 
in  the  early  portions  of  the  Bible.  I  am  as  far  from  prejudices  on  this 
point  as  M.  Brdal,  who  is  a  Jew,  and  who,  like  most  educated  Jews, 
looks  upon  the  books  of  the  Old  Testament  as  much  more  than 
inspired — taking  inspired  in  the  modern  sense  of  that  word — namely, 
as  real,  old,  historical  documents.  I  should  value  any  such  traces  of 
influences  received  from  neighbouring  nations  by  the  writers  of  the 
Old  Testament  most  highly ;  but  such  is  the  importance  from  an 
historical  point  of  view  that  I  shall  not  feel  inclined  to  build  any  con- 
clusions on  such  vague  evidence  as  that  brought  together  by  M.  Brdal. 
.  .  .  Any  such  word  as  Asdossodeus,  if  it  could  be  discovered  in  the 
early  books,  would  be  invaluable,  but  though  I  do  not  give  up  all 
hope  of  such  discoveries  hereafter,  I  am  bound  to  say  that  as  yet 
I  cannot  see  them.' 

To  THE  Same. 

February  16. 

'  I  am  afraid  I  have  hardly  done  justice  to  your  book  in  my  review. 
The  fact  is,  I  was  overwhelmed  with  work,  and,  after  a  short  intro- 
duction, I  put  in  a  portion  of  my  lectures  which  I  am  preparing  for 
the  Press.  However,  I  find  that  my  article  has  at  least  startled  several 
people  who  have  a  tender  feehng  for  Helen  and  Troy,  and  I  hope 
they  will  take  to  your  book  and  try  to  get  some  more  information. 
I  may  be  wrong  in  my  explanation  of  the  relation  between  Helen  and 
Paris,  Sarama  and  Pam,  but  I  cannot  help  thinking  that  Helena  and 
Sarama  are  the  same  word.' 

The  following  letter  refers  first  to  Mr.  Gifford  Palgrave, 
the  Arabian  traveller,  who  had  just  returned  from  his  daring 
expedition,   and    then    to  the   Schleswig-Holstein    question, 


1864]  Schleswig-Holstetn  291 

which  occupied  so  much  of  Max  Miiller's  attention  during  the 
early  part  of  this  year. 

To  HIS  Wife. 

February  17. 

*  After  luncheon  I  went  to  see  the  Jesuit,  and  had  a  very  interesting 
talk  with  him  about  a  thousand  subjects.  I  found  him  clever,  well- 
informed,  and  devoted  to  his  work ;  quite  unanglicized,  however,  in 
all  his  views,  and  strangely  torn  away  from  all  the  fibres  of  his  native 
soil.  It  is  a  pleasant  contrast  to  the  self-seeking,  money-making,  place- 
hunting  tendencies,  to  see  a  man  without  any  ambition  as  far  as  this 
life  is  concerned,  but  evidently  full  of  ambition  for  another  life.  I 
enclose  a  letter  from  Delane ;  so  you  see  I  am  in  for  it.  I  am  all  in 
large  print,  to  offer  a  larger  target  to  the  arrows  of  the  enemy.' 

Max  MUller,  both  in  letters  to  the  Times  and  to  friends  in 
England  and  abroad,  upheld  the  independence  of  the  Duchies : 
'  They  are  sovereign  and  independent  states,  and  are  indis- 
solubly  united.'  He  advocated  the  claims  of  the  house  of 
Augustenburg,  and  reprobated  the  high-handed  policy  of 
Bismarck,  as  much  as  the  pretensions  of  Denmark.  In  later 
years  he  saw  that  Bismarck's  policy  with  regard  to  the  Duchies 
was  the  first  link  in  the  chain  that  led  to  the  unity  of 
Germany.  The  feeling  in  England  was  very  strong.  Denmark 
was  weak,  Prussia  and  Austria  strong ;  therefore  Denmark 
must  be  upheld — people  forgetting  that  the  Duchies,  whose 
rights  were  at  stake,  were  still  weaker.  Max  Miiller  was 
openly  attacked  in  the  papers,  and  received  anonymous  letters 
from  Danes  in  England  that  were  too  vile  to  show  to  any 
one ;  in  some  his  life  even  was  threatened.  One  old  friend 
assumed  in  the  AthencEiini  that  he  was  the  author  of  a 
pamphlet,  The  Dano-German  Conflict  and  Lord  RiisseWs 
Proposals  of  Mediation,  calling  it  'an  ingenious  mystifica- 
tion, the  author  of  which  wishes  to  be  supposed  to  be  an 
Englishman.'  The  author  was  an  Englishman  connected 
with  the  Government,  and  therefore  could  not  give  his  name. 
Max  Mijller  always  signed  his  letters,  and  never  masked  as 
an  Englishman. 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  March  4. 

'You  will  have  gathered  from  the  papers  that  I  am  quite  well. 

I  had  lately  to  tell  the  English  something  of  the  truth,  and  though 

U  2 


292  Schleswig-Holstein  ch.  xiv 

they  don't  like  to  hear  it,  yet  they  have  taken  it  well.  The  common 
papers  abuse  me,  but  they  are  of  little  weight,  and  the  leading  ones 
behave  civilly,  though  they  answer  with  the  most  absurd  nonsense. 
All  this  takes  up  my  time,  that  is  the  worst,  and  disturbs  my  work  ; 
but  one  must  do  one's  duty,  and  now  that  I  am  known  in  England,  it 
fell  to  my  lot  to  take  up  the  cudgels  for  the  truth  on  the  German  side. 
The  affair  is  still  very  complicated.  Russia,  Austria,  and  Prussia 
hang  together,  but  with  bad  intentions.  Everything  now  depends  on 
France,  and  the  Emperor  will  sell  himself  to  the  highest  bidder — either 
to  England  or  Russia.  England  has  plunged  deeply,  and  will  hardly 
come  out  with  a  whole  skin.  Palmerston  would  like  war,  but  the 
people,  at  least  in  manufacturing  towns  and  the  north,  are  against  it. 
The  King  of  the  Belgians  arrived  to-day.' 

To  THE  Same. 
Contemporary  Letter,  March  4. 

'  M.  has  talked  of  writing  to  you  for  some  days,  as  he  was  afraid 
you  would  share  the  fears  of  the  German  papers,  which  seem  to  think 
he  must  be  in  prison,  or  very  near  it,  for  his  letters  to  the  Times. 
Happily,  here  any  one  may  speak  out  his  mind  freely  without  fear  of 
any  bad  consequences.  Such  certainly  is  not  the  case  in  Berlin  now, 
as  we  hear  from  Morier  that  Herr  von  Schlotzer  has  been  sent  off  to 
Rome  for  having  expressed  his  feelings  against  Bismarck  too  freely. 
The  newspapers  are  all  very  angry  with  M.,  which  proves  that  they 
feel  the  truth  of  what  he  says  ;  but  every  newspaper  almost  is  ultra- 
Danish,  except  the  local  papers  of  Liverpool  and  Manchester,  and 
other  great  places  of  trade,  where  the  merchants  are  German  in  feel- 
ing, and  entirely  opposed  to  any  idea  of  war.  The  Queen's  life  is  no 
easy  one  at  present.  Her  own  feehngs  entirely  German,  and  her 
Ministers  and  people  as  entirely  Danish.  She  must  be  happy  just  now 
at  having  old  King  Leopold  with  her,  as  she  leans  so  much  on  him.' 

Max  MUller's  lectures  this  term  were  on  *  The  Origin  of 
Fables,'  and  were  largely  attended. 

To  HIS  Wife. 

Oxford,  March  30. 

'  I  had  a  visit  to-day  from  the  Schleswig-Holstein  architect — a  very 
nice  fellow.  He  came  to  England  on  business  :  is  building  a  grand 
mansion  somewhere  near  York.  He  told  me  many  things  about  the 
war,  &c.  He  is  a  man  of  forty-five,  with  wife  and  children,  in  very 
good  business.  He  has  enrolled  himself  to  fight  as  soon  as  the 
Prussians  and  Austrians  are  gone.  All  his  friends,  he  says,  have  done 
the  same,  and  are  ready  to  die  rather  than  submit  to  the  Danes  again. 


1864]  Death  of  the  Old  Aunt  293 

I  had  a  visit  from ,  who  brought  me  all  sorts  of  messages  from 

Princess  Hohenlohe.  However,  I  told  him  nothing  could  be  done  at 
present.  I  also  received  an  address  and  vote  of  thanks  from  Bremen, 
largely  signed.' 

Early  in  April  Max  Miiller  heard  of  the  death  of  his 
mother's  old  aunt,  Frau  Klausnitzer,  mother  of  Emilie, 
Baroness  Stolzenberg.     He  writes  : — 

To   HIS   IMoTHER. 

Translation.  April  5. 

'  The  news  of  the  death  of  the  dear  old  aunt  has  affected  me  very 
much.  She  had  indeed  enjoyed  the  full  measure  of  human  life,  and 
in  her  old  age  had  a  large  measure  of  happiness  ;  but  when  the  moment 
of  parting  comes — come  as  it  may — it  comes  always  too  soon.  I  have 
only  had  the  printed  notice,  and  know  nothing  of  how  it  was.  In 
your  last  letter  you  said  she  was  so  well  and  bright,  and  then  I  always 
thought,  "  Well,  whilst  the  old  aunt  is  so  well  and  strong  my  mother  has 
a  good  spell  of  life  still  before  her."  One  only  fancies  the  generations 
must  follow  each  other,  till  the  turn  comes  for  ourselves.  Well,  for 
those  who  have  had  such  a  happy  old  age,  and  remained  strong  in 
mind  and  body  to  the  last,  those  who  are  left  can  only  thank  God, 
and  pray  for  a  like  end  for  themselves  and  for  all  they  love.  We 
accustom  ourselves  so  easily  to  life  as  a  second  nature,  and  in  spite  of 
the  graves  around  us,  death  remains  something  unnatural,  hard  and 
terrifying.  That  should  not  be.  An  early  death  is  terrifying,  but  as 
we  grow  older  our  thoughts  should  accustom  themselves  to  passing 
away  at  the  end  of  a  long  life's  journey.  All  is  so  beautiful,  so  good, 
so  wisely  ordered,  that  even  death  can  be  nothing  hard,  nothing  dis- 
turbing ;  it  all  belongs  to  a  great  plan,  which  we  do  not  understand, 
but  of  which  we  know  that  it  is  wiser  than  all  wisdom,  better  than  all 
good,  that  it  cannot  be  otherwise,  cannot  be  better.  In  faith  we  can 
live,  and  we  can  die — can  even  see  those  go  before  us,  who  came 
before  us,  and  whom  we  must  follow.  All  is  not  according  to  our 
will,  to  our  wisdom,  but  according  to  a  heavenly  Will,  and  those  who 
have  once  found  each  other  through  God's  hand  will,  clinging  to  His 
hand,  find  each  other  again.  Let  me  soon  hear  how  you  are,  and 
submit  to  God's  Will  quietly  and  with  resignation.' 

All  these  early  months  Max  Miiller  vv^as  preparing  his 
second  volume  of  Lectures  on  Language  for  the  Press,  which 
had  been  delayed  by  his  visit  to  Germany  the  previous  year. 


294  Comparative  Mythology  [ch.  xiv 

Before,  however,  they  were  ready,  a  fourth  edition  of  the  first 
volume  came  out,  of  1,250  copies  like  the  others.  He  also 
wrote  a  much-admired  article  on  *  The  Language  and  Poetry 
of  Schleswig-Holstein,'  with  some  good  translations  of  Klaus 
Groth's  *  Platt-Deutsch  Poems.'  This  was  reprinted  in  Chips, 
first  edition.  Volume  III. 

To  Rev.  G.  Cox. 

Oxford,  April  1 1 . 

*  If  the  old  generation  is  uncritically  sceptical,  the  young  generation 
is  uncritically  credulous.  Now  the  young  generation,  the  rising 
scholars,  to  a  man,  swear  in  Comparative  Philology  and  Mythology, 
and  the  future  is  theirs,  I  am  afraid  as  we  get  older  we  shall  be 
equally  unwilling  to  change  our  views  and  examine  our  evidence. 
I  hope  in  that  case  we  may  abstain  and  stand  by  in  silence ;  but  though 
I  hope  it,  I  am  not  quite  certain  on  that  point.  Surely,  Comparative 
Mythology  is  not  self-evident ;  if  it  were,  where  would  be  the  pleasure 
of  having  dug  up  some  of  these  old  bones  ?  People  who  make  new 
discoveries  ought  not  to  be  angry  with  the  world  for  not  accepting 
them  at  once  !  To  me,  I  confess,  though  it  may  sound  very  conceited, 
there  is  a  pleasure  in  living  in  a  small  University.  I  am  old  enough  to 
remember  the  incredulous  wagging  of  heads  when  Bopp  declared  that 
the  infinitive  was  the  dative  or  some  other  case  of  an  abstract  noun  : 
there  is  hardly  a  grammar  now  where  you  do  not  find  this.  Even 
now,  if  you  tell  people  that  two  only  of  the  ten  numerals  in  Greek  and 
Sanskrit  are  oxytone,  and  that  this  is  not  by  accident,  they  think  you 
are  talking  nonsense.  Fifty  years  hence  a  boy  will  be  plucked  who 
does  not  know  it.  Now  you  know  I  am  myself  a  great  unbeliever  in 
many  mythological  parallelisms,  and  I  am  quite  prepared  to  admit 
that  many  of  my  own  comparisons  will  be  knocked  over.  It  is  sad 
that  it  should  be  so,  but  so  it  is !  even  old  Bopp's  Comparative 
Grammar  is  by  this  time  riddled  with  shot  and  crumbling  down,  but 
something  better  has  been  put  in  its  place.  But  that  the  principles 
I  have  laid  down  for  the  study  of  Comparative  Mythology  are  sound 
I  am  prepared  to  prove  against  the  world.' 

To  HIS  Wife. 

Oxford,  June  17. 

'  Our  garden  looks  so  well,  and  I  jump  out  of  window  and  look  at 
my  roses,  and  then  go  back  to  my  work.  There  is  to  me  a  beauty 
and  mystery  and  sanctity  about  flowers,  and  when  I  see  them  come 
and  go,  no  one  knows  whence  and  whither,  I  ask,  What  more  miracles 
do  we  want  ?     What  better,  more  beautiful,  more  orderly  world  could 


1864]  Almsgiving  '         295 

we  wish  to  belong  to  than  that  by  which  we  are  surrounded  and 
supported  on  all  sides  ?  Where  is  there  a  flaw  or  a  fault  ?  Then  why 
should  we  fear  unless  the  flaws  are  within  us,  and  we  will  not  see  the 
blessing  and  the  rest  which  we  might  enjoy  if  we  only  trusted  to  the 
Author  of  all  that  beauty,  order,  and  wisdom  about  us  ?  It  is  a  perfect 
sin  not  to  be  happy  in  this  world,  and  how  much  of  the  misery  which 
there  is,  is  the  work  of  men,  or  could  be  removed  by  men,  if  they 
would  but  work  together  for  each  other's  good.  It  seems  so  hopeless 
to  do  any  good  on  so  small  a  scale  as  ours  must  necessarily  be  ;  yet 
I  do  not  think  we  do  enough,  not  in  proportion  to  what  is  given  us 
without  any  desert.' 

Max  Miiller  had  very  strong  feelings  about  the  duty  of 
almsgiving,  and  considered  a  tenth  of  all  he  had  the  least 
that  should  be  given  away  annually.  In  most  years  he  far 
exceeded  this  sum,  and  even  his  wife  never  knew  the  constant 
help  he  gave  to  poor  young  students  and  literary  men,  both 
German  and  English.  To  his  mother  and  sister  he  was  most 
generous.  He  had  been  a  great  smoker  before  his  marriage, 
and  indulged  in  the  best  cigars,  but  he  gave  up  smoking 
entirely  when  he  had  the  expenses  of  a  household  to  provide 
for,  that  his  charity  purse,  as  he  called  it,  might  not  suffer ; 
and  it  was  only  in  the  last  twenty  years  of  his  life  that  he 
took  to  smoking  again,  and  then  only  cigarettes,  and  very 
few  of  them  each  day. 

As  soon  as  his  book  was  printed,  Max  Miiller  joined  his 
wife  and  children  at  Ray  Lodge,  and  on  June  22  he  writes 
to  his  mother  that  he  was  expecting  the  publication  of  his 
second  volume  of  Lectures,  and  did  not  trouble  himself  as  to 
its  reception.  '  One  does  one's  best,  and  one  says  what  one 
feels  is  right,  and  the  rest  one  lets  alone.  I  am  not  at  all 
sorry  that  I  have  spoken  out  to  the  English,  and  if  they 
abuse  me,  it  shows  they  are  ashamed.'  And  his  wife  wrote 
also :  '  Max  is  enjoying  his  holiday  here,  for  the  lectures  being 
off  his  hands  he  is  giving  himself  perfect  rest  and  doing 
nothing  but  lie  in  the  hayfields  or  the  garden,  enjoying 
the  flowers.' 

On  August  I  Max  MuUer's  third  child,  a  third  daughter, 
was  born.  In  writing  to  ask  his  valued  friend  Dean  Stanley 
to  be  godfather,  he  says : — 


296  Birth  of  Third  Child  [ch.  xiv 

To  Dean  Stanley. 

August  2. 

'  I  always  hoped  to  have  you  as  godfather  to  my  first  son,  if  there 
should  be  one.  As  it  seems,  however,  that  there  is  to  be  no  litde 
Max,  I  shall  wait  no  longer.  I  have  no  doubt  that  your  family  of 
godchildren  is  a  very  large  one,  but  as  I  think  you  may  trust  G.  and 
myself  that  we  shall  try  to  bring  up  our  children  in  the  real  faith  and 
true  discipline  of  Christ,  I  hope  you  will  be  able  to  accede  to  our 
request,  and  add  this  one  to  many  other  proofs  of  real  friendship 
which  you  have  given  to  both  of  us.  Have  you  seen  Bunsen's  Leben 
Jesu  ?  I  read  it,  and  wrote  to  Madame  Bunsen  asking  her  to  have  it 
pubhshed,  and  translated  into  English,  possibly  into  French  also. 
I  like  it,  and  I  think  just  now  it  will  do  good.  It  contains  the  soul, 
which  is  wanting  in  Renan's  ghost,  or  rather  in  his  corpse,  of  Christ. 
It  gives  all  that  is  essential  in  the  outward  life  of  Christ,  and  then 
throws  the  burden  of  believing  or  disbelieving  the  divinity  of  Christ  on 
every  one  of  us,  as  it  was  thrown  on  those  who  witnessed  His  real  life, 
who  had  to  break  with  a  religion  dear  and  sacred  to  themselves,  and 
whose  senses  and  reason  must  have  had  to  pass  through  a  much  more 
severe  struggle  than  we  have  to  pass  through,  before  they  yielded  to 
the  voice  within,  that  Christ  was  the  Son  of  God.  I  do  not  know 
whether  you  would  consider  it  wise  to  have  your  name  in  any  way 
connected  with  a  translation  of  Bunsen's  work,  but  I  hope  it  will  not 
be  brought  out  with  any  appearance  of  coming  from  a  hostile  camp. 
It  should  come  as  a  message  of  peace — as  a  minimum,  a  very  small 
minimum,  if  you  like — but  with  a  large  margin  on  every  side,  which 
need  not  remain  a  blank.' 

In  writing  to  tell  his  mother  of  the  birth  of  her  new 
grandchild,  Max  mentions  at  the  end  of  his  letter  that  1,000 
copies  of  his  Lectures  had  been  sold  the  first  day. 

To  Rev.  G.  Cox. 

Oxford,  August  5,  1864. 
'  My  dear  Sir, — .  .  .  As  to  annihilation,  all  I  mean  is  that  it  is  a  word 
without  any  conceivable  meaning,  and  that  it  might  do  some  people 
good  to  see  this  clearly.  We  are — that  is  enough.  What  we  are  does 
not  depend  on  us ;  what  we  shall  be,  neither.  We  may  conceive  the 
idea  of  change  in  form,  but  not  of  cessation  or  destruction  of  substance. 
No  doubt  people  mean  frequently  by  annihilation  the  loss  of  conscious 
personality,  as  distinct  from  material  annihilation.  On  that  point 
I  said  nothing,  because  it  would  have  led  me  too  far  out  of  my  own 
sphere.     However,  what  I  feel  about  it  is  shortly  this.     If  there  is  any- 


1864]  Weymouth — Mother's  Visit.  297 

thing  real  and  substantial  in  our  conscious  personality,  then  whatever 
there  is  real  and  substantial  in  it  cannot  cease  to  exist.  If  on  the 
contrary  we  mean  by  conscious  personality  something  that  is  the  result 
of  accidental  circumstances,  then,  no  doubt,  we  must  face  the  idea  of 
such  a  personality  ceasing  to  be  what  it  now  is.  I  believe,  however, 
that  the  true  source  and  essence  of  our  personality  lies  in  what  is  the 
most  real  of  all  real  things,  and  in  so  far  as  it  is  true,  it  cannot  be 
destroyed.  There  is  a  distinction  between  conscious  personality  and 
personal  consciousness.  A  child  has  personal  consciousness ;  a  man 
who  is  this  or  that,  a  Napoleon  or  a  Talleyrand,  has  conscious 
personality.  INIuch  of  that  conscious  personality  is  merely  temporary 
and  passes  away;  but  the  personal  consciousness  remains.  I  do  not 
think  that  Schleiermacher  could  have  said  that  the  last  enemy  that 
would  be  destroyed  in  us  is  the  idea  of  our  immortality.  What  he 
may  have  said  is,  our  idea  of  immortality.  I  should  like  to  see  this 
subject  fully  and  freely  discussed.  It  is  no  doubt  the  old  controversy 
between  Nominalism  and  Realism  under  a  new  form.  We  know  what 
stuff  words  are  made  of,  and  it  strikes  me  that  those  who  know  the 
antecedents  of  words  are  spared  many  troubles  and  difficulties  in 
religious  and  philosophical  struggles.' 

The  middle  of  September  the  whole  family  party  went 
for  change  to  Weymouth,  where  they  were  joined  by  Max 
Muller's  mother,  who  returned  with  them  to  Oxford  and 
stayed  on  with  them  the  whole  winter. 

Politics  crop  up  again  towards  the  close  of  the  year,  as 
the  follov/ing  letter  to  Morier,  Secretary  of  Legation  at  Berlin, 
shows.     Morier  shared  all  Max  MUller's  feelings  as  to  the 

Duchies : — 

Oxford,  Novetnher  lo. 
'  INIy  dear  Morier, — For  the  sake  of  decency,  if  not  from  a  feeling 
of  personal  friendship,  I  trust  the  Duchies  will  soon  be  handed  over 
to  Duke  Frederick.  If  Prussia  attempts  to  swallow  the  small  morsel 
by  itself  it  will  stick  in  her  throat.  Hereafter  it  will  go  down  together 
with  others  at  one  good  gulp.  I  was  so  sorry  not  to  see  you  again 
before  you  returned  to  Berlin ;  we  went  to  Weymouth  during  Sep- 
tember and  October ;  my  mother  came  to  me  there,  and  is  now  staying 
with  us.  We  are  all  well,  thank  God,  and  if  it  were  not  for  the  dinner- 
pardes  this  quiet  life  would  be  very  pleasant.  But  I  am  afraid  the 
dinner-parties  will  drive  me  sooner  or  later  away  from  this  country  to 
the  less  hospitable  shores  of  the  Spree  or  Danube.  Jowett's  salary 
has  again  been  defeated,  this  time  in  Council ;  it  shows  how  low 
human  nature  can  sink.     It  is  perfectly  disgusting,  and  I  feel  ashamed 


298  German  Christmas  in  Oxford       [ch.  xiv 

to  accept  any  salary  from  such  a  body  of  men.  The  matter,  however, 
is  not  to  rest,  and  a  new  motion  has  at  once  been  made.  Is  there  not 
some  great  mischief  brewing  in  all  these  meetings  of  crowned  heads 
and  Ministers  ?  And  are  you  quite  certain  that  there  is  no  mischief 
hatching  as  against  England  ?  Though  John  Bull  does  make  a  fool 
of  himself  now  and  then,  the  world  would  soon  go  to  wrack  and  ruin 
without  him.  Crowned  brains  are  just  now  very  active,  and  I  am  sure 
they  all  consider  England  a  bull  in  a  china  shop.  There  are  certain 
fellows  now  very  cock-a-hoop,  and  capable  of  anything  in  the  way  of 
spite  and  mischief.     Yours  ever  affectionately.' 

Christmas  vi^as  spent  in  Oxford  for  the  first  time  since 
i860,  and  was  a  regular  German  Christmas,  with  a  tree  for 
the  children,  and  German  Stolle  (cake)  and  German  dishes. 
Max  Mliller,  who  had  not  spent  Christmas  with  his  mother 
since  1 849,  was  as  happy,  and  entered  into  everything  with 
the  same  zest,  as  one  of  his  own  children.  It  was  never 
difficult  to  give  him  pleasure,  for  his  hard  early  training 
made  of  every  little  trifle  a  source  of  enjoyment  and  a  cause 
of  thankfulness  to  the  Giver  of  all  Good. 

Early  in  1865  the  Max  MUllers  received  the  sad  news  that 
the  family  home  at  Ray  Lodge  was  to  be  given  up  and  the 
party  there  dispersed.  The  long  lease  had  nearly  run  out, 
and  the  owner  would  only  sell,  not  let  again.  Max  Muller's 
father-in-law  resolved  to  settle  in  London  near  his  younger 
daughter,  and  the  sister  who  had  lived  with  him  over  forty 
years,  bringing  up  his  children,  preferred  the  country,  as  did 
Max  Muller's  brother-in-law,  who  had  hitherto,  with  his  wife 
and  child,  lived  at  Ray  Lodge.  To  the  Max  MuUers  and 
Walronds  it  was  a  great  loss  ;  living,  as  they  did,  in  a  town, 
the  country  life  was  a  boon  to  their  children,  and  only  a  large 
country  house  had  room  for  them  all  to  meet  together.  It 
was  at  once  resolved  to  spend  as  long  a  time  as  possible 
during  the  summer  in  the  old  home. 

To  Lady  Augusta  Stanley. 
64,  High  Street,  Oxford,  February  7,  1865. 
*  Dear  Lady  Augusta, — Many  thanks  for  the  Theology  of  the  Nine- 
teenth Century — and,  I  hope,  of  many  more  centuries  to  come — which 
I  believe  I  owe  to  your  kindness.     I  read  it  with  intense  pleasure ;  it 
was  almost  like  having  a  talk  with  the  Dean,  or  listening  to  one  of  his 


1865]  Lectures  at  Leeds  299 

sermons.  I  do  not  know  the  exact  date  of  the  Book  of  Daniel,  and 
this,  I  am  afraid,  would  be  considered  heresy  by  many  of  the  Presi- 
dents and  Princes ;  but  of  this  I  am  certain,  that  in  any  century,  even 
in  our  own,  the  lions  cannot  hurt  a  man  who,  like  Daniel,  is  a  servant 
of  the  living  God.  I  hope  you  and  the  Dean  are  quite  well.  We 
have  been  living  our  quiet  and  happy  life  at  Oxford.  My  mother 
has  been  with  us  the  whole  winter,  and  the  children  are  well.  With 
herzb'che  Griisse  to  the  Dean,  yours  sincerely,  '  Max  Muller.' 

The  following  letter  touches  on  the  curious  legend  of  the 
Barnacle  Goose,  fully  detailed  in  the  second  volume  of  Max 
Mialler's  Lechircs  on  Language,  which  had  excited  a  good 
deal  of  attention  not  only  in  England,  but  on  the  Continent : — 

To  Professor  Benfey. 

Translation.  64,  High  Street,  February  26. 

'Dear  Colleague, — .  . .  I  have  read  the  little  notice  on  fishes  and 
birds  in  Occident  und  Orietit.  As  it  is  a  later  addition,  it  would  be 
most  remarkable  if  the  fable  had  really  got  into  the  Eastern  fables 
from  the  West  of  Europe.  The  occurrence  of  the  same  legend  in 
different  places  allows  of  various  explanations,  but  especially  through 
the  passage  in  Genesis  i.  20,  to  which  the  priests  have  often  referred, 
in  order  to  prove  that  all  fowl  are  of  common  origin  with  fishes,  and 
therefore  may  be  eaten  on  fast-days. 

'  These  commoner  legends  do  not  therefore  belong  to  the  "  myth  " 
treated  by  me,  which  does  not  refer  to  birds  in  general,  but  only  to 
the  goose  which  goes  by  the  special  name  of  Barnacle  Goose.  This 
name  can  be  explained,  and  can  be  connected  with  the  name  barnacle- 
shell.' 

Early  in  March    Max  Miiller   went   to   Leeds   to    deliver 

a  lecture  on  '  The  Vedas,  or  the  Ancient  Sacred  Books  of  the 

Brahmans.' 

To  HIS  Wife. 

Leeds,  March  6. 

*  So  you  see  I  found  my  way  after  all.  L  was  a  wretched  day  till 
we  got  beyond  Rugby,  and  then  the  sun  came  out,  and  the  country 
looked  warm  and  bright.  It  is  quite  spring  here,  and  I  hope  the 
change  will  do  me  good.  I  found  Mr.  Hincks  waiting  for  me ;  he  is 
a  clergyman,  though  I  do  not  know  of  what  denomination  yet.  He 
has  a  nice  house,  and  a  wife  and  two  daughters.  We  had  a  quiet 
dinner,  and  in  the  evening  the  intellect  of  Leeds  will  assemble  here.' 

March  7, 

*  We  had  a  very  pleasant  party  last  night,  chiefly  clergy  and  medical 


300  Leeds  [ch.  xiv 

men.  The  Vicar  of  Leeds,  Dr.  Otley,  came,  though  my  host  is  the 
Unitarian  minister  of  Leeds.  I  was  a  little  tired,  having  to  talk  a  great 
deal.  We  had  a  sumptuous  supper,  and  then  to  bed.  This  morning 
we  started  after  breakfast  to  see  the  town.  Very  fine  Town-hall,  with 
a  statue  of  the  Queen  by  Noble.  Then  we  explored  a  wool  manu- 
factory, with  some  beautiful  machinery,  seeing  the  whole  process  from 
the  sheep  to  the  shawls.  Then  the  poor  parts  of  the  town,  and  the 
Working  Men's  Club — all  very  curious,  and  the  weather  fine.  We 
dined  at  three,  and  in  the  evening  the  lecture  is  to  come  off.  Well, 
I  must  do  my  best.  The  people  are  all  very  civil,  but  I  shall  be  glad 
when  it  is  over.  Love  to  mother,  and  give  her  this  wool,  which  I  saw 
made.' 

The  Philosophical  Hall  at  Leeds  was  packed  with  a  most 
attentive  audience,  which  included  many  clergy  of  the  Church 
of  England,  and  ministers  of  all  the  leading  nonconformist 
bodies,  for  the  friendly  relations  between  the  Church  and 
Dissent  at  Leeds,  so  marked  in  the  days  of  Dean  Hook, 
still  continued  in  full  force.  The  lecturer  concluded  by 
deducing  three  lessons  to  be  learned  from  the  careful  study 
of  the  Vcdas  and  other  Sacred  Books  of  the  East.  Firstly, 
that  '  most  religions  were  in  their  most  ancient  form,  or  in 
the  minds  of  their  authors,  free  from  many  of  the  blemishes 
that  attach  to  them  in  later  times.  Secondly,  that  there 
was  hardly  any  religion  which  did  not  contain  some  truth, 
sufficient  to  enable  those  who  sought  the  Lord  to  find  Him 
in  their  hour  of  need.  Thirdly,  that  we  learnt  to  appreciate 
better  than  ever  what  we  really  have  in  our  own  religion.  No 
one  who  had  not  examined  patiently  and  honestly  the  other 
religions  of  the  world  could  know  what  Christianity  really 
was,  or  could  join  with  such  truth  and  sincerity  in  the  words 
of  St.  Paul,  "I  am  not  ashamed  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ."' 
The  concluding  words  were  quoted  thirty-five  years  later  in 
the  sermon  preached  in  Max  Miiller's  parish  church  the 
Sunday  after  his  death. 

Soon  after  his  return  from  Leeds,  Max  Miiller's  mother, 
who  had  been  with  him  since  September,  returned  to  Germany. 
With  all  her  devotion  to  her  son,  the  quiet,  regular  life  in 
his  house  soon  wearied  her,  accustomed  as  she  had  been 
from  her  earliest  days  to  be  actively  busy  in  household 
affairs  ;  and  her  deafness  prevented  her  from  sharing  in  the 


1865]      Foreign  Member  of  Turin  Academy       301 

pleasures  of  society,  especially  in  a  foreign  country.  In 
summer,  when  she  could  be  more  in  the  open  air  and  enjoy 
the  beautiful  College  gardens,  she  was  happier,  but  the  long 
winter  visits  were  never  a  success.  To  her  son,  the  mere 
feeling  that  his  mother  was  under  his  roof  was  happiness; 
but  she  required  more  variety  and  amusement  than  a  scholar's 
house  could  give  her,  and  it  was  impossible  not  to  see  that 
she  longed  for  her  German  home,  though  she  suffered  severely 
when  the  moment  of  parting  came. 

The  following  letter  shows  that  Max  MuUer  was  still 
occupied  with  the  Schleswig-Holstein  question.  Mr.  Gladstone 
was  at  this  time  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  : — 

To  THE  Right  Hon.  W.  E.  Gladstone. 

High  Street,  April  2. 
*  Dear  Sir, — I  hope  to  be  in  London  the  whole  of  next  week,  and 
should  like  very  much  to  see  you.  You  will  easily  guess  the  subject 
on  which  I  should  wish  to  speak  to  you.  I  have  felt  throughout  that 
if  there  is  a  statesman  in  England  who  will  form  his  opinion  on  the 
Schleswig-Holstein  question,  not  according  to  what  seems  expedient, 
but  according  to  what  is  just  and  right,  it  is  you.  There  may  be 
reasons  however  why  you  might  decline  to  speak  to  me  on  that 
question,  but  even  in  that  case  I  hope  you  will  pardon  my  request.' 

This  spring  Max  Mliller,  who  had  been  elected  a  Corre- 
spondent of  the  Turin  Academy  in  1859,  was  chosen  as  one 
of  the  six  Foreign  Members  of  that  distinguished  society,  his 
colleagues  being  Cousin,  Thiers,  Bockh,  Mommsen,  and  Grote. 

Before  leaving  home  for  the  summer.  Max  Mliller  found 
time  to  write  to  his  old  friend  Bishop  Patteson,  in  answer  to 
his  letter  of  the  year  before : — 

64,  High  Street,  Oxford,  April  i6,  1865. 
'  My  dear  Bishop, — I  am  so  thoroughly  ashamed  of  myself  that 
I  was  afraid  I  should  never  have  courage  enough  to  write  to  you.  It 
has  been  a  weight  on  my  conscience  for  years,  and  I  doubt  whether 
I  shall  be  able  to  give  you  any  intelligible  reason  why  I  put  off  writing 
to  you  from  month  to  month,  and  from  year  to  year,  till  at  last  I  gave 
it  up  for  very  shame.  However,  the  simple  truth  is  this.  I  have  been 
very  busy,  and  I  always  hoped  I  should  find  time  sooner  or  later  to 
devote  special  attention  to  the  IMelanesian  languages,  I  wished  to  do 
so  first,  and  before  I  troubled  you  with  any  inquiries;    and   then, 


302  Bishop  of  Melanesia  [ch.  xiv 

whenever  I  began  to  get  ready  for  the  work,  I  felt  that  I  had  other 
work  to  do,  more  necessary,  and  which  my  friends  expected  me  to  do, 
and  that  I  must  not  attempt  any  new  subject  before  having  finished 
what  I  had  in  hand.  This  is  the  only  intelligible  account  I  can  give 
you  of  my  protracted  silence,  and  now  that  I  have  done  so,  I  can  only 
ask  that  you  will  forgive  me,  though  I  can  hardly  forgive  myself.  My 
thoughts,  I  can  truly  tell  you,  have  often  been  with  you  and  your  work. 
Many  times  I  have  envied  you  your  choice  of  a  life's  work  about 
which,  if  once  chosen,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  is  right,  useful, 
and  pleasing  in  the  sight  of  God  and  of  men.  When  I  first  heard  of 
your  departure,  I  confess  I  was  surprised.  I  believe  I  had  seen  you 
last  at  Dresden,  revelling  in  ancient  Italian  art,  and  studying  Hebrew 
or  Arabic.  I  thought  of  you,  as  I  thought  of  Thomson,  as  a  future 
Bishop  in  the  midst  of  the  refined  society  of  London,  and  when 
I  received  your  first  letter,  dated  somewhere  latitude  and  longitude, 
I  felt  for  a  moment  that  you  had  made  a  mistake,  and  that  the  Church 
at  home  could  ill  afford  to  send  men  of  your  stamp  as  missionaries  to 
mere  savages.  I  do  not  think  so  now,  and  if  I  compare  your  lot  with 
that  of  Thomson,  now  Archbishop  of  York,  I  feel  that  yours  is  the 
higher  and  the  happier  of  the  two.' 

Oxford,  May  14. 

'  I  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  Mr.  Codrington,  who  told  me  many 
things  about  you  and  your  work,  full  of  interest.  How  different  life 
must  seem  to  you  from  what  it  is  to  us !  Everything  so  clear  before 
you,  nothing  to  cause  you  any  misgivings,  work  to  be  done  which 
must  be  done,  a  great  work  without  any  of  the  littlenesses  which  hang 
about  our  life  in  English  society.  I  cannot  bring  myself  to  take  much 
interest  in  all  the  controversies  that  are  going  on  in  the  Church  of 
England,  and  which  to  a  great  extent  centre  in  Oxford.  No  doubt 
the  points  at  issue  are  great,  and  appeal  to  our  hearts  and  minds,  but 
the  spirit  in  which  they  are  treated  seems  to  me  so  very  small.  How 
few  men  on  either  side  give  you  the  impression  that  they  write  face  to 
face  with  God,  and  not  face  to  face  with  men  and  the  small  powers 
that  be.  Surely  this  was  not  so  in  the  early  centuries,  nor  again  at 
the  time  of  the  Reformation  ?  I  have  great  regard  for  Stanley,  because 
I  know  him  personally,  and  know  him  to  be  strictly  honest  to  himself, 
and  capable  of  sacrificing  many  things  he  holds  most  dear  for  the 
sake  of  truth.  He  takes  a  warm  interest  in  your  work  too.  I  suppose 
you  received  some  years  ago  two  contributions,  one  from  Stanley,  the 
other  from  Thomson  (Archbishop),  which  they  gave  me  to  forward  to 
you.  Stanley  was  most  anxious  to  send  more,  but  knowing  how  he 
spends  his  money,  I  would  not  take  more  than  £10.  I  still  have  great 
faith  in  the  Archbishop  of  York.    Unfortunately  his  elevation  has  been 


1865]  Melanesian  Dialects  303 

very  sudden,  and  there  are  many  who  envy  him  and  watch  him :  that 
makes  him  timid,  and  he  hardly  dares  to  be  himself.  But  I  feel  certain 
he  is  averse  to  persecution,  and  ready  to  make  every  possible  allowance 
for  difference  of  opinion  among  those  who  seek  honestly  for  what  is 
true  and  right.  If  I  may  judge  as  a  mere  spectator,  the  danger  of  the 
Church  lies  at  present  in  narrow-minded  clamour  and  partisanship. 
Newspapers,  religious  or  otherwise,  appealing  to  the  masses  on  points 
which  men  of  education  and  special  knowledge  only  can  understand, 
do  more  harm  than  any  political  demagogues.  I  wish  I  could  send 
you  about  twenty  persons,  both  lay  and  clergy,  to  work  for  ten  years 
as  missionaries  with  you,  and  I  feel  certain  that  after  the  removal  of 
the  leaders,  the  Church  would  have  peace  again.  But  enough  of  this, 
for  I  want  to  have  some  space  for  linguistics.  The  skeleton  grammars 
you  sent  me  are  very  valuable,  and  it  is  most  desirable  that  all  you 
can  write  down  should  be  printed.  Of  course,  if  the  grammatical 
forms  could  be  more  systematized  it  would  be  better,  but  at  the  same 
time  there  is  danger  in  systematizing ;  and  I  consider  that  the  most 
important  point  which,  in  the  study  of  languages,  can  be  settled  by 
such  languages  as  yours,  and  by  such  only,  is  the  original  want  of 
system,  the  influence  of  the  individual,  the  family,  and  the  class,  in 
the  formation  and  tradition  of  speech.  The  natural  state  of  language 
is  unbounded  dialectic  variety,  but  of  course  in  all  literary  languages 
that  phase  is  lost  to  us  beyond  the  hope  of  recovery.  Your  own 
missionary  work,  the  repeating  of  certain  prayers,  &c.,  will  artificially 
arrest  the  dialectic  variety  of  the  native  language.  I  suppose  few  of 
your  Melanesian  friends  recollect  more  than  their  grandfathers,  and 
therefore  it  is  not  likely  they  should  be  conscious  of  changes  in  their 
language.  But  the  great  variety  of  local  dialects  are  the  best  witnesses 
as  to  the  changeableness  of  language,  and  though  it  would  hardly  be 
worth  your  while  to  note  such  things,  small  peculiarities  in  the  speech 
of  certain  families  or  settlements  might  throw  much  light  on  the 
process,  the  most  mysterious  process,  how  language  changes.  This 
is  the  great  problem  on  which,  in  the  end,  will  depend  the  decision  in 
favour  of  one  or  many  beginnings  of  human  speech.  Literary  languages 
do  entirely  mislead  us,  and  have  misled  nearly  all  scholars  on  that 
point.  Savage  languages  alone  can  show  how  far  languages  can 
change.  It  would  be  very  important,  too,  to  make  observations  as  to 
the  number  of  words  sufficient  for  answering  all  the  purposes  of  a  low 
civilization.  How  many  words  does  a  Melanesian  know  or  use  ?  How 
many  of  them  convey  to  him  an  etymological  meaning,  i.  e.  are 
intelligible  to  him  in  their  radical  intention  ?  Does  he  use  different 
names  for  the  same  thing,  or  does  he  call  two  things  by  the  same 
name?     A  language  of  i,ooo  words  is  more  easily  changed  than 


304  Last  Visit  to  Ray  Lodge  [ch.  xiv 

a  language  of  10,000.  Out  of  two  synonymes,  one  is  sure  to  be 
lost  in  time,  whereas  the  inconvenience  arising  from  two  things  being 
called  by  the  same  name  is  sure  to  lead  to  an  independent  coining  of 
new  words,  I  send  you,  through  Mr.  Codrington,  a  book  by  Mr.  Tylor 
on  A7icienl  Civilizaiion,  with  a  review  of  mine.  It  will  show  you 
how  valuable  accurate  and  trustworthy  observations  of  the  habits  of 
savages  are  for  many  important  inquiries,  and  it  may  perhaps  induce 
you  to  put  down  in  writing  the  results  of  your  own  observations 
among  the  ancient  strata  of  mankind  cropping  out  in  your  islands. 
I  wish  I  had  more  time  for  that  kind  of  work,  but  I  must  for  the  next 
three  or  four  years  give  all  my  time  to  the  finishing  of  my  edition  of 
the  jRig-veda,  the  work  which  originally  brought  me  to  England,  and 
which,  when  finished,  will  set  me  free. 

'  We  are  hard  at  work  canvassing  for  Gladstone.  I  believe  he  will 
be  returned,  and  I  believe  his  place  would  never  be  contested,  if  it 
were  not  for  twenty  or  thirty  idle  agitators.' 

Early  in  June  the  vi^hole  family  moved  to  Ray  Lodge  for 
their  last  visit,  and  stayed  there  nearly  three  months,  during 
which  time  there  vv^as  a  constant  succession  of  family  visitors, 
all  wishing  to  see  the  last  of  the  house  that  had  been  made  so 
pleasant  to  all  members  of  the  large  circle  of  relations.  The 
Walronds  were  also  there  with  their  four  children,  and  the 
summer  months  flew  by  all  too  fast  to  the  two  young  wives 
in  the  home  of  their  happy  childhood  and  youth.  The  river 
was  a  constant  pleasure.  Max  Miiller  becoming  an  expert 
oarsman,  and  many  were  the  hours  he  spent  with  his  wife  on 
the  river,  under  the  shadow  of  the  Taplow  and  Cliveden 
woods.  One  long  delightful  day  was  spent  in  a  picnic  at 
Medmenham  Abbey,  with  the  choir  from  Bray  Church,  in 
which  his  father-in-law,  who  had  himself  a  very  fine  voice, 
had  always  taken  a  keen  interest,  and  the  old  ruins  echoed 
to  many  a  beautiful  glee  and  chorus.  The  loved  Vicar  of 
Bray  drove  over  with  his  wife  and  daughters  in  the  afternoon, 
in  time  to  come  down  the  river  on  the  barge  that  held  the 
large  party,  and,  among  other  singers,  Max  Miiller  was 
persuaded  to  sing  '  O  Tannenbaum,'  the  song  that  nearly 
twenty  years  earlier  had  amused  his  friends  in  '  Billy  Russell's' 
rooms  in  the  Temple,  with  its  imitation  of  various  musical 
instruments,  and  which,  if  report  speaks  true,  was  a  delight 
to  the  '  Monks  of  All  Souls '  at  their  Gaudys  for  many  years. 


1865]  Messrs.  Longmans  305 

Drives,  too,  were  taken  through  Hedsor,  Dropmore,  the 
Burnham  Beeches,  and  Windsor  Park,  and  all  the  other 
favourite  haunts  of  bygone  years.  But  a  sense  of  regret 
underlay  everything,  and  Max  Muller  in  his  letters  of  that 
summer  to  his  mother  constantly  laments  the  loss  to  his 
children  of  the  grandfather's  house  and  gardens. 

Throughout  this  year  there  was  a  frequent  exchange  of 
letters  with  Messrs.  Longmans,  Max  Muller  arranging  for  his 
friend.  Professor  Benfey,  the  publication  in  England  of  his 
Sanskrit  Grammar,  as  one  of  the  series  of  handbooks  for 
Sanskrit  which  Max  Muller  was  intending  to  publish.  With 
the  thoroughness  that  he  carried  into  all  his  work,  he  made 
himself  master  of  the  details  of  printing,  binding,  and 
publishing,  the  cost  of  ink  and  paper,  the  proper  charges  for 
corrections  and  advertisements,  and  he  used  laughingly  to 
say  that  the  highest  compliment  he  ever  received  was  what 
Mr.  William  Longman,  half  in  admiration  and  half  provoked, 
said  of  him  to  Mr.  Froude,  '  As  to  your  friend  Max  Muller, 
he  can  skin  the  flints  in  Paternoster  Row!'  A  second  edition 
of  Volume  II  of  the  Lectures  came  out  this  year,  and  the  fifth 
edition  of  Volume  I. 

From  Professor  Huxley. 

Museum  of  Geology,  Jermyn  Street, 
June  15,  1865. 
'My  dear   Sir, — I  beg  your   acceptance  of  the  numbers  of  the 
Fortnightly  Review  containing  my  article  on  Ethnology,  which  accom- 
panies this  note. 

'  I  lost  no  time  on  Monday  in  referring  to  Christianity  and  3fankind, 
and  the  perusal  of  your  chapter  on  "  Ethnology  v.  Phonology  "  leads 
me  profoundly  to  regret  that  I  had  not  been  able  to  avail  myself  of  the 
aid  of  so  powerful  an  ally. 

'  But  if  you  will  continue  to  pull  one  way,  and  I  the  other,  I  have 
hopes  we  shall  be  able  to  get  Ethnology  and  Phonology  apart  in 
time.     Ever,  my  dear  Sir,  very  faithfully  yours,  '  T.  Huxley.' 

To  Professor  Huxley. 

Civil  Service  Commission,  y««^  i6,  1865. 
'  I\Iy    dear    Sir, — Accept    my   best    thanks    for   your   article   on 
Ethnology  in  the  Fortnightly  Review.     I  shall  read  it  carefully  next 
week,  when  this  examination  for  the  Indian  Civil  Service  is  over. 
I  X 


3o6  Queen  of  Holland  [ch.  xiv 

I  have  130  candidates  to  examine  in  Sanskrit;  and  six  hours  of  viva 
voce  a  day  acts  Hke  an  extinguisher  on  my  reasoning  faculties. 
I  hope,  however,  I  shall  soon  recover,  and  shall  truly  rejoice  if,  after 
your  powerful  pleading,  Sir  Creswell  Creswell  will  grant  a  divorce  to 
Ethnology  and  Phonology,  two  parties  that  ought  never  to  have  been 
joined  together,  and  whose  union  has  certainly  been  the  cause  of 
a  succession  of  scientific  mishaps.     Believe  me,  yours  very  truly, 

'  Max  Muller.' 
To  Edward  Tylor,  Esq. 

Ray  'Lodq-e,  June  23. 
*  I  am  glad  to  hear  you  are  going  to  write  an  article  on  Wilhelm 
von  Humboldt.  Steinthal  has  made  Humboldt  far  more  unintelligible 
than  he  is.  Humboldt  is  much  more  of  a  poet  or  seer  than  an  exact 
philosopher.  To  attempt  to  make  him  what  he  is  not,  as  Steinthal 
has  done,  destroys  what  he  really  is.  But  I  confess,  to  give  a  faithful, 
clear,  and  consistent  account  of  Humboldt's  various  and  sometimes 
diverging  views  of  language  is  by  no  means  an  easy  task,  and  I  am 
glad  you  have  undertaken  it.  I  was  very  sorry  to  have  missed  you 
when  you  were  at  Oxford.  I  am  still  deep  in  examination  papers  for 
the  Indian  Civil  Service.     Yours  very  truly.' 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  Ray  Lobg'e, /tily  16. 

'  I  was  lately  invited  to  a  luncheon  in  London  to  which  the  Queen 
of  Holland  had  asked  various  people  she  wished  to  know — Professor 
Owen,  Tennyson,  Grote  the  historian,  Lord  Houghton,  formerly 
Monckton  Milnes  and  also  a  poet,  the  Editor  of  the  Times,  and  my 
unworthy  self.  The  Queen  is  very  friendly,  and  very  highly  educated. 
She  is  a  daughter  of  the  old  King  of  Wurtemburg,  and  we  talked 
German  together,  though  she  speaks  English  and  French  fluently. 
My  second  volume  of  Lectures  goes  off  very  well,  2,200  copies  sold 
in  one  year.  It  is  stereotyped  in  America,  and  translated  into  French 
and  Italian.  Bottiger  gets  on  slowly  [with  the  German  translation] 
and  is  not  a  good  translator,  but  that  can't  be  helped  now.' 

It  vi^as  in  this  summer  that  Mr.  Gladstone  stood  for  the  last 
time  for  election  as  a  University  burgess,  and  was  rejected. 
The  Max  MUllers  were  staying  at  Claydon  House,  and  from 
there  Max  came  in  to  Oxford  to  record  his  vote.  On  his 
return  that  evening  he  brought  word  of  the  mishap  to  the 
statue  of  King  James  over  the  gateway  into  the  Schools 
quad.     Originally  the  statue  had  held  a  sceptre  in  the  right 


1865]  Gladstone  s  Defeat  at  Oxford  307 

hand,  and  a  Bible  in  the  left.  The  tradition  in  Oxford  had 
always  been  that  the  sceptre  fell  out  of  James's  hand,  and  was 
smashed  on  the  pavement,  on  the  day  that  William  III  landed 
at  Torbay.  Certain  it  is  that,  as  the  voters  poured  out  of  the 
Theatre,  the  Bible  was  lying  in  pieces  on  the  pavement,  and 
was  seen  by  all  voters  who  crossed  the  Schools  quad,  coming 
out  of  the  Theatre.  Max  Miiller  was  of  this  number,  on  his 
way  to  his  house  in  High  Street.  Of  course  it  was  considered 
of  great  significance  by  Mr.  Gladstone's  supporters.  Lord 
Houghton  was  one  of  the  party  at  Claydon,  and  read  aloud  of 
an  evening  Swinburne's  Atalanta  in  Calydon,  which  had  not 
long  appeared. 

To  THE  Dean  of  Westminster. 

Ray  Lodge,  July  19. 

'  My  dear  Stanley, — I  was  in  town  yesterday  and  called  at  the 
Deanery ;  but  as  I  was  told  you  had  a  bad  headache,  I  did  not  like 
to  send  up  my  card.  When  I  returned  in  the  evening  I  found  your 
letter.  I  shall  go  to  Oxford  to-day  and  be  at  the  station  at  3.55. 
It  will  be  a  real  pleasure  to  show  Oxford  to  the  Queen  of  Holland. 
I  liked  very  much  what  I  saw  of  her  at  your  house.  The  only  people 
worth  knowing  in  the  world  are  those  who,  instead  of  being  Deans  or 
Bishops  or  Archbishops,  &c.,  are  themselves,  or  try  to  be,  and  are 
proud  to  be  themselves.  She  hides  her  crown  most  gracefully — and 
crowns,  I  suppose,  are  more  difficult  to  hide  than  mitres,  coronets,  &c. 

'  Gladstone  is  rejected  by  Oxford,  and  I  grieve  to  see  meanness, 
narrowness,  intolerance,  and  conceit  triumphant  once  more.  I  sup- 
pose it  is  right  to  subscribe  to  the  Bishop  of  Natal's  Fund  ;  I  promised 
to  do  so,  though  I  cannot  subscribe  much.  I  do  not  think  that  he 
understands  the  language  of  ancient  history — it  is  a  language  full  of 
irregularities,  and  to  try  to  eliminate  them  all  is  like  eliminating  the 
irregular  verbs  in  Greek.  But  though  I  differ  from  him  and  his 
school,  I  cannot  bear  to  see  honest  inquiry  squashed  by  the  clamour 
of  Demetrius  and  his  craftsmen,  and  the  attempt  to  starve  a  man  into 
silence  or  submission  is  a  discovery  which  will  be  a  disgrace  to  the 
nineteenth  century.     Ever  yours,  *  Max  Muller.' 

To  E.  A.  Freeman,  Esq. 

Ray  Lodge,  A  ugust  1 2 . 

'  My  dear  Freeman, — Could  you  find  time  to  send  me  one  line  if 

you  know  any  book  in  English  on  the  English  Tell  saga  ?     I  have 

got  the  Swiss  books,  but  I  want  to  know  the  history  of  the  English 

tale  of  Adam  Bell,  Clym  of  the  Clough,  and  William  of  Cloudesley. 

X  :j 


3o8  'Foolish  Letter's'  [ch,  xiv 

I  think  with  you  that  the  myth  of  Tell  or  Agamemnon  makes  the 
existence  of  a  real  Agamemnon  probable,  but  what  can  the  historian 
do  with  such  probable  heroes  ? ' 

Max  MUller  was  singularly  scrupulous  as  to  inflicting 
inquiries  on  his  friends,  as  he  suffered  himself  from  letters 
from  all  parts  of  the  world,  on  every  imaginable  subject. 
He  was  most  careful  to  answer  all  genuine  inquiries,  but 
when  asked  by  one  lady  if  football  was  played  in  England 
before  the  emigration  of  the  Britons  (whatever  that  meant), 
and  by  another  where  to  get  her  horoscope  cast,  by  one 
gentleman  how  to  find  the  origin  of  his  name  Jones,  by 
another  why  in  learning  German  he  might  not  say  der  but 
das  Pferd,  and  by  an  hotel-keeper  how  to  pronounce  the 
word  '  schedule,'  and  whether  the  term  revoke  or  renege  should 
be  used  at  cards,  as  two  gentlemen  had  laid  heavy  wagers  on 
these  points,  he  did  not  feel  called  on  to  waste  his  time  in 
answers.  He  had  a  book  in  which  these  and  other  equally 
foolish  letters  were  pasted,  and  in  which  he  kept  the  most 
amusing  of  the  envelopes  addressed  to  him  in  every  imagin- 
able style. 

Among  the  best  of  these  envelopes  are : — 

'  To  the  most  celebrated  and  honoured  Max  Miiller.* 

'  M.  le  Directeur,  Universite  des  Langues,  Angleterre,' 
came  straight  to  him. 

'  Professor  Max  Mliller,  Editor  of  the  Works  of  the  East 
Indies,  General  Post  Office,  London.' 

'  Max  Miiller,  Ancient  Professor  of  University,  England.' 

'  Mr.  Rev.  Max  Mullen' 

'  Master  Max  MuUer.' 

'  To  very  honourable  Knight  Max  Miiller,' 

'S"^  Magnificenz  Mr.  Max  Muller,  Rector  of  the  University.' 

'  The  Venerable  Professor  Max  Mliller.' 

*  Pundit  Max  Mullen' 

'  Mn  Max,  Oxford.' 

'  To  the  great  Linguist  Max  Miiller.' 

'  To  Father  Max  Mullen' 

'  The  most  noblest  of  the  noble,  Great  Oriental  Savant, 
F.  Max  Mullen' 

'  To  the  Head  authority  on  Language,  Oxford.' 


1865]  '  Mabel  and  Ellen  '  309 

But  there  was  one  letter  which  he  was  fond  of  showiner 
though  he  never  knew  who  were  the  writers : — 

To  Professor  Max  Mijller. 

March  lo. 

'  Sir, — We  are  a  couple  of  rather  wild  English  girls,  who  have  been 
trying  all  our  lives  to  learn  something  and  have  not  yet  succeeded. 
We  have  become  somewhat  dissatisfied  lately  with  our  failures,  and 
have  made  up  our  minds  to  master  some  wonderful  language  that  few 
girls  (or  even  men)  would  know.  We  intended  to  "  go  in  "  for  Arabic, 
but  every  one  says  that  we  should  never  get  over  even  the  alphabet. 
To  take  only  one  or  two  you  mention  in  your  lectures,  Persian  and 
Sanskrit  are  as  difficult  as  Arabic.  Zend  no  one  has  ever  heard  of 
Prakrit  we  cannot  get  the  necessary  materials  for.  What  are  we  to 
do  ?  Every  one  seems  to  think  we  are  too  fastidious,  but  all  we  want 
is  to  get  hold  of  an  unusual  language  that  is  not  quite  beyond  our 
capabilities.  We  have  at  length  made  up  our  mind  to  try  and  get 
out  of  our  difficulties  by  applying  to  head  quarters,  and  trouble  you 
with  our  inquiries.  We  enclose  a  directed  envelope  in  order  to 
take  up  as  little  of  your  valuable  time  as  possible.  We  are,  yours 
respectfully,  '  Mabel  and  Ellen.' 

The  address  given  was  '  Holly,  Post  Office,  Kiln  Green, 
Twyford.' 

To  this  the  following  answer  was  sent : — 

'  Dear  Miss  Mabel  and  IMiss  Ellen, — It  is  by  no  means  easy  to 
reply  to  your  inquiry.  To  take  up  any  work  in  good  earnest  is 
a  most  excellent  thing,  and  I  should  be  the  last  person  to  find  fault 
with  anybody  for  fixing  on  learning  a  language,  even  for  the  mere 
sake  of  learning  something.  Yet  it  is  right  that  our  work  should 
have  some  useful  object  beyond  the  mere  pleasure  of  working.  Thus 
in  selecting  a  language  we  might  look  at  three  ulterior  objects — 
literature,  travel,  or  science  of  language.  Now,  as  I  have  no  reason  to 
suppose  that  you  want  to  learn  a  language  that  might  be  useful  to  you 
in  travelling,  or  that  might  furnish  promising  material  for  scientific 
analysis,  I  will  take  it  for  granted  that  literature  would  form  an  object 
of  interest  to  you  in  the  choice  of  a  language.  As  it  is  to  be  a 
language  which  few  people  in  England  are  likely  to  know,  I  should 
say  take  Portuguese,  if  you  like  Romance,  or  take  Swedish,  if  you 
like  Teutonic  languages.  The  books  for  learning  these  languages 
are  easily  procured,  and  there  is  a  literature  both  in  Swedish  and 
Portuguese  very  little  known  in  this  country,  and  well  deserving  the 


3IO  Leaving  Ray  Lodge  [ch.  xiv 

interest  of  two  young  ladies.  But  I  am  afraid  you  will  consider  both 
Portuguese  and  Swedish  as  flxr  too  commonplace.  Well,  in  that  case, 
take  Siamese.  You  will  have  some  difficulty  in  getting  grammars 
and  dictionaries,  yet,  if  you  are  in  earnest  and  apply  to  Messrs. 
Williams  and  Norgate,  14,  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden,  you  will 
with  some  little  trouble  and  expense  get  what  you  want.  There  is 
not  a  single  man  in  Europe,  I  believe,  who  knows  Siamese.  The 
French,  however,  are  opening  the  country,  and  some  of  their  agents 
and  missionaries  have  begun  to  study  the  language.  The  alphabet 
is  troublesome,  the  grammar  itself  seems  easy.  There  is  a  vast 
literature,  as  yet  almost  unknown.  The  King  of  Siam  is  a  man  of 
literary  tastes,  a  man  who  reads  and  writes  English,  and  who  would 
no  doubt  be  delighted  to  receive,  say  two  or  three  years  hence — 
for  it  will  take  at  least  that  time — a  letter  written  in  his  own  language 
by  two  English  ladies.  With  this  little  glimpse  of  romance  looming 
in  the  distance  I  must  close  my  letter,  and  beg  to  remain,  with  best 
wishes  for  perseverance  and  success,  yours  faithfully,  '  M.  M.' 

Mabel  and  Ellen  were  the  daughters  of  the  well-known 
writer,  Mortimer  Collins,  but  they  did  not  learn  Swedish, 
Portuguese,  or  Siamese ! 

After  another  month  at  Ray  Lodge  the  Max  MUUers 
returned  to  Oxford^  and  the  Walronds  to  London,  and  the 
old  house  knew  them  no  more.  The  weather  in  September 
of  this  year  was  unusually  hot,  and  evening  after  evening 
was  spent  on  the  river,  not  only  on  the  lower  river,  but  the 
Cherwell,  then  hardly  known  even  to  boating  men,  was 
constantly  explored  nearly  to  Islip.  '  We  carried  the  boat 
from  one  river  to  the  other,'  says  a  letter.  It  was  a  happy 
six  weeks  before  term  began,  and  Max  Miiller,  who  was 
working  at  his  Veda,  without  any  pressure  of  other  work, 
greatly  enjoyed  the  quiet — as  he  tells  his  mother — alone  with 
his  wife  and  children,  and  a  few  intimate  friends  who  were  in 
Oxford. 

He  gave  two  public  lectures  in  the  October  Term  on 
*  Joinville's  Saint  Loiiisl  which  were  much  appreciated,  and 
formed  the  nucleus  of  the  article  on  Joinville  in  Chips, 
Volume  in. 

It  was  in  October  that  Max  Miiller,  finding  that  his  friend 
the  Bodleian  Librarian,  '  Bodley  Coxe/  could  not  secure  the 
services   of  any  Orientalist  for  the  place  of  Oriental  Sub- 


1865]  Siih-Lihrarianship  of  Bodleian  311 

Librarian  at  the  Bodleian,  offered  himself  for  the  post.  As 
soon  as  the  Vice-Chancellor  announced  the  day  on  which  the 
'  nomination  of  Mr.  Max  Mtiller  to  the  office  of  Sub-Librarian, 
which  nomination  has  received  the  sanction  of  the  Curators, 
will  be  submitted  to  the  House,'  disagreeable  letters  and 
protests  began  to  appear.  One  man,  signing  as  '  a  Member  of 
Convocation/  made  out  that  Max  Muller  had  an  income  of 
at  least  ;^  1,1 00  a  year  from  public  funds  (it  was  really  i^yoo, 
including  his  ill-paid  work  on  the  Veda).  This  was  answered 
by  the  Bodleian  Librarian,  and  by  a  Member  of  Convocation, 
in  the  following  letters  : — 

November  4. 

'  Members  of  Convocation  are  respectfully  informed  that  the  necessi- 
ties of  the  Bodleian  Library  require  at  this  time  an  Under-Librarian 
specially  conversant  with  Oriental  Literature.  Failing  in  his  endeavour 
to  secure  the  services  of  another  distinguished  Orientalist,  the  Librarian 
has  been  allowed  (with  the  unanimous  consent  of  the  Curators)  to 
submit  the  name  of  Professor  Max  Muller  to  the  approval  of  the 
House,  as  one  who,  together  with  his  Oriental  learning,  combines 
a  large  acquaintance  with  Modern  European  Literature,  a  department 
of  scarcely  less  importance  to  the  interests  of  the  Library. 

'  It  may  be  as  well  to  correct  three  mis-statements  which  appear  in 
the  first  of  the  letters  now  in  circulation : — 

1.  Professor  Miiller's  salary  as  Taylorian  Professor  is  £500,  not 
"more  than  £600." 

2.  He  has  resigned  the  Examinership  for  the  Indian  Civil  Service. 

3.  His  labours  in  editing  the  Vedas,  so  far  from  being  "  well  paid," 
entail  on  him  a  considerable  pecuniary  sacrifice. 

'  H.  O.  CoxE,  Bodley's  Librarian.' 

November  6,  1865. 

'  The  letter  of  a  Member  of  Convocation  contained  in  the  Standard 
of  October  30,  furnishes  us  with  the  keynote  to  the  threatened 
opposition  to  Professor  Max  Miiller's  appointment  as  Sub-Librarian 
to  the  Bodleian  Library. 

'As  this  "distinguished  scholar"  has  been  always  too  much  occu- 
pied in  the  duties  connected  with  his  Professorship  to  mix  himself 
up  in  theological  or  in  political  controversies,  it  is  difficult  to  under- 
stand on  what  grounds  he  can  have  rendered  himself  obnoxious  in 
either  of  these  capacities,  except  to  those  who  regard  every  German  as 
a  Rationalist,  and  every  member  of  Gladstone's  Committee  as  a  Radical. 

'  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  Convocation,  dismissing  all  such  irrelevant 


312  Palmerston's  Death  [ch.  xiv 

considerations,  will  leave  it,  as  on  former  occasions,  to  the  Head 
Librarian,  who  has  never  been  suspected  of  an  undue  bias  towards 
"Liberalism  in  politics,  or  Rationalism  in  religion,"  to  determine, 
with  the  sanction  of  the  Curators,  what  is  most  needed  with  reference 
to  the  exigencies  of  an  Establishment  for  the  efficiency  of  which  he 
is  mainly  responsible.  '  Member  of  Convocation/ 

Max  Muller  was  elected,  and  enjoyed  the  work  very  much  ; 
but  the  strain  of  double  work  was  too  much,  his  health  broke 
down  under  it,  and  he  had  to  resign  the  Librarianship  after 
about  a  year  and  a  half.  He  of  course  ceased  to  be  a  Curator 
of  the  Bodleian  (he  had  been  elected  in  1856)  when  he 
accepted  the  post  of  Sub-Librarian. 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  November  i. 

'  Here  people  talk  of  nothing  but  Palmerston's  death.  I  have  never 
admired  the  man  much.  I  was  introduced  to  him  a  couple  of  years 
ago ;  he  looked  like  a  dandy,  but  spoke  in  a  very  friendly  way.  He 
allowed  himself  to  be  more  ruled  by  England  than  he  ruled  her. 
That  has  its  good  side,  especially  here  where  public  opinion  is  well 
regulated,  but  he  was  entirely  wanting  in  independence  and  all  higher 
ideas  of  life.  Stanley  buried  him  in  Westminster  Abbey.  I  did  not 
go  up  for  it.' 

To  Dean  Stanley. 

64,  High  Street,  November  23. 

'  My  dear  Stanley, — Many  thanks  for  the  second  series  of  your 
Lectures  ^  just  received.  I  shall  read  them  as  soon  as  I  find  a  few 
quiet  days,  and  they  will  recall  the  pleasant  time  when  you  were 
settled  here.  If  you  cannot  have  the  man,  the  next  best  thing  is 
to  have  his  book,  yet  it  is  but  a  poor  substitute.  Why  did  you  not 
put  on  your  titlepage,  "Corresponding  Member  of  the  Institute 
of  France  "  ?     They  are  rather  particular  about  that  in  Paris. 

'  The  Convocation  for  confirming  my  re-election  ^  is  fixed  for 
Friday,  December  i,  at  two.  Whether  there  is  to  be  a  sulphurous 
eruption  I  do  not  know  yet,  but  I  should  not  be  surprised.  However, 
you  must  not  think  of  coming  up.  If  it  is  to  be,  I  have  no  doubt 
it  is  meant  for  good.  I  have  done  nothing  in  the  matter,  and  my 
rule  in  life  has  always  been  not  to  struggle  against  storms  that  are 
gathering  overhead,  but  to  wait,  hoping  they  may  pass,  but  quite 
prepared  for  the  drenching  if  it  comes. 

'  I  think  I  have  been  treated  without  that  fairness  and  consideration 

^  On  the  Jewish  Church.  "^  To  his  Professorship. 


1865]  Attacks  on  M.  M.  313 

which,  as  a  rule,  are  generally  shown  by  Englishmen  to  Englishmen  ; 
but  though  I  may  have  made  a  mistake  in  settling  in  England,  and 
spending  here  the  best  years  of  my  life,  I  shall  always  be  thankful 
for  having  passed  through  this  school  of  life.  There  are  many  things 
I  owe  to  my  stay  in  England  and  to  my  English  friends,  perhaps 
the  most  precious  things  in  a  man's  life — things  that  cannot  be  taken 
away,  and  that  I  shall  value  all  the  more,  if  the  evening  of  my  life  is 
to  be  spent  in  my  own  country.     Ever  yours,  '  Max  MiJller.' 

To  THE  Right  Hon.  W.  E.  Gladstone. 

High  Street,  November  12,   1865. 

'  I  cannot  allow  another  week  to  pass  without  thanking  you  for 
your  essay  on  the  Providential  Position  of  Greece.  I  have  read 
it  with  deep  interest,  and  there  are  many  things  which  I  should  like 
to  say  about  it.  But  I  live  just  now  in  the  midst  of  a  storm  which 
will  very  likely  drive  me  away  from  England  \  and  I  cannot  for  the 
moment  concentrate  my  thoughts  on  any  other  subject.  I  am  so 
glad  that  you  have  said  many  of  the  things  which  you  have  said  in 
your  valedictory  address.  Though  no  human  mind  can  ever  hope 
to  discover  or  to  understand  the  vestiges  of  the  Creator  and  Ruler 
of  mankind  in  the  broken  strata  of  history,  yet  the  very  search  for 
them  comforts  and  elevates  the  mind  of  man,  and  the  sense  of  our 
own  impotence  and  ignorance  widens  and  deepens  our  faith  in  the 
Highest  Wisdom  and  Power. 

'  With  many  thanks  for  the  honour  you  have  done  me  in  sending  me 

your  essay.' 

To  HIS  W^ife. 

Oxford,  November  28. 

'  May  God  watch  over  us,  and  may  we  never  forget  how  much 
happiness  He  has  showered  upon  us  !  There  is  something  very  awful 
in  this  life,  and  it  is  not  right  to  try  to  forget  it.  It  is  well  to  be 
reminded  by  the  trials  of  others  of  what  may  befall  us,  and  what 
is  kept  from  us  only  by  the  love  of  our  Father  in  heaven,  not  by  any 
merit  of  our  own.' 

Christmas  was  spent  in  London  at  the  grandfather's  house, 
but  to  the  sorrow  of  the  two  eldest  children,  who  recollected 
the  regular  German  Christmas  of  the  year  before  with  their 
grandmother,  there  was  no  Christmas  tree,  the  house  being 
too  small  to  give  up  a  room  to  it. 

^  The  opposition  threatened  to  his  election  as  Sub-Librarian  on  account 
of  his  unorthodoxy. 


CHAPTER   XV 

1866-1867 

Easter  in  Paris.  Sanskrit  Grammar.  War  between  Prussia  and  Austria. 
Cornwall.  '  My  Brother.'  Gold  medal  from  Duke  of  Anhalt.  Illness. 
Bournemouth.  Letter  on  Brahma  Somij,  Death  of  niece.  '  Parks 
End'  bought.     Cure  at  Ems.     Chips,  Volumes  I  and  II. 

By  January  2  the  Max  Miillers  settled  quietly  again  in 
Oxford,  he  remaining  hard  at  work  till  Easter,  when  the  ten 
days'  vacation  from  the  Bodleian  was  spent  in  a  visit  to 
Paris.  The  weather  was  too  cold  for  expeditions,  but  many 
pleasant  hours  were  spent  with  congenial  friends — the  Mohls, 
the  Regniers,  Barthelemy-St.-Hilaire,  Stanislas  Julien,  Michel 
Br^al,  and  others.  To  Max  Miiller  this  intercourse  and  ex- 
change of  ideas  with  friends  occupied  in  work  like  his  own  was 
the  greatest  refreshment.  It  was  such  intercourse  he  sorely 
missed  in  Oxford,  where  the  men  who  could  at  all  enter 
into  his  pursuits  were  younger  than  himself,  and  more  like 
pupils,  whilst  his  older  friends,  with  whom  his  Oxford  career 
had  begun,  had  almost  all  moved  on  to  other  spheres  of 
work. 

To  HIS  Mother. 

TransIafio?i.  Oxford,  April  16. 

*  Our  time  in  Paris  was  very  amusing.  The  only  sad  thing  was 
the  recollection  of  so  many  friends  whom  one  knew  there,  and  who 
are  gone.  I  often  thought  of  Emilie,  and  of  Gathy,  and  Hagedorn, 
and  of  my  life  in  Paris  in  1846.  That  is  long  ago,  and  yet  I  enjoy 
life  as  much  as  I  did  then,  and  think  the  grey  hairs  are  only  an 
outward  appearance  !  ...  I  do  not  believe  in  war,  have  never  believed 
in  it,  but  I  am  curious  to  see  how  long  men  of  honour  and  reasonable 
men  in  Germany  will  submit  to  such  a  scandalous  government ! 
Now  I  am  busy  again  with  my  work,  and  shall  not  get  away  till 


i866]  '  CJiagreen '  and  '  Chagrin '  315 

August.     I  have  been  made  an  Academician  of  Turin.     There  are 
only  seven,  and  after  Thiers  and  Cousin  comes  my  unworthy  self.' 

To  E.  B.  Tylor,  Esq. 

Oxford,  April  16. 
'  On  my  return  from  Paris  I  found  a  copy  of  the  Quarterly,  and  in 
it  your  excellent  article  on  the  Science  of  Language.  I  feel  not  only 
personally  very  much  obliged  to  you,  but  I  believe  you  have  rendered 
a  real  service  to  our  common  studies  by  exciting  the  interest  and 
allaying  the  fears  of  that  large  and  important  class  of  Englishmen 
who  are,  more  or  less,  led  by  the  Quarterly  Review.  A  violent 
onslaught  from  that  quarter,  which  was  by  no  means  unlikely,  might 
have  done  serious  mischief,  and  I  therefore  tender  you  my  thanks  both 
for  what  you  have  done,  and  what  you  have  been  the  means  of 
preventing.  What  you  say  about  Prepositions  is  true.  I  believe, 
however,  that  those  which  are  not  predicative  like  trans  will  turn  out 
to  be  prenominal,  local  adverbs  pointing  to  here  and  there.  Qui  vivra 
verra.  You  have  managed  the  Interjectionalists  very  well.  Never 
did  I  make  a  greater  mistake  than  in  taking  an  illustration  of  the 
Bow-wow  theory  from  Wedgwood's  Dictionary,  which  happened 
to  be  on  my  table,  instead  of  quoting  the  same  view  from  a  hundred 
other  books!  You  have  put  the  case  very  clearly,  and  I  hope  no 
more  paper  will  be  wasted  on  this  unprofitable  discussion.  You 
attribute  too  much  importance  to  my  phonetic  types  or  typical  sounds  ; 
they  were  left  as  a  mere  frame,  to  be  filled  in  by-and-by.' 

To  THE  Same. 

Oxford,  April  19. 

*  Many  thanks  for  your  article  in  the  Fortnightly  Review.  I  like  it 
very  much  and  agree  with  every  word  of  it ;  only  that  I  shall  have  to 
write  a  much  more  determined  defence  of  the  Pooh-pooh  and  Bow- 
wow theory  than  you  have  done,  but  of  course  only  after  defining  the 
true  meaning  of  these  theories.  I  cannot  get  over  chagrin.  I  do 
not  think  it  can  be  merely  leather,  least  of  all  Eastern  leather ;  but 
I  confess  I  cannot  get  at  the  history  of  the  word.  I  believe  that  the 
chagreen  leather  is  of  Eastern  origin,  but  chagrin  as  substantive  and 
adjective,  chagrineux  and  chagriner — I  confess  that  staggers  me. 
The  question  is  who  first  used  the  metaphor,  if  that  is  the  origin  of 
the  word.' 

Rumours  of  war  between  Austria  and  Prussia  were  now 
rife,  and  Max  Mullcr  wrote  to  warn  his  mother  not  to  depend 
on  seeing  him  and  his  in  Germany  in  the  summer. 


3i6  Sanskrit  Handbooks  [ch.  xv 

To    HIS    JMOTHER. 

Translation.  May  27. 

'We  can  make  no  plans  for  the  summer  whilst  there  are  these 
rumours  of  war.  Till  now  I  firmly  believed  in  peace,  but  now  I  am 
afraid  the  summer  will  not  go  by  without  something  happening. 
I  cannot  take  any  interest  in  these  matters,  unless  it  comes  to  a  real 
popular  war.  Till  now  the  people  have  not  wished  for  war,  but 
only  the  JMinisters  and  the  soldiers,  and  they  may  eat  the  broth  they 
have  cooked.  But  how  any  people  can  submit  to  such  a  way  of 
governing,  I  cannot  comprehend,  and  am  thankful  I  am  not  there. 
I  have  at  last  finished  my  Sanskrit  Grammar.  It  came  out  last  week, 
and  it  has  taken  a  great  load  off  my  conscience.' 

In  1864  Max  Miiller  had  arranged  with  Messrs.  Longmans 
to  publish  a  series  of  handbooks  for  the  study  of  Sanskrit. 
In  his  preface  to  the  first  of  the  series,  the  first  book  of  the 
Hitopadesa,  he  explains  that  these  handbooks  were  intended 
for  two  classes  of  readers :  first,  for  those  candidates  for  the 
Indian  Civil  Service  who  desired  not  only  to  acquit  them- 
selves well  in  the  examination,  but  to  lay  a  good  foundation 
for  the  subsequent  study  of  the  spoken  vernaculars  ;  and 
secondly,  for  a  steadily  increasing  number  of  scholars  who 
wished  to  gain  an  elementary  but  accurate  knowledge  of 
Sanskrit  as  a  key  to  the  study  of  Comparative  Philology. 
For  both  these  classes  the  existing  works  were  too  diffuse, 
and  only  adapted  to  those  who  wished  to  make  Sanskrit 
their  lifelong  study.  Max  Miiller's  handbooks  included  the 
first,  second,  third,  and  fourth  books  of  the  Hitopadesa, 
Benfey's  Sanskrit  Dictionary,  and  a  Sanskrit  Grammar  for 
beginners  by  Max  MUlIer.  The  text  of  the  first  book  of  the 
Hitopadesa  was  prepared  by  Dr.  Kielhorn,  one  of  the  many 
German  Sanskrit  scholars  for  whom  Max  Miiller  was  instru- 
mental in  getting  appointments  in  India. 

The  Librarian  of  the  India  Office,  in  writing  to  thank  him 
for  the  Hitopadesa,  says,  '  It  is  very  obliging  of  you,  in  the 
interest  of  beginners,  to  prepare  books  of  this  description  ; 
that  they  are  very  much  needed  is  undeniable — at  last  it  is 
feasible  for  a  student  of  ordinary  ability  to  commence  the 
study  of  Sanskrit  without  a  teacher.' 

Max    Miiller's   'sensible   and   well-constructed   book'  was 


i866]       War  between  Austria  and  Prussia      317 

praised  in  several  reviews,  whilst  his  friend  Professor  Cowell 

had  from  the  first  welcomed  the  series  as  *  an  immense  help  to 

the  student.     With  such  helps  as  these  Sanskrit  should  be  as 

easily  acquired  as  any  other  language.     The  projected  series 

will  be  invaluable.' 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  O^iYO^vt,  June  17. 

'  I  hope  that  you  are  safe  in  Chemnitz,  for  Dresden  is  not  the  place 
for  you.  I  see  that  the  Prussians  have  marched  into  Saxony,  and 
they  are  very  likely  to  encounter  the  Austrians  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  Dresden.  At  Chemnitz,  at  all  events,  you  are  not  in  the  im- 
mediate scene  of  the  fighting — you  have  advice  and  help  from  the 
Krugs.  Now  that  war  has  really  begun  things  will  not  quiet  down 
again  so  very  quickly ;  but  in  the  way  war  is  now  conducted,  those 
who  live  at  the  very  theatre  of  war  will  be  far  less  disturbed  than 
in  former  times.  Sooner  or  later  a  war  between  Austria  and  Prussia 
was  unavoidable,  and  if  it  is  but  decisive,  it  will  lead  to  what  all  true 
Germans  have  desired  for  years,  a  united  Germany.  Prussia  and 
Austria  are  merely  names,  and  stand  for  no  more  than  Anhalt  and 
Reuss.  The  great  thing  is  that  the  dualism  of  Prussia  and  Austria 
should  be  ended.  Who  conquers,  or  is  conquered,  is  of  little  con- 
sequence. Germany  remains  Germany,  and  cannot  be  governed, 
even  by  a  Roman  Catholic  Emperor,  otherwise  than  she  allows 
herself  to  be  governed.  If  Prussia  wins,  she  must  cease  to  be  Prussia  ; 
Austria  the  same.  So  wait  quietly,  no  excitement,  no  partisanship. 
Bismarck,  either  with  or  without  his  own  consent,  may  become  the 
greatest  benefactor  of  Germany.  It  is  sad  that  your  Austrian  invest- 
ments have  fallen  again !  but  don't  make  yourself  miserable  about  it. 
How  many  people  are  in  the  same,  or  even  worse,  plight !  Whatever 
you  want,  I  can  always  give.  You  need  have  no  scruples  about  it,  for 
if  I  don't  give  it  to  you,  I  give  it  to  others ;  and  I  have  for  years  given 
away  to  others  far  more  than  I  give  you.  What  flows  in  so  richly 
on  me  does  not  belong  to  me,  and  I  ought  to  give  away  a  great  deal 
more  than  I  do.  So,  as  I  say,  don't  vex  yourself  about  money. 
Stay  on  quietly  for  the  present  with  the  Krugs.  We  can  make  no 
summer  plans  yet.  France  and  Switzerland  are  the  only  places  where 
it  would  be  quiet. ...  Do  not  make  the  times  worse  than  they  are 
by  over-anxiety.' 

It  was  in  this  year  that  Max  Muller  made  the  acquaintance 
of  Mr.  John  Bellows,  the  head  of  the  great  printing  works  at 
Bristol.  At  first  the  acquaintance  was  only  by  letter,  but  on 
meeting  they  were  both  much  attracted  to  each  other,  and 


3i8  Bellozvs'  Outline  Dictionary  [ch.  xv 

a  true  friendship  sprang  up  which  continued  to  the  last, 
though,  being  very  busy  men,  they  did  not  meet  as  often 
as  both  desired.  In  sending  his  friend's  letters  to  Mrs.  Max 
Muller,  Mr.  Bellows  says  : — 

'  It  was  in  1866  that  I  put  before  Professor  Max  Muller  a  plan 

1  had  for  printing  a  skeleton  dictionary  in  which  travellers  and 
missionaries  might  record  the  vocabulary  of  any  particular  language, 
or  dialect,  they  wished  to  study.  He  entered  heartily  into  it,  and 
compiled  for  it  a  key  alphabet  for  the  various  sounds  that  would  have 
to  be  noted.  It  so  happened  that  a  Scottish  firm  just  then  offered 
me  a  quantity  of  paper  they  had  made  for  Confederate  bank-notes 
during  the  American  War,  but  which  they  had  failed  to  run  through 
the  blockade  at  Charleston.  As  this  was  very  strong  and  thin,  I  used 
it  for  the  Outline  Dictionary .  It  answered  well,  I  believe,  as  the 
edition  all  sold.    It  was  really  Professor  Max  Miiller's  work,  however.' 

The  following  letters  show  how  minutely  Professor  Max 
Muller  entered  into  the  scheme : — 

To  Mr.  John  Bellows. 

64,  High  Street,  June  20. 
'  I  cannot  think  of  anything  better  than  the  inverted  a  to  represent 
the  a  ;  we  must  not  have  accented  letters,  otherwise  no  doubt  the 
Swedish  S  would  be  preferable.  I  do  not  see  quite  clearly  the 
principle  you  follow  in  giving  the  various  meanings  of  certain  words. 
The  book  is  meant  for  Englishmen  who  must  be  supposed  to  know 
the  shades  of  meaning  of  each  word ;  besides  there  is  no  reason  to 
give  them  all.  Would  it  not  be  best  to  give  various  meanings  only 
when  there  is  a  clearly  defined  difference,  as  in  Account,  i  narrative, 

2  bill,  3  esteem  ?  But  why  give  "  coming  to  the  throne "  under 
Accession  ?  If  the  missionary  wants  to  express  that  meaning  he 
would  put  it  under  Accession,  and  if  he  wants  to  express  "  an  acces- 
sion to  his  income  "  he  would  place  it  there  likewise,  making  a  note 
for  his  own  information.  Why  put  casual,  and  by  injury,  under 
Accidental  ?    Does  accidental  ever  mean  by  injury,  except  indirectly  ? ' 

To  THE  Same. 

Oxford,  June  27. 

'  There  is  very  little  to  alter.  I  should  put  v,  bought,  all,  as  a  familiar 
English  sound,  before  the  a  of  Vater.  Also  I  should  put  n  as 
optional  with  fi ;  in  fact  I  should  not  have  admitted  fi  at  all  if  I  had 
not  been  told  that  this  type  is  generally  to  be  found  in  ordinary 
founts.     You  know  best  whether  that  is  so  j  if  not,  I  should  leave  it 


i866]  Battle  of  Koniggrdtz  319 

out,  and  give  ;/  only.     I  think  a  little  more  care  should  be  taken  with 
the  Dictionary.' 

To  THE  Same. 

July  18. 

'  I  received  your  envelopes  and  the  electro-typed  specimens,  and  am 
much  obliged  to  you  for  them.  As  to  your  Dictionary,  I  am  afraid 
there  is  something  wrong  in  getting  the  words  ready  for  press. 
Why  should  you  not  take  any  ordinary  Dictionary,  and  just  underline 
in  red  the  words  which  you  want  1  I  have  been  collating  your  proof- 
sheets  with  Blackley  and  Friedlander's  Practical  German  Dictionary, 
just  published  by  Longmans,  and  I  really  think  it  would  take  less 
time  to  underline  that,  than  to  collate  the  proof-sheets,  to  say  nothing 
of  the  trouble  of  making  the  corrections  in  the  composition.  I  always 
think  that  what  is  worth  doing  is  worth  doing  well,  and  I  feel  sure 
that  with  a  little  more  trouble  at  first,  much  trouble  afterwards  may  be 
avoided.' 

Since  Max  Muller's  last  letter  to  his  mother  great  events 
had  taken  place  in  Germany.  The  rapid  advance  of  the 
Prussians  had  been  crowned  by  the  great  battle  of  Konig- 
gratz.  Austria  had  given  up  Venice  to  France,  and  the 
'  Seven  Days'  War,'  as  it  was  called  in  England,  seemed  over. 
The  excitement  and  interest  in  England  were  very  great. 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  Oxfokb,  July  8. 

'  All  good  Germans  have  long  desired  what  is  now  happening. 
The  methods  employed  might  have  been  better,  here  and  there,  but 
Prussia  staked  her  existence  to  make  Germany  united  and  strong, 
and  though  I  thoroughly  doubt  whether  the  motives  were  throughout 
honest  and  pure,  yet  I  rejoice  over  the  results.  Prussia  will  have 
a  yet  harder  war  to  wage,  for  war  with  France  can  hardly  be  avoided. 
But  in  spite  of  all  that,  Germany  will  at  last  take  her  right  place  in 
Europe,  and  that  she  never  could  have  done  with  the  "  Bundestag  " 
and  thirty  princes.  Austria  will  always  remain  a  great  power  in  the 
East,  but  in  the  Protestant  North  an  independent  power  must  be 
created,  be  it  called  Prussia  or  Germany.  I  often  long  now  to  be 
back  in  Germany,  though  I  could  be  of  no  use  as  a  soldier. 
Write  to  me  very  often ;  I  am  so  busy  I  cannot  always  write  to  you, 
but  you  have  plenty  of  time,  and  all  you  write  interests  me.  Also 
letters  may  get  lost  now,  so  the  more  you  write  the  better.  Why  do 
not  you  and  Emilie  come  to  England  for  six  or  eight  weeks  ?  I  do 
not  believe  that  we  shall  have  peace  very  soon ;  should  it  come  we 


320  Wilhelm  Midler  Prize  [ch.  xv 

might  still  go  to  Germany  in  August  and  September.  Do  not 
worry  too  much.  There  is  always  war,  and  always  will  be,  like 
thunder  after  great  heat.  I  am  very  sorry  for  Emilie  at  Dessau,  in 
the  midst  of  Prussians  with  her  strong  Austrian  feelings.  Where  is 
Adolf,  and  what  has  become  of  Fritz  Stockmarr  '  ? ' 

The  following  letter  refers  to  a  communication  from  Max 
MUller's  old  schoolfellow,  Karl  Elze,  of  Dessau,  a  well-known 
Shakespearian  scholar,  later  on  Professor  of  English  Litera- 
ture at  Halle.  He  wrote  to  tell  his  friend  that  a  literary 
society  in  Dessau,  which  for  some  years  had  been  giving 
public  lectures,  had  resolved  to  apply  the  money  so  made  to 
the  founding  of  a  Wilhelm  Miiller  Prize,  to  be  given  each 
year  in  the  three  highest  classes  of  the  Dessau  Gymnasium 
(public  school)  on  Wilhelm  Miiller's  birthday. 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  Oxford,  July  i6. 

'  I  write  whenever  I  have  something  to  write  about,  and  from  the 
enclosed  letter  from  Elze  you  will  see  that  we  are  not  quite  forgotten 
in  Dessau.  I  wrote  at  once  to  Elze  a  beautifully  written  letter,  to  tell 
him  how  pleased  I  was.  I  at  once  promised  him  loo  thalers,  and 
hope  later  on  to  give  more,  so  that  perhaps  in  time  it  may  form 
a  Wilhelm  Miiller  Scholarship.  So  you  see  there  is  a  bit  of  good 
news.  One  hopes  now  the  war  will  soon  be  over ;  well,  the  quicker 
the  better.  The  losses  are  terrible,  but  so  it  has  always  been,  and  in 
no  century  has  Germany  been  so  long  at  peace  as  in  this.  You  can 
well  imagine  I  am  no  admirer  of  Bismarck,  but  I  am  convinced  his 
policy  is  the  only  one  to  make  Germany  strong  and  respected  by 
other  nations.  What  would  have  become  of  Germany  if  France  had 
attacked  Hanover,  or  Saxony,  or  Hesse,  and  the  jealousy  betv/een 
Prussia  and  Austria  had  made  all  joint  action  impossible?  With 
Italy  united,  with  the  Colossus  of  Russia  and  the  great  mass  of 
France,  it  was  necessary  North  Germany  should  be  united.  Austria 
was  opposed  to  this  union  and  must  therefore  suffer,  but  in  spite  of 
all  defeats  she  will  always  be  a  great  power  in  the  East,  and,  if  she 
concentrates  herself  by  giving  up  Italy  and  Germany,  will,  one  hopes, 
be  strong  enough,  in  spite  of  Russia,  to  annex  Turkey,  and  drive 
the  Turks  back  to  Asia.  Those  are  my  hopes,  but  who  knows 
what  may  come }  I  expected  that  Prussia  would  meet  with  some 
great  defeat,  and  that  may  still  happen,  and  would  do  Prussia  good, 
as  thereby  she  would  become  more  thoroughly  German;  but  these 

^  Soldier  cousins  of  Max  Miiller's. 


i866]  Unsettled  State  of  Germany  321 

things  are  not  in  our  hands,  and  all  happens  as  is  for  the  best.  So 
do  not  let  the  grey  hairs  appear !  much  worse  things  have  happened 
in  the  world  than  the  overthrow  of  a  dynasty.  On  the  whole  the 
world  is  a  very  small  grain  of  sand,  Europe  a  small  quarter  of  the 
world,  and  Austria  a  very  small  part  of  Europe,  and  the  man  one 
calls  from  habit  Emperor  is  but  a  man,  not  so  much  better  than  the 
thousands  who  have  fallen  in  Bohemia.  I  wish  I  knew  how  to  send 
you  some  money — the  letters  seem  to  go  safely  enough.  Stay  quietly 
in  Chemnitz.  It  is  possible  the  Prussians  may  have  to  retreat,  and 
then  Dresden  might  have  to  suffer,  whilst  Chemnitz  is  off  the  track. 
Wish  Krug  joy  for  his  twenty-five  years'  doctorate — I  shall  soon 
attain  a  like  honour,  and  yet  I  cannot  feel  myself  at  all  old ! ' 

To  E.  B.  Tylor,  Esq. 

July  6. 

*  Two  things  have  escaped  me  which  perhaps  you  will  help  me  to 

catch.     I  made  a  note  of  a  passage  where  the  name  Bear,  for  the 

constellation,  occurred  among  a  race  that  could  not  be  suspected  of 

Aryan  influences.     But  I  lost  my  reference.     Secondly,  I  saw  a  paper 

by  Mr.  Edkins  on  the  relation  between  Chinese,   Mongolian,   and 

Tibetan,  either  in  the  Ethnological  or  Anthropological  Society  ;  but 

this  too  I  cannot  find  again.     The  finder  shall  be  duly  rewarded.' 

As  the  time  for  his  holiday  drew  near,  Max  Miiller  felt 
more  and  more  unwilling  to  risk  taking  his  wife  and  children 
to  Germany  in  the  unsettled  state  of  things  ;  and  he  was 
conscious,  without  any  vanity,  that  he  could  not  travel  about 
entirely  unknown,  or  say  what  he  liked  unheeded.  He  did 
not  wish  to  be  obliged  to  express  any  real  opinion  publicly 
for  either  Prussia  or  Austria,  and  it  seemed  wisest  to  keep  out 
of  Germany  till  things  were  more  settled.  Even  in  his  own 
family  party  spirit  ran  very  high.  His  Dessau  relatives  were 
all  for  Prussia,  and  Max  Muller's  own  feelings  were  on  that 
side,  whereas  his  cousin  Emilie,  and,  influenced  by  her,  his 
mother,  were  violently  Austrian. 

mi,-  To  HIS  Mother.        ^ 

Iranslation,  Oxford,  August  5. 

*  That  nothing  has  come  of  our  plans  is  very  sad.  I  had  gone  on 
hoping  we  might  get  to  Riigen,  but  the  state  of  things  is  too  uncer- 
tain for  travelling,  especially  with  children.  It  looks  more  peaceful  at 
this  moment,  but  I  do  not  quite  trust  it;  it  is  always  possible  that 
Austria  may  venture  on  another  battle.  Also  the  new  organization  in 
the  north,  and  the  Parliament  in  Frankfort,  are  sure  to  cause  local 

I  Y 


322  St.  Ives,  Cornwall  [ch.  xv 

disturbances,  and  as  one  can  do  nothing  to  help,  it  is  better  to  stay 
away,  and  hope  for  happier  times.  .  .  .  One  cannot  alter  matters,  and 
when  you  think  that  Babylon  and  Nineveh,  and  Athens  and  Rome, 
have  passed  away  in  the  course  of  time,  you  cannot  wonder  so  much 
at  the  Hapsburg  catastrophe.  Such  things  happen  now  and  again, 
and  the  world  goes  on  afterwards  as  before ! ' 

Sir  Benjamin  Brodie  and  his  family,  and  Professor  Bar- 
tholomew Price  with  his,  had  gone  to  St.  Ives  in  Cornwall  for 
the  summer,  and  persuaded  the  Max  MUlIers  to  follow  their 
example.  The  one  difficulty  was  a  house  ;  the  few  suited  to 
visitors  were  all  taken.  At  last  Lady  Brodie  found  what  was 
really  a  fisherman's  cottage  close  down  to  the  beach,  small  and 
simple,  but  exquisitely  clean,  and  this  was  promptly  secured. 
Life  at  St.  Ives  was  amusingly  primitive  ;  the  butcher 
came  once  a  week  from  Penzance,  but  every  house  had  its 
own  poultry  yard  to  supply  deficiencies.  Vegetables  and 
fruit  were  even  more  difficult  to  procure :  there  was  one 
baker  in  St.  Ives.  The  town  faces  north ;  the  part  where  the 
visitors  lived  thirty-six  years  ago  was  out  of  the  town  proper, 
which  was  built  on  a  broad  spit  of  land  surrounded,  except  to 
the  south,  by  the  sea.  The  town  was  entirely  inhabited  by 
the  fishermen,  and  was  almost  unapproachable  from  the  smell 
of  stale  fish.  Behind  the  cottage  which  the  Max  Mlillers 
occupied  the  land  rose  to  the  granite  moors,  from  the  top  of 
which  there  was  a  wonderful  view,  south  to  Penzance  and 
Mount's  Bay,  and  back  north  to  the  Bay  of  St.  Ives  and  the 
coast  towards  Perranzabuloe.  The  smelling  town  was  often 
braved,  for  beyond  it  the  spit  of  land  ended  in  an  open 
meadow,  from  which  one  could  see  on  calm  days  the  long 
swell  of  the  green  waters  of  the  Atlantic  rolling  in  with  irre- 
sistible force,  or  on  stormy  days  the  foaming  waves  as  they 
dashed  and  thundered  against  the  cliffs ;  whilst  the  sunsets, 
as  seen  from  this  point,  were  a  constant  delight.  Bathing 
was  carried  on  from  the  beach  in  front  of  the  Max  Mlillers' 
cottage,  '  Primrose  Villa,'  the  boulders  of  rock  fallen  from 
the  cliff's  serving  as  dressing-rooms.  At  that  time  of  year 
the  moors  were  one  blaze  of  purple  heather  and  golden 
gorse — in  striking  contrast  to  the  grey  limestone  headlands 
of  the  sea-coast.     So  brilliant  was  the  colouring  that,  on  the 


i866]  Sf.  Michaers  Mount  323 

first  walk  to  the  moors,  the  eldest  child,  five  and  a  half  years 
old,  who  inherited  all  her  father's  passion  for  flowers,  gave 
a  cry  of  rapture  as  she  saw  the  long  stretch  of  heather  and 
gorse,  '  Oh,  Daddy,  whose  garden  is  this  ?  '  Max  Miiller  was 
delighted  with  the  country,  examining  the  cromlechs  and 
other  Celtic  remains  with  keen  interest.  But  his  letters  shall 
speak  for  themselves. 

To  Mr.  Bellows. 

St.  Ives,  September. 
'  I  have  not  been  able  to  see  much  of  Cornwall  yet,  owing  to  various 
reasons  :  my  own  health,  my  wife's  health,  and  the  weather.  How- 
ever, we  are  both  well  again ;  and  in  spite  of  the  weather  we  have 
spent  three  days  at  the  Lizard.  Gew  Graze,  Pigeon  Hugo,  Kynance, 
and  the  coast  as  far  as  Cadgewith  are  full  of  interest.  As  soon  as  the 
weather  settles  a  little,  we  mean  to  go  to  the  Land's  End.  If  possible, 
we  shall  do  Carnbrea,  when  I  hope  to  see  your  friend  Mr.  Michell, 
though  I  am  afraid  we  are  not  up  to  descending  into  the  mine.  What 
you  say  about  the  accent  in  Cornish  is  very  true.  I  did  not  know 
about  the  German  miners,  and  I  wonder  whether  one  could  find  an 
historical  account  of  them  anywhere.  The  legends  and  stories  of 
Cornwall  are  purely  German — very  little  of  Cornish  left  there.  The 
names  of  places  deserve  a  careful  study.  Mere  etymology  will  not  do 
it ;  you  want  first  of  all  to  ascertain  their  primitive  form.  As  to 
"Carack  luz  en  kuz\"  please  remember  that  I  am  not  a  Cornish  scholar. 
I  consider  your  argument  against  the  modern  form  of  kuz,  instead  of 
the  Cornish  cuit,  Welsh  coed,  as  quite  true.  So  far  I  go  with  you,  and 
this  seems  to  me  to  dispose  of  the  meaning  commonly  given  to 
"  Carack  luz  en  kuz,"  the  hoar  rock  in  the  wood.  What  it  really 
meant  I  cannot  tell ;  I  do  not  see  that  you  prove  the  meaning  of  bay 
for  the  word  ktlz,  or  of  holy  for  Mz,  unless  you  have  some  further 
evidence.  Mere  possibilities  will  not  help  much.  Nor  do  I  see  that 
you  prove  that  the  Mount  was  a  burial-place.  If  you  can  establish  the 
meaning  of  bay  for  kuz  it  will  be  very  important,  but  even  to  have 
shown  that  it  could  not  have  meant  wood,  is  quite  sufficient  to  guard 
against  the  extraordinary  conclusions  founded  on  that  name.  One 
more  quesdon,  What  is  the  earliest  date  for  the  name  "  Carack  luz  en 
kuz,"  or  of  the  pilchard  song  in  which  it  occurs  ? ' 

To  THE  Same. 

St.  Ives,  September  13. 
'The  weather  is  sadly  against  us  here.     We  saw  the  Land's  End, 
and  walked  along  the  coast  to  the  Logan,  with  a  fearful  sea  rolling  at 
^  An  old  name  for  St.  Michael's  Mount. 
Y  a 


324  Articles  on  Cornwall  [ch.  xv 

our  side.  It  was  magnificent.  We  went  down  Botollock  Mine,  which 
to  my  mind  is  as  grand  as  anything  I  recollect.  We  have  only  one 
more  week  here.  I  wish  I  could  stay  here  longer,  it  is  a  delightful 
neighbourhood  and  full  of  interest.  Now  and  then  one  feels  very  near 
the  old  world.  How  careless  people  are  about  Celtic  antiquities; 
while  they  send  men-of-war  to  fetch  home  the  lions  and  bulls  of 
Nineveh,  farmers  are  allowed  to  pull  down  cromlechs  and  caves,  and 
use  the  stones  for  pig-styes.' 

To  THE  Same. 

St.  Ives,  September  18. 

'  The  fates  have  been  sadly  against  me  during  my  stay  in  Cornwall. 

First  I  was  laid  up  with  cold,  &c.,  and  afterwards  the  weather  has  been 

so  uncertain  that  I  have  only  just  been  able  to  see  what  was  absolutely 

necessary.     However,  in  spite  of  all,  I  am  so  delighted  with  Cornwall, 

that  I  am  sure  to  come  again,  and  if  I  could  I  should  gladly  give  up 

Oxford  and  settle  here,  in  a  cottage  by  the  sea-shore,  and  finish  my 

edition  and  translation  of  the  Veda,  which  I  am  afraid  I  shall  never  be 

able  to  finish  at  Oxford.     The  air  here  is  so  invigorating,  and  life  so 

easy,  natural,  and  uninterrupted  by  society,  that  one  feels  up  to  any 

amount  of  work.     I  tremble  when  I  think  of  the  hurry  and  flurry  of 

Oxford,  and  the  distraction  and  lassitude  which  it  entails.  .  .  .  The 

growth  of  the  modern  name  and  legend  of  Marazion  is  very  curious. 

...  I  wish  somebody  would  take  up  the  history  of  Cornish  names  of 

places.     There  are  so  many  names  of  fields,  and  lanes,  and  stones,  to 

say  nothing  of  houses  and  villages,  which  would  yield  an  ample  harvest. 

...  I  should  like  to  know  the  meaning  of  Perran,  and  St.  Perran,  and 

his  various  aliases.     Can  it  mean  *'  miner  "  or  "  smelter  " }     He  seems 

a  saint  of  Cornish  growth,  and  I  expect  a  saint  who  never  had  flesh 

or  bone,  as  little  as  his  companion,  St.  Chywiddan,  i.  e.  White  house, 

or  Smelting  house.     Do  you  happen  to  know  anything  about  their 

meaning  and  origin,  beyond  what  is  found  in  Hunt's  Cornish  Tales  ? ' 

So  delighted  was  Max  Miiller  with  all  he  saw  and  heard 
in  Cornwall — for  he  was  never  tired  of  the  tales  of  Cornish 
saints,  giants,  and  fairies  that  he  learnt  from  various  Cornish 
people  with  whom  he  came  in  contact — that  he  began,  almost 
as  soon  as  he  returned  to  Oxford,  to  write  the  paper  on 
'  Cornish  Antiquities,'  which  was  published  the  following  year 
in  the  Quarterly.  Another,  on  the  question,  '  Were  there 
Jews  in  Cornwall  ? '  also  appeared  in  a  periodical  of  the  next 
year,  and  provoked  long  discussions  ;  whilst  a  third  paper, '  On 
the  Insulation  of  St.  Michael's  Mount,'  was  read  before  the 


i 


i866]  Max  Midler's  *  Brother'  325 

Ashmolean  Society  in  Oxford  in  the  autumn  of  1867.     AH 

three  papers  were   republished  in  the  two  first  editions   of 

Chips. 

To  Mr.  John  Bellows. 

September  29. 

' .  .  .  I  send  you  what  I  have  written  down  about  St.  Michael's 
Mount.  I  wonder  whether  you  will  be  able  to  read  it,  and  I  want 
much  to  know  what  you  think  about  it  before  I  send  it  to  be  printed. 
I  have  taken  possession  of  some  remarks  of  yours,  to  which,  how- 
ever, I  would  gladly  attach  your  name  if  you  will  let  me  do  so.  ...  I  am 
in  no  hurry  about  printing  it.  I  am  pining  after  St.  Ives,  and  Cornish 
rocks,  and  fresh  sea-breezes.' 

Just  after  his  return  to  Oxford,  Max  Miiller  received 
intelligence  that  an  impostor,  calling  himself  his  brother,  was 
going  about  in  London  getting  money  from  those  whom  he 
could  take  in.  The  story  was  always  the  same  :  he  had 
been  robbed  on  his  way  over  from  Germany,  and  had  not 
enough  to  pay  his  ticket  to  Oxford.  As  the  man  or  men 
continued  the  same  fraud  for  several  years.  Max  Miiller  at 
length  put  a  notice  in  the  Times,  mentioning  that  he  had 
never  had  a  brother.  This  stopped  the  impostor  in  London 
after  a  time,  but  a  few  years  later  the  same  trick  was  tried 
in  one  of  the  Australian  colonies,  and  Max  received  letters 
from  several  people  who  had  been  duped  by  him.  The 
imposture  continued  on  and  off  for  quite  five  years,  and 
there  is  still  a  large  packet  of  letters  from  his  victims  marked 
in  Max  Muller's  hand,  '  My  Brother.' 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  October  7. 

'  The  Professors  in  Berlin  are  wretchedly  paid,  and  whenever  I  hear 
of  affairs  there,  I  feel  I  should  never  be  able  to  fit  in  there.  I  am  not 
rich  here,  but  independent.  I  think  I  should  long  ago  have  been  in 
prison  had  I  stayed  in  Germany ;  here  in  England  I  can  do  what 
I  will.  People  abuse  me,  but  they  cannot  bite,  and  everybody  barks 
at  his  own  door.' 

To  Professor  Lepsius. 

Translation.  Oxford,  October  14. 

' .  .  .  The  things  that  happen  in  Prussia — or  shall  I  say  Germany  ? — 
occupy  one's  head  and  one's  heart.  What  would  Bunsen  have  thought 
of  it  all  ?     Many  a  thing  has  happened  differently  to  what  we  should 


326        Gold  Medal  from  Duke  of  Dessau    [ch.  xv 

have  wished,  but  that  it  has  happened,  and  that  it  has  advanced  so  far, 
and  will  advance  still  more  and  more,  makes  it  well  worth  while  to 
have  lived  to  see  it  come  to  pass.  There  will  have  to  be  further 
struggles,  but  a  glorious  beginning  has  been  made  ! ' 

It  w^as  in  this  autumn  that  Max  Miiller  received  a  fine  gold 
medal  from  his  old  Duke,  Leopold  of  Dessau,  who,  knowing 
that  Orders  are  not  worn  in  England,  except  at  Court,  had  this 
medal  struck  expressly  for  the  student  whose  career  he  had 
watched  with  interest  from  his  earliest  childhood.  On  the 
obverse  of  the  medal  is  the  head  of  the  Duke,  who  was  a  very 
handsome  man,  and  on  the  reverse,  within  a  broad  wreath  of 
oak  and  laurel  leaves,  the  inscription  : — 

'  Fiar  Verdienst  um  Kunst  und  Wissenschaft  dem  Professor 
Dr.  Max  Muller,  1866.' 

('To  Professor  Dr.  Max  Miiller,  1866,  for  services  to  Art 
and  Science.')  It  was  the  first  recognition  he  received,  except 
from  learned  societies,  and  was  greatly  prized,  and  always 
kept  on  his  table. 

To  Mr.  John  Bellows. 

Oxford,  Noveinber  8. 

'  It  is  very  kind  of  you  to  lend  me  your  Cornish  Dictionary ;  I  shall 
take  great  care  of  it,  and  return  it  as  soon  as  I  get  my  own  copy.  It 
seems  a  very  useful  book,  and  carefully  put  together,  only  the  Sanskrit 
comparisons  are  horrible.  I  wish  Mr.  Williams  would  publish  his 
Celtic  Grammar,  but  confine  himself  to  Celtic.  I  guessed  the  riddle  of 
the  Nine  Maidens  as  soon  as  I  began  to  read  your  letter.  I  saw  the 
stones,  and  I  wish  I  had  known  about  the  missing  stone,  and  where  to 
find  it.  As  to  the  legend,  it  would  grow  up  naturally  enough.  If  you 
once  have  the  nine  maidens  and  turned  into  stones,  the  dancing  on 
a  Sunday,  &c.,  will  come  by  itself.  I  think  I  could  match  that  easily 
by  German  legends.  You  see  that  even  the  two  pipers  were  soon 
added  by  popular  fancy.  I  wish  I  could  find  out  whether  I  am  right 
in  supposing  that  the  two  pipers,  and  the  two  stones  that  flank  the 
Men-an-tol,  point  to  the  equinoctial  points,  and  served  to  fix  the  great 
annual  festivals.  There  are  certainly  tombs  on  St.  Michael's  Mount, 
and  I  read  an  ancient  charter  which  allows  people  to  be  buried  on  the 
mainland,  but  still  requires  the  dues  to  be  paid  to  the  Priory.  I  feel 
sure  an  attempt  should  be  made  to  declare  all  real  antiquities,  in 
Cornwall  and  elsewhere,  national  property.  I  have  collected  a  few 
cases  of  vandalism.  If  you  meet  with  any  in  your  readings,  please  let 
me  know.' 


1 866]  Indian  MSS.  327 

To  THE  Same. 

Oxford,  November  14, 

*  You  have  traced  the  extracts  from  the  Sikh  MSS.  beautifully,  and 
before  I  say  more  about  it,  let  me  ask  you  where  you  get  that 
beautiful  tracing-paper,  and  how  much  it  is  per  quire.  Well,  there  is 
very  litde  known  about  the  Sikh  language.  We  possess  several  MSS. 
of  their  sacred  book,  the  Granlh,  and  of  some  minor  works,  all 
treating  of  the  Sikh  religion.  The  language  is  the  Penjabi  as  spoken 
about  1500  A.D.,  a  corruption  of  Sanskrit,  like  Hindi  and  the  rest. 
The  alphabet,  too,  is  Devanagari,  only  curiously  misapplied.  By 
means  of  Sanskrit  on  the  one  side,  and  Hindi  on  the  other,  one  could 
make  out  passages  here  and  there,  but  that  was  a  slow  process.  So 
I  wrote  through  a  friend  of  mine  to  some  of  the  Sikh  priests  at 
Umritsir,  asking  them  to  write  out  a  Sanskrit  translation  of  some 
portions  of  their  sacred  code.  They  sent  me  instead  a  Hindi  and 
Penjabi  translation,  and  by  means  of  it,  and  with  the  help  of  some 
friends  who  are  good  Hindi  scholars,  I  made  out  some  interesting 
passages.  I  have  now  written  again  for  a  literal  Sanskrit  translation, 
and  when  I  get  it  I  hope  to  publish  a  few  specimens  of  the  sacred 
writings  of  the  Sikhs.  Every  book  that  has  formed  the  foundation  of 
a  large  religious  movement  ought  to  be  accessible  to  scholars  and 
theologians.  It  has  taken  me  twenty  years  now  to  bring  out  the  first 
edition  of  the  sacred  book  of  the  Brahmans,  the  Veda  ;  so  I  am 
afraid  life  is  too  short  to  embark  on  a  second  undertaking  of  the  same 
kind — the  one  representing  the  oldest,  the  other  the  most  modern 
phase  of  religious  thought  in  India — the  one  1,500  years  before,  the 
other  1,500  after,  our  era.  I  should  be  very  glad  some  day  to  see  Sir 
Thomas  Phillips's  collection  ;  I  know  it  is  wonderfully  rich.  I  wish 
some  collector,  like  him,  would  rescue  what  there  is  still  to  be  rescued 
of  the  ancient  literature  of  India.  Manuscripts  in  India,  being  made 
of  vegetable  paper,  do  not  last  much  longer  than  400  years.  It  was 
the  duty  of  every  rajah  to  keep  a  library  and  a  staff  of  librarians, 
whose  work  it  was  to  recopy  each  manuscript  as  soon  as  it  began  to 
show  signs  of  decay.  As  soon  as  these  rajahs  were  pensioned  off, 
the  first  retrenchment  they  made  in  their  establishments  was  the 
suppression  of  these  libraries  and  librarians.  They  were  not  even 
allowed  to  present  their  libraries  to  the  East  India  Company  !  Well, 
the  result  is  that  at  the  present  moment  literary  works,  which  have 
been  preserved  for  more  than  a  thousand  years,  are  crumbling  away. 
In  a  few  places,  where  there  exists  still  among  the  natives  an  interest 
in  their  ancient  Hterature,  manuscripts  are  copied  and  some  of  them 
printed  and  lithographed.  But  the  great  bulk  of  Sanskrit  literature 
(larger  than  the  literature  of  Greece)  is  allowed  to  perish,  whereas 


328  The  Veda  [ch.  xv 

a  few  thousand  pounds  might  preserve  all  that  is  worth  preserving. 
If  the  interest  which  is  now  taken  in  the  early  history  of  mankind, 
in  the  origin  of  religions,  mythological  and  philosophical  ideas,  con- 
tinues for  the  next  hundred  or  two  hundred  years,  the  Sanskrit  MSS. 
would  be  valued  hereafter,  like  the  Codex  Alexandrinus  or  Sinai- 
ticus.  Many  of  them  will  be  unique.  And  strange  to  say  the  same 
manuscripts  which  in  the  hot  and  dry  climate  of  India  are  so 
perishable  are  perfectly  safe  as  soon  as  they  are  deposited  in  a 
European  library.  But  no  one  takes  an  interest  in  these  matters,  and 
while  people  shudder  at  the  supposed  vandalism  of  Omar  in  de- 
stroying the  Alexandrian  Library,  the  same  unconscious  vandalism 
takes  place  unheeded  under  our  eyes.  I  have  not  forgotten  my 
Cornish  articles ;  but  I  want  to  get  rid,  not  only  of  the  Jews,  but  also 
of  the  Saracens.     Yours  very  truly.' 

To  HIS  Wife. 

Oxford,  December  9. 

'  Life  at may  be  very  nice  for  people  who  have  nothing  to  do, 

or  think  they  have  nothing  to  do,  and  no  account  to  give  of  their 
days  and  hours.  But  I  have  not  learnt  life  so.  I  still  have  a  great 
work  to  do,  and  I  often  feel  that  I  might  have  done  a  great  deal 
more,  if  I  had  kept  the  one  object  of  my  life  more  steadily  in  view. 
I  sometimes  wish  you  would  help  me  more  in  doing  that,  and  insist 
on  my  working  harder  at  the  Veda  and  nothing  else.  1  hope  I  shall 
finish  that  work,  and  I  feel  convinced,  though  I  shall  not  live  to  see 
it,  that  this  edition  of  mine  and  the  translation  of  the  Veda  will 
hereafter  tell  to  a  great  extent  on  the  fate  of  India,  and  on  the  growth 
of  millions  of  souls  in  that  country.  It  is  the  root  of  their  religion, 
and  to  show  them  what  that  root  is,  is,  I  feel  sure,  the  only  way  of 
uprooting  all  that  has  sprung  from  it  during  the  last  3,000  years. 
If  those  thoughts  pass  through  one's  mind,  one  does  grudge  the 
hours  and  days  and  weeks  that  are  spent  in  staying  in  people's 
houses,  and  one  feels  that  with  the  many  blessings  showered  upon 
one,  one  ought  to  be  up  and  doing  what  may  be  God's  work.' 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  London,  December  16. 

'  We  stayed  from  Thursday  to  Saturday  with  the  Belgian  Minister, 
M.  Van  de  Weyer,  who  has  a  beautiful  place  not  far  from  Taplow.  He 
is  a  very  cultivated  man  and  an  experienced  statesman,  and  was  a 
hbrarian  in  Holland  when  the  revolution  broke  out ;  then  he  became 
one  of  Leopold's  Ministers.  He  married  a  rich  American,  and  they 
live  in  great  luxury.     We  had  the  same  rooms  Princess  Alice  had 


t867]  Bournemouth 


329 


when  she  last  paid  them  a  long  visit.     It  is  very  near  Windsor  and 
the  Queen  often  drives  over  to  see  them.' 

The  Christmas  was  spent  in  London  with  the  grandfather, 
the  last  the  Max  Miillers  were  to  spend  away  from  their  own 
home  till  their  children  were  grown  up. 

Max  Miiller  had  been  far  from  well  whilst  in  London,  and 
on  his  return  to  Oxford  was  laid  up  with  so  severe  a  bronchial 
attack,  accompanied  by  great  prostration,  that  his  medical 
attendant  and  friend,  Mr.  Symonds,  was  seriously  anxious 
about  him,  and  took  him  to  London  for  further  advice.  He 
was  ordered  to  leave  Oxford  at  once  for  a  milder  climate. 
The  weather  was  so  severe  that  a  journey  to  the  Riviera  was 
thought  too  great  a  risk,  and  just  after  the  middle  of  January 
Max  with  his  wife  and  children  settled  at  Bournemouth,  his 
old  friend  Professor  Cowell  undertaking  his  work  as  Sub- 
Librarian  at  the  Bodleian,  and  occupying  his  house  in  Oxford, 
till  it  was  fit  for  him  to  return  home.  At  first  he  was  almost 
entirely  confined  to  the  house,  but  as  the  weather  improved 
and  he  gained  strength  he  was  able  to  enjoy  the  walks  in 
the  sheltered  pine  woods,  which  then  stretched  between  the 
Bourne  and  Boscombe,  or  quiet  rides  with  some  relatives 
of  his  wife  living  at  Bournemouth ;  and  constant  talks  with 
one  of  these  relatives,  the  banker  Mr.  Glyn,  afterwards  Lord 
Wolverton,  was  a  great  resource,  as  he  was  not  fit  for  any 
hard  mental  work,  and  had  been  ordered  by  his  doctor  to 
leave  his  books  in  Oxford.  Both  Max  Miiller  and  Mr.  Glyn 
were  ardent  Liberals,  and  great  admirers  of  Mr.  Gladstone, 
who,  as  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  was  in  the  habit  year 
by  year  of  talking  over  his  Budget  with  Mr.  Glyn,  and  a 
favourite  point  of  discussion  was  whether  the  nation  would 
accept  Mr.  Gladstone  some  day  as  Prime  Minister.  Mr.  Glyn 
was  in  those  days  inclined  to  doubt  it.  One  point  on  which 
the  uncle  and  nephew  disagreed  entirely  was  in  their  estima- 
tion of  Louis  Napoleon,  whom  Mr.  Glyn  admired,  as  he 
attributed  the  commercial  prosperity  of  France  to  his  good 
government.  Max  Miiller,  on  the  other  hand,  who  had  often 
been  in  Paris,  and  knew  how  the  respectable  middle  class  kept 
entirely  aloof  of  the  Government,  which  they  looked  on  as 
thoroughly  evil,  had  no  admiration  for  the  adventurer. 


330  Brahma  Somdj  [ch.  xv 

It  was  many  weeks  before  Max  Miiller  at  all  recovered 
his  usual  health  and  strength ;  and  though  he  began  his 
translation  of  the  Rig-veda,  of  which  the  prospectus  had  been 
published  in  January,  he  soon  found  that  he  was  only  up 
to  lighter  work,  and  he  began  to  prepare  his  articles  on  Corn- 
wall for  the  Press.  The  first,  on  '  Cornish  Antiquities,'  had 
been  intended  for  the  North  British  Review.  When  written 
he  sent  it  to  his  friend  Mr.  Bellows,  a  Cornishman  by  birth, 
for  revision,  and  in  his  letter  mentions  that  he  had  a  half- 
promise  from  a  member  of  Parliament  that  he  would  prepare 
a  Bill  on  the  proper  preservation  of  national  monuments.  It 
had  been  a  real  sorrow  to  him  in  Cornwall  to  see  how  the 
interesting  Celtic  remains  were  left  entirely  at  the  mercy 
of  indifferent  landowners  and  ignorant  farmers,  who  had  no 
scruples  in  using  the  fine  stones  for  gateposts  and  farm 
buildings ;  in  some  cases,  as  with  the  ancient  wells,  pulling 
them  down  entirely  to  build  them  up  in  modern  style,  or 
as  they  described  it,  'fitty.'  Nothing  more  is  to  be  found 
about  this  half-promise  in  any  of  the  letters,  and  it  was  not 
till  about  1873  that  Lord  Avebury,  then  Sir  John  Lubbock, 
introduced  his  Ancient  Monuments  Bill,  which  was  not  finally 
passed  till  1882. 

The  second  article,  'Are  there  Jews  in  Cornwall?'   came 

out  in  Macmillans  Magazine  in  the  April  of  this  year.     The 

third  article,  '  On  the  Insulation  of  St.  Michael's  Mount,'  was 

not  published  till  it  appeared  in  the  third  volume  of  CJiips 

from  a  German  Workshop  in  1870. 

Before  he  left  Oxford,  Max  Miiller  had  heard  from  the 
Dean  of  St.  Paul's,  asking  him  to  furnish  a  list  of  books 
that  might  be  of  interest  and  use  to  his  nephew.  Dr.  Milman, 
the  new  Bishop  of  Calcutta.  On  furnishing  the  list  Max 
Miiller  forwarded  a  letter  on  the  Brahma  Somaj,  or  body 
of  pure  Theists  in  India,  written  to  him  by  Satyendra  Nath 
Tagore,  himself  a  faithful  adherent  of  the  Brahma  Somaj,  who 
was  the  first  native  to  pass  the  examination  for  the  Indian 
Civil  Service.  As  Max  Miiller  was  intimately  acquainted 
later  with  Keshub  Chunder  Sen  and  Mozoomdar,  leaders 
of  the  Somaj,  and  always  took  the  deepest  interest  in  the 
whole  movement,  as  being,  he  felt,  the  real  stepping-stone 


1867]  Satyendra  Ndth  Tagore  331 

to  Christianity  in  India,  the  letter  is  given  in  the  Appendix. 
It  presents  the  real  teaching  of  the  Somaj  at  that  time  as 
explained  by  a  highly  educated  and  enlightened  follower. 

To  THE  Dean  of  St.  Paul's. 

64,  High  Street,  Oxford, 
January,  1867. 
*  I  enclose  a  letter  from  an  Indian  friend  of  mine,  Satyendra  Nath 
Tagore,  which  may  possibly  interest  you,  and  which,  if  you  like,  you 
may  forward  to  the  Bishop,     It  will  give  him  an  insight  into  the 
religious   aspirations    of  the   best   people   in    India   at   the    present 
moment.     The  writer  is  the  grandson  of  Dwarka  Nath  Tagore,  whom 
you  may  remember  in  London,  some  twenty  years  ago,  a  very  shrewd 
and  amiable  man.     His  grandson  came  over  to  pass  the  Civil  Service 
Examination,  and,  to  the  great  dismay  of  the  authorities,  came  out  as 
No.  6.     He  was  about  twenty  when  I  knew  him  in  England,  and  he 
was  then  at  the  head  of  the  so-called  Brahma  Somaj,  which  is  making 
very  considerable  progress  among  the  lower  classes  in  India.     The 
movement  began  with  Rammohun  Roy,  and  him,  too,  you  may  have 
seen.     His  idea  was  to  go  back  to  the  earliest  form  of  the  Indian 
religion,  as  preserved  in  the  Vedas,  and  to  surround  the  Vedas  with 
all  the  defences  of  a  revealed  book.     What  he  took  for  the  Veda  was 
not  the  original  collection,  but  the  more  modern  philosophical  appen- 
dices, Upanishads.     After  his  death  the  movement  languished,     I  re- 
member my  young  friend  telling  me  :  "  Rammohun  Roy  put  us  on 
a  wrong  track — he  was  a  trimmer.     We  have  entirely  broken  with 
the    Veda."     They  have  certainly  put  an  end  to  idolatry,  they  have 
broken  with  caste,  and  they  hold   the  essential   points   of  natural 
religion.     I  need  not  tell  you  that  I  find  it  difficult  to  meet  his  argu- 
ments, and  to  remove  his  doubts  with  regard  to  some  points  of  the 
Christian  religion  which  are  his  stumbling-blocks.     I  have  not  written 
to  him  for  some  time,  simply  because  I  feel  I  cannot  grapple  with 
him,  and  he  is  not  a  man  to  be  satisfied  with  words.     I  know  some 
other  men  of  a  similar  character  in  India — one,  a  convert,  a  man 
more  like  the  martyrs  of  old  than  anybody  I  ever  saw.     What  I  feel 
very  deeply  when  I  have  to  argue  with  such  men,  is  that  the  Chris- 
tianity  which    conquered   the   world   was   very   different    from   our 
hardened  and  formularized  Christianity,  and  that  the  old  tree  will 
never  bear  transplanting  into   a  new   soil,   though  the  young   seed 
would  probably  grow  up  on  Indian  soil  into  as  wonderful  a  tree  as 
anything  we  have  seen  as  yet  in  the  history  of  Europe.     India  wants 
Apostles  enjoying  all  the  freedom  of  St.  Paul ;  but  what  would  the 
Elders  at  Jerusalem  say  to  that  ? 


332 


Nehemiah  Goreh 


[CH.  XV 


'Please  return  Satyendra  Nath  Tagore's  letter  to  me  when  you 
have  done  with  it.' 

To  THE  Dean  of  St.  Paul's  (Dr.  Milman). 

Staunton  House,  Bournemouth, 

February  26. 

'  Dear  Mr.  Dean, — I  see  no  objection  whatever  to  Tagore's  letter 
being  copied  and  shown  to  men  who  take  an  interest  in  the  religious 
future  of  India,  as  he  says  himself  I  may  make  any  use  of  it.  I  am 
particularly  glad  that  Lord  Cranborne  should  have  seen  it,  if,  as  you 
say,  he  takes  an  interest  in  affairs  of  religion.  I  have  myself  the 
strongest  belief  in  the  growth  of  Christianity  in  India,  There  is  no 
country  so  ripe  for  Christianity  as  India,  and  yet  the  difficulties  seem 
enormous.  The  case  of  Nehemiah  Goreh  is  a  most  interesting 
one ;  it  ought  to  be  typical,  and  yet  it  seems  to  be  exceptional,  and 
he  became  a  Christian  without,  nay,  in  spite  of,  the  missionaries. 
I  have  never  yet  seen  a  missionary  or  a  civil  servant  who  does  not 
consider  himself  infinitely  superior  to  any  Hindu,  and  yet  this  Nehe- 
miah Goreh  has  suffered  more  for  his  Christianity,  and  of  his  own  free 
will,  than  any  man  I  know  in  England  or  Germany.  Such  a  man, 
and  many  like  him,  wants  sympathy  and  love,  and  that  is  what  they 
never  find.  Advice,  reproof,  and  a  good  deal  of  de  haut  en  las  patro- 
nizing the  natives  receive,  no  doubt,  from  missionaries,  but  respectful 
and  loving  treatment  I  doubt  whether  they  ever  receive.  The  idea 
that  a  man  like  Nehemiah  Goreh  could  be  in  any  respect  his  superior 
never  enters  a  missionary's  mind,  yet  I  confess  I  felt  far  more  awed 
by  that  modest  and  honest  convert  than  by  many  a  bishop  and 
archbishop.  Twelve  men  such  as  Nehemiah  might  do  more  in  India 
than  hundreds  of  missionaries.  I  hope  my  health  is  getting  better. 
I  am  not  accustomed  to  be  ill,  and  it  makes  me  very  unhappy  not  to 
be  able  to  work.  My  chief  complaint  is  want  of  strength.  I  am 
to  stay  here  till  May.' 

The  end  of  March  brought  great  sorrow  to  Max  Mijller 
in  the  news  of  the  death  of  his  sister's  eldest  daughter, 
nineteen  years  of  age,  after  a  few  days'  illness.  It  may  be 
remembered  that  she  had  spent  part  of  the  summer  of  1863 
with  the  Max  Miillers  on  the  Starnberger  See.  She  had 
grown  up  into  a  beautiful  girl  and  was  the  joy  and  pride 
of  her  parents.  Max  Miiller  wished  to  go  at  once  to  his 
mother  and  sister,  but  his  doctor  would  not  sanction  the 
journey,  and  absence  again  added  to  his  sorrow. 


;?^' 

*(ll^. 


1867]  Death  of  Max  Midler's  Niece  333 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  Bournemouth,  April  8. 

'  Augusta's  letter  has  touched  me  again  deeply.  May  God  give  her 
strength  to  bear  this  sorrow.  I  have  spent  the  whole  week  in  great 
anxiety  and  grief,  and  whenever  I  feel  a  little  better  I  think  I  ought  to 
have  gone  to  you.  And  yet  my  doctor  says  I  must  still  take  the 
greatest  care,  and  I  feel  myself  that  I  only  get  on  slowly,  and  the 
smallest  change  in  the  weather  brings  back  the  swelling  and  inflamma- 
tion of  the  throat,  and  I  might  have  been  more  of  an  anxiety  than 
a  help  to  you.' 

It  was  during  this  spring  that  his  friend  Mr.  Bellows 
brought  out  the  Outline  Dictionary  mentioned  earlier  in 
this  chapter,  to  which  Max  Muller  contributed  a  valuable 
preface. 

To  INIr.  Bellows. 

Oxford,  May  3. 

'  I  received  to-day  a  dozen  copies  of  the  Outline  Dictionary,  and  was 
very  much  pleased  to  see  the  book  out.  I  shall  try  to  make  the  best 
use  I  can  of  these  copies.  I  shall  send  one  to  Lepsius,  Berlin  Academy ; 
Monsieur  Bell,  French  Academy ;  Bishop  of  Melanesia,  and  the  Bishop 
of  New  Zealand.  The  book  strikes  me  as  very  convenient,  just  the 
right  shape,  and  I  should  think  missionaries  would  be  very  thankful  to 
have  such  a  book  if  they  knew  of  it.  I  begin  to  feel  so  much  better, 
now  that  the  weather  is  mild,  and  work  is  again  a  great  delight.' 

Through  the  past  winter  Max  Miiller's  thoughts  had  been 

much  occupied  by  the  idea  of  a  possible  change  in  his  life. 

The  University  authorities  at  Cambridge  had  founded  a  Chair 

of   Sanskrit,   and    he    was    doubtful   whether    he    ought   or 

ought  not  to  stand  for  election.     Six  years  sooner  he  would 

have  felt  no  doubt  on  the  question,  but  he  had  now  turned 

his  attention   more  to   general  philology  and  the  problems 

of   mythology.     He  had  lived   too  for   nearly  twenty  years 

in  Oxford,  and  both  he  and  his  wife  were  deeply  attached 

to    the    place,   and    had   many  valued    friends  there.      The 

following  letter   shows  how   the    matter   had   been   decided 

for  him : — 

Bournemouth,  April  16,  1867. 

'  My  dear  Kingsley, — I  am  not  sufficiently  up  in  the  Luxemburg 
question  to  undertake  an  article  for  Eraser,  but  I  have  written  to 
a  friend  of  mine,  an  Englishman  who  knows  a  good  deal  about  these 


334         Chips  from  a  German  Workshop    [ch.  xv 

matters.  I  hope  and  trust  the  matter  will  be  settled  peaceably. 
Germany  has  enough  to  do  at  home,  and  though  I  rejoice  in  a  united 
and  strong  Germany,  I  do  not  like  to  see  the  drill-sergeant  Govern- 
ment strengthened  more  than  can  be  helped.  The  absence  of  England 
from  the  councils  of  Europe  is  sadly  felt  just  now,  A  man  must  dare 
to  have  friends,  and  dare  to  have  enemies — and  so  must  a  people. 
The  natural  ally  of  England  is  Germany,  that  is  to  say,  a  united, 
sensibly  governed,  Protestant,  Northern  Germany.  England  and 
Germany  will  represent  the  Teutonic  element  in  Europe,  with  all  that 
is  good  and  bad  in  it ;  and,  if  united  by  common  objects,  they  will 
stand  like  a  breakwater  between  the  Romans  and  Roman  Catholics  in 
the  West  and  South,  and  the  Slavs  and  Greeks  in  the  East  and  North. 
You  want  a  good  statesman  in  whom  the  country  trusts,  a  man  like 
Pitt  or  Sir  Robert  Peel.  Gladstone  has  a  foreign  policy,  but  matters 
must  get  much  worse  before  people  in  England  will  find  out  what  they 
possess  in  Gladstone.  He  ought  to  retire  like  Camillus,  and  wait  till 
greater  times  call  for  greater  men. 

'  Cox  is  a  hard-working  man.  He  wants  a  little  sunshine — to  throw 
off  the  prickles  and  grow  into  flower. 

'  My  Cambridge  plans  are  at  an  end.  I  had  long  made  up  my 
mind  not  to  stand  against  Cowell.  He  has  now  decided  to  become 
a  candidate.  You  could  not  get  a  better  man.  The  Master  of  Trinity, 
I  hear,  is  favourable  to  him.  Do  what  you  can  for  him,  you  may  do 
it  safely.     Ever  yours  affectionately.' 

The  follovi^ing  letter  contains  the  first  mention  of  the  work 
by  which  perhaps  Max  Miiller  became  best  known  to  the 
general  public,  Chips  from  a  German  Workshop.  On  receipt 
of  Mr.  Longman's  answer  he  set  to  work  at  once  on  the 
collection  and  revision  of  his  articles.  The  work  came  out 
in  the  autumn,  when  the  fine  preface  was  written.  '  It  was 
through  the  preface  to  the  Chips  that  I  first  learnt  to  know 
and  love  Max  Miiller,'  wrote  one  who  felt  he  owed  nearly  all 
that  was  good  in  him  to  Max  MuUer's  teaching. 

To  W.  Longman,  Esq. 

Bournemouth,  April  20,  1867. 
'  Dear  Sir, — I  have  been  looking  through  my  essays,  and  I  mean 
to  revise  and  republish  them.     The  first  volume  would  contain  essays 
on  Religion,  Mythology,  and  Traditions. 

'  Afterwards  there  would  be  a  second  volume  on  Languasfe  and 
Literature.     As  a  general  title  I  thought  of  Chips  from  a  German 


•^nJ 


■s. 
■s. 


1867]  ^ Parks  End'  bought  335 

Workshop.  Would  you  feel  inclined  to  take  these  essays  on  the  same 
terms  as  the  second  volume  of  my  Lectures  ?  They  will  be  ready  for 
October,  I  think.     Yours  very  truly,  '  M.  M.' 

On  one  of  the  last  days  of  April  the  Max  Mtillers  returned 
to  Oxford,  and  the  same  day  they  saw  the  announcement  of 
the  sale  by  auction,  in  a  day  or  two,  of  the  house  Professor 
Goldwin  Smith  had  built  for  himself  across  the  Parks— which 
had  already  been  laid  out  and  planted,  and  were  no  longer 
the  bare  fields,  with  the  Museum  in  their  midst,  of  five  years 
before.  The  house  in  High  Street  was  damp,  cold,  and 
becoming  too  small,  and  on  finding  that  '  Parks  End,'  which 
was  only  a  bachelor's  house,  could  easily  be  enlarged,  Max 
Muller  resolved  to  bid  for  it.  It  was  a  bright  sunny  day 
when  he  and  his  wife  first  went  over  their  future  home,  the 
lilacs  were  in  full  bloom,  and  the  little  place  looked  its  best. 
Not  a  single  house  then  stood  to  the  north  of  '  Parks  End  ' — 
on  the  north  side  of  what  is  now  called  Norham  Gardens  were 
cultivated  fields — the  nearest  houses  were  in  Park  Town,  and 
only  two  houses  existed  each  side  of  *  Parks  End.'  Directly 
the  house  was  bought  plans  were  made  for  adding  a  drawing- 
room,  and  what  Mr.  Goldwin  Smith  afterwards  irreverently 
called  a  '  baby-hutch,'  and  the  work  was  at  once  begun,  as 
his  wife  was  resolved  that  Max  Muller  should  leave  High 
Street  before  the  winter  set  in. 

The  lectures  announced  for  this  term  were  on  the  poem 

of  the  Nibclungen,  on  which  he  had  lectured  sixteen  years 

before. 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  64,  High  Street,  May  3. 

'  You  will  hardly  guess  what  has  kept  me  from  writing  sooner.  We 
have  bought  a  house,  and  I  wanted  to  tell  you  all  about  it.  .  .  .  You 
must  not  be  anxious  about  me.  I  am  really  well  again :  our  doctor 
thinks  me  much  stronger  in  every  way.  I  have  given  up  the  Bodleian, 
and  shall  not  have  so  much  work.  The  new  house  is  really  very 
charming,  and  the  children  are  delighted  with  it.  It  is  the  best  built 
house  here  in  every  way ;  all  the  chief  rooms  look  south,  and  as  it 
faces  the  Parks  we  can  never  have  any  house  built  in  front  of  us.  We 
must  add  to  it,  for  it  is  too  small,  but  we  are  able  to  pay  the  whole  out 
of  our  savings  without  borrowing  anything.  We  have  had  very  happy 
years  here,  and  the  children  are  so  strong  and  healthy ;  we  shall  be 


336  Birth  of  only  Son  [ch.  xv 

sorry  to  leave  this  house,  but  we  are  glad  to  have  a  larger  and  better 
house,  and  more  out  of  the  town.' 

Since   her  daughter's   great   sorrov^   the   old   mother  had 

resolved   to   give   up   her  rooms  in  Dresden   and   move   to 

Chemnitz,  a  change  v^hich  her  son  had  long  urged  her  to 

make. 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  64,  High  Street,  May  19. 

'  Your  rooms  in  Dresden  must  look  very  sad  and  bare,  and  whenever 
I  think  of  poor  Auguste  my  heart  is  very  heavy.  It  is  such  a  hopeless 
trial,  and  one  sees  nothing  to  make  up  for  what  they  have  lost.  It  is 
well  that  you  have  settled  to  move  to  Chemnitz,  and  though  you  will 
miss  Dresden,  few  mothers  have  the  comfort  of  spending  their  last 
years  with  their  children  and  children's  children.  You  can  thank  God 
for  this,  in  spite  of  the  many  afflictions  and  trials  He  has  laid  on  you, 
and  then  you  will  forget  the  many  little  disagreeables  and  misunder- 
standings which  constant  living  together  must  bring.  I  cannot  under- 
stand why  you  make  yourself  so  anxious  about  money.  I  hope 
I  shall  always  be  able  to  give  you  as  much  as  you  want.  I  give  away 
every  year  a  fixed  proportion  of  my  income,  and  if  it  does  not  go  to 
you  it  goes  to  others.  The  question  is  therefore  only,  whether  I  give 
it  to  you,  or  to  others  who  perhaps  need  it  less  than  you  do.  You 
should  make  no  difficulty  about  such  matters ;  there  are  cares  enough 
in  life  without  making  new  ones  for  ourselves.' 

On  June  9  Max  Miiller's  youngest  child  and  only  son  was 
born,  and  though  he  had  professed  to  be  quite  satisfied  with 
his  three  little  girls,  his  letters  show  how  he  rejoiced  at  the 
birth  of  what  is  called  in  Germany  the  '  Stammhalter.' 

To  HIS  Cousin,  Captain  von  Basedow. 

Trajislalion.  64,  High  Street,///;/^  30,  1867. 

*  My  dear  Adolf, — You  will  already  have  heard  that  at  last  a  little 
son  has  appeared  here,  and  I  wish  to  ask  you  to  be  one  of  his  god- 
fathers. Both  G.  and  I  wish  the  boy  not  to  be  exclusively  English, 
and,  like  his  name  Wilhelm  Grenfell,  so  his  godfathers  should  be  of 
both  countries.  He  can  then  later  on  choose  his  own  home,  and  like 
the  old  proverb  uhi  bene  ihi patria.  His  other  godparents  are  cousins 
of  G.'s.  Of  course  we  should  prefer  that  you  should  come  here  your- 
self, but  if  that  can't  be,  write  if  you  will  accede  to  our  wish,  and  let 
me  have  your  answer  as  soon  as  possible,  as  the  little  heathen  is 
already  three  weeks  old.     Here,  thank  God,  all  goes  on  well,  but  after 


1867]  Ems  337 

all  the  sorrow  we  have  had,  we  cannot  feel  very  joyful.  The  last  few 
years  have  brought  many  changes,  but  one  must  not  lose  courage. 
In  August  I  think  of  going  to  Germany,  and  hope  I  shall  find  you  all 
well  at  Dessau.  Much  love  from  us  both  to  your  wife,  your  mother, 
Tante  Julie,  Rosalia,  Berndt  and  his  wife,  the  Stockmarrs,  and  any  old 
friends  who  still  remember  me.     Always  in  true  affection,      '  Max.' 

Though  very  much  stronger,  it  was  thought  wise  for  Max 
Miiller  to  take  the  waters  at  Ems  this  summer,  and  as  soon 
as  his  wife  could  move  she  and  their  four  children  went  to 
stay  with  the  mother-aunt  near  Maidenhead,  and  Max  started 
for  Ems,  where  his  mother  and  sister  and  her  husband  joined 
him  as  his  guests  ;  and  a  happy  month  was  passed  together, 
he  doing  everything  in  his  power  to  lighten  the  cloud  of 
sorrow  resting  on  his  sister  and  Dr.  Krug. 

To  HIS  Wife. 

Ems,  August  19. 

'We  have  had  a  beautiful  walk  this  afternoon,  and  I  have  often 
wished  you  here  ;  you  would  enjoy  it  so  much,  and  I  should  enjoy  it 
all  so  much  with  you.  And  yet  what  a  pleasure  it  is  to  see  mother  so 
well,  at  least  for  her  age,  and  able  to  enjoy  all  with  us.  And  those 
poor  Krugs — it  is  quite  sad  to  see  them  happy,  and  always  that  fearful 
grief  in  their  hearts.  How  often  one  thinks  of  Marie,  and  how  she 
would  have  delighted  in  seeing  all  this  beautiful  scenery,  and  being 
with  us.  .  .  .  Krug  speaks  so  freely  about  those  who  are  no  more ; 
I  can  only  listen,  for  what  can  one  say  ?  Our  view  of  death  is  wrong, 
no  doubt,  because  our  view  of  life  is  wrong :  there  is  nothing  to  be 
feared  in  this  beautiful  world  of  God's  own  making  and  ordering. 
But  parting  is  a  wrench,  even  for  a  few  weeks,  and  nothing  can  take 
away  the  pang  of  that  long  parting  with  those  whom  we  have  truly 
loved.  How  one  grows  together ;  how  you  and  the  children,  every 
one  of  them,  cling  to  me,  and  are  part  and  parcel  of  myself.  To  lose 
one  of  them,  even  though  one  may  submit  to  God's  will,  must  tear 
a  wound  which  can  never  disappear  again,  however  time  may  soothe 
the  first  agony.  We  ought  to  be  so  grateful.  I  do  not  think  of  real 
happiness  God  can  give  more  than  has  been  given  us :  how  can  one 
ask  for  more,  or  wish  for  anything  ?  I  should  like  to  sit  quiet,  to  rest 
and  be  thankful,  not  to  move,  lest  something  should  move  and  fall. 
I  do  long  for  you  all,  but  it  was  right  to  give  up  something  of  our 
happiness :  the  more  you  give  away  the  more  is  given  you ;  that 
seems  to  me  a  law  of  our  spiritual  life.  ...  All  send  you  their  best 
love,  and  wish  you  and  the  children  were  here ;  and  they  say  it  is  so 

I  Z 


338  Ems  [cH.  XV 

good  of  you  to  let  me  go  alone.  Krug  thinks  it  will  be  very  good  for 
me  here.  The  evenings  are  glorious.  We  have  supper  in  the  garden 
at  nine — the  river  running  by,  all  lighted  up,  and  in  the  distance  lights 
on  the  hills,  and  then  the  bright  stars  above.  People  do  enjoy  them- 
selves here;  there  are  more  than  2,000  here,  music  everywhere, 
splendid  roses,  fine  halls — I  am  sorry  to  say  gambling,  too.' 

To  THE  Same. 

Ems,  August  27. 

'  One  look  up  to  heaven,  and  all  this  dust  of  the  high-road  of  life 
vanishes.     Yes  !  one  look  up  to  heaven  and  even  that  dark  shadow  of 
death  vanishes.     We  have  made  the  darkness  of  that  shadow  ourselves, 
and  our  thoughts  about  death  are  very  ungodly.     God  has  willed  it 
so ;  there  is  to  be  a  change,  and  a  change  of  such  magnitude  that  even 
if  angels  were  to  come  down  and  tell  us  all  about  it,  we  could  not 
understand  it,  as  little  as  the  new-born  child  would  understand  what 
human  language  could  tell  about  the  present  life.     Think  what  the 
birth  of  a  child,  of  a  human  soul,  is ;  and  when  you  have  felt  the  utter 
impossibility  of  fathoming  that  mystery,  then  turn  your  thoughts  upon 
death,  and  see  in  it  a  new  birth,  equally  unfathomable,  but  only  the 
continuation  of  that  joyful  mystery  which  we  call  a  birth.     It  is  all 
God's  work ;  and  where  is  there  a  flaw  or  a  fault  in  that  wonder  of  all 
wonders,  God's  ever-working  work  ?     If  people  talk  of  the  miseries  of 
life,  are  they  not  all  man's  own  work .?     Would  not  the  carrying  out 
of  one  single  commandment  of  Christ,  "  Love  one  another,"  change 
the  whole  aspect  of  this  world,  and  sweep  away  prisons  and  work- 
houses, and  envying  and  strife  and  all  the  strongholds  of  the  devil? 
Two  thousand  years  have  nearly  passed,  and  people  have  not  yet 
understood  that  one  single  command  of  Christ,  "  Love  one  another." 
We  are  as  perfect  heathens  in  that  one  respect  as  it  is  possible  to  be. 
No !  this  world  might  be  heaven  on  earth,  if  we  would  but  carry  out 
God's  work  and  God's  commandments — and  so  it  will  be  hereafter. 
We  must  submit,  but  we  must  feel  that  it  is  a  great  blessing  to  be  able 
to  submit,  to  be  able  to  trust  that  infinite  Love  which  embraces  us  on 
all  sides,  which  speaks  to  us  through  every  flower  and  every  worm, 
which  always  shows  us  beauty  and  perfection,  which  never  mars,  never 
destroys,  never  wastes,  never  deceives,  never  mocks.    And  would  that 
loving  Father  begin  such  a  work  in  us,  as  is  now  going  on,  and  then 
destroy  it,  leave  it  unfinished  ^     No,  what  is  will  be ;  what  really  is  in 
us  will  always  be ;  we  shall  be  because  we  are.     Many  things  which 
are  now  will  change,  many  things  in  us  which  we  take  to  be  our  very 
own  will  change ;  but  what  we  really  are  we  shall  always  be ;  and  if 
love  forms  really  part  of  our  very  life,  that  love,  changed,  it  may  be, 


1867]  Thoughts  on  Death 


339 


purified,  sanctified,  will  be  in  us  and  remain  with  us  through  that 
greatest  change,  which  we  call  death.     The  pangs  of  death  will  be  the 
same  for  all  that,  just  as  the  pangs  of  childbirth  seem  ordained  by- 
God,  in  order  to  moderate  the  exceeding  joy  that  a  child  is  born  into 
the  world.     And  as  the  pain  is  forgotten  when  the  child  is  born,  so  it 
will  be  after  death — the  joy  will  be  commensurate  to  the  sorrow.     The 
sorrow  is  but  the  effort  necessary  to  raise  ourselves  to  that  new  and 
higher  state  of  being ;  and  without  that  supreme  effort  or  agony,  the 
new  life  that  waits  for  us  is   beyond  our  horizon,  beyond  our  con- 
ception.    It  is  childish  to  try  to  anticipate ;  we  cannot  know  anything 
about  it ;  we  are  meant  to  be  ignorant ;  and,  though  we  may  imagine 
heaven  and  hell,   even  the  Divina   Commedia  of  a  great  poet  and 
thinker  is  but  child's  play  and  nothing  else.     Here,  as  everywhere 
else,  the  purity  of  Christ's  teaching  appears.     A  teacher  whose  every 
word  is  believed  is  sorely  tempted  to  promise  rewards  in  a  future  life, 
and  to  paint  in  glowing  colours  the  Jerusalem  the  Golden  that  is  to 
receive  those  who  believe  in  Him.     Christ  says,  "  What  no  eye  has 
seen,"  and  thus  shows  the  truth  of  His  vision,  and  the  honesty  in  His 
dealing  with  His  fellow  creatures.     No  illusions,  no  anticipations,  only 
that  certainty,  that  quiet  rest  in  God,  that  submissive  expectation  of 
the  soul,  which  knows  that  all  is  good,  all  comes  from  God,  all  tends 
towards  God,     To  say  more  is  to  deceive  ourselves  and  others.     But 
though  M'e  may  thus  look  forward  to  what  is  to  come,  I  quite  agree 
with  you  that  it  is  wrong  to  look  away  from  this  life,  or  to  treat  it  as 
an  imperfect  or  contemptible  state.     This  life  is  as  perfect  as  God 
would  make  it,  and  it  is  an  incredible  pride  if  we  are  to  master  and 
criticize  this  beautiful  work  of  God.     We  have  spoilt  it  first,  and  taken 
away  its  very  sunshine  and  warmth — love — and  then  we  complain  that 
it  is  cold.     Poverty  is  hard  to  bear,  but  a  cheerful  and  contented  mind 
does  not  feel  the  burden ;  and  how  much  poverty  might  be  alleviated, 
if  we  wished  to  do  it !     Illness  is  hard  to  bear,  but  it  raises  us  above 
the  cares  of  this  life  ;  it  reconciles  us  to  that  parting  which  must  come 
sooner  or  later;  it  makes  death  easy,  which  those  who  are  rich  and 
strong  dread  as  the  greatest  of  evils.     Unkindness  is  hard  to  bear,  but 
it  leads  us  to  examine  ourselves,  to  weigh  our  own  motives,  to  value 
all  the  more  those  loving  hearts  who  return  our  love,  and  to  look 
forward  to  a  better  time  when  we  shall  be  known  such  as  we  are.' 

To  THE  Same. 

Ems,  August  31. 

'  We  had  such  a  beautiful  evening.  We  drove  to  a  forest  between 
Ems  and  the  Rhine,  where  we  could  see  the  whole  neighbourhood, 
and  all  the  windings  of  the  river  about  Ehrenbreitstein  and  Coblentz. 

Z  3 


340  Bonn  [cH.  XV 

There  was  a  Franciscan  monastery  with  the  fourteen  stations  of  the 

Passion,  arranged  with  such  real  taste  and  thought,  and  at  the  end 

a  chapel  and  a  beautiful  church,  all  built  by  the  present  incumbent,  an 

old  man,  who  is  his  own  architect,  and  has  begged  together  the  funds 

for  the  church,  which  is  built  in  a  very  old  and  simple  Byzantine  style ; 

and  the  walls  and  altar  and  pulpit  are  covered  with  crystals  and  stones 

and  slags  found  in  the  neighbourhood,  so  that  the  interior  is  glittering 

with  light.     Though  the  experiment  is  difficult  and  apt  to  degenerate 

into  mere  stage  effect,  there  is  so  much  originality  and  thought  about 

it,  that  one  can  enjoy  it  all,  and  feel  with  the  old  man  who  spent  his 

life  and  energy  in  erecting  that  sacred  place.     As  we  drove  home  the 

first  line  of  the  new  moon  was  visible,  and  Jupiter  shone  in  all  his 

beauty.' 

To  THE  Same. 

September  2. 

'  You  have  no  idea  how  beautiful  this  valley  is — the  smooth  wooded 
hills  all  around,  and  the  river  reflecting  the  undulating  landscape,  and 
the  beautiful  clear  sky,  and  the  varying  tints  and  the  brilliant  stars.  Life 
seems  so  light  and  easy  here.  Then  it  is  very  amusing  to  watch  all  the 
strange  people  from  every  part  of  the  world — Orientals  and  Greeks  and 
Wallachians,  to  say  nothing  of  French,  EngUsh,  Americans,  and  Jews. 

*  I  had  a  kind  of  semi-official  application  to  ask  me  whether  I  would 
not  settle  in  Prussia.  They  would  give  me  3,000  thalers  (£450),  and 
I  need  not  trouble  much  about  lecturing,  either  at  Berlin  or  Bonn. 
I  said  that  for  the  present  I  was  tied,  but  that,  if  I  settled  in  Germany, 
I  should  prefer  to  live  independently  without  taking  any  office,  and 
make  what  I  wanted  by  writing.  I  could  not  quite  make  out  from 
whom  it  came,  but  Professor  Bernays  told  me  the  offer  was  serious, 
and  he  is  a  friend  of  the  Minister  of  Public  Instruction.' 

To  Professor  Bernays. 
Translation.  Lustgarten,  Ems,  September,  Wednesday. 

'  I  hope  to  get  to  Bonn  on  Friday  night,  on  my  return  to  England, 
and  to  stay  till  Saturday  afternoon,  and  then  start  straight  to  London 
via  Cologne.  I  trust  to  find  you  in  Bonn,  my  best  friend,  for  I  long 
to  have  some  spiritual  intercourse  with  you  before  I  leave.  I  also 
want  to  see  Brandis.  I  shall  put  up  at  the  "  Stern  "  ;  Morier  may  be 
there  too.  What  you  mentioned  about  the  German  plans  the  other 
day  has  occupied  me  much,  but,  as  I  told  you  before,  it  seems  to  me 
best  to  remain  in  Oxford  for  a  few  more  years.  I  do  not  deny  that 
I  should  like  to  spend  the  evening  of  life  in  German  air,  but  I  stopped 
long  ago  wishing  for  certain  things  and  making  plans ;  Heaven  has  so 
far  guided  me  so  mercifully.    Hoping  to  see  you  soon,  ever  yours.' 


1867]  Move  to  'Parks  End'  341 

Directly  Max  Miiller  returned  to  England,  the  move  to 
'  Parks  End '  began.  The  roof  was  already  on  the  new  part 
of  the  house,  which  was  boarded  off  from  the  old  part,  in 
which  the  whole  party,  tightly  packed,  spent  the  winter. 
When  once  settled,  his  wife  wrote  to  a  relative  : — 

Parks  End,  October  9, 
'  You  can  enter  into  the  delight  it  is  to  Max  to  look  round  and  to 
feel  that  he  has  bought  this  house  with  his  own  hard  work.     I  am 
sure  it  is  a  much  greater  delight  than  any  house  left  to  one  could  give.' 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  Parks  End,  October  9. 

'  Do  not  lose  heart,  but  thank  God  for  all  that  is  left  you ;  that  is 
the  chief  thing,  and  so  I  wish  you  joy  of  your  birthday  and  of  your 
new  home.  May  God  give  you  many  peaceful  and  happy  hours  there, 
and  strength  to  bear  whatever  He  sends.  How  happy  our  time  was 
together  in  the  summer,  and  how  seldom  does  everything  succeed  so 
well  as  our  stay  in  Ems.  It  is  true,  the  sad  recollections  were  always 
there  as  a  background ;  but  what  life  is  without  such  recollections  ? 
But  we  must  go  on,  and  comfort  comes  only  when  we  know  whose 
hand  sends  the  sorrow.  I  hope,  in  spite  of  all  your  fear  and  difii- 
culties,  that  your  move  is  safely  over,  and  that  you  do  not  dislike  your 
new  home.' 

On  his  own  birthday  this  year,  his  forty-fourth,  he  writes 
to  his  mother  : — 

Translation.  December  6. 

'  Thank  you  for  all  your  good  wishes.  I  feel  always  as  if  there  is 
hardly  anything  left  to  wish  for.  I  can  only  pray  God  to  preserve  all 
I  have  !     The  children  are  all  well  and  bright ;  the  boy  grows  fast.' 

To  his  sister  he  writes  a  few  days  later : — • 

Translation.  December  9. 

*  I  often  feel  how  much  more  happiness  has  been  given  me  than 
I  deserve ;  and  when  I  think  of  all  you  have  lost,  I  often  feel  how  all 
that  we  call  our  own  is  only  lent  us  for  a  short  time,  and  how  we 
cannot,  from  day  to  day,  call  anything  ours.  This  Christmas  time 
will  bring  you  and  poor  Krug  renewed  sorrow.  But  try  and  remember 
how  much  is  left  you,  and  do  not  let  the  years  you  yet  have  together 
pass  in  mere  sorrow ;  the  years  do  not  come  again.' 

The  allusion  in  the  following  letter  is  to  the  intention 
Max  Miiller  had  already  expressed  of  dedicating  the  second 


342  Visitors  at  ^ Parks  End'  [ch.  xv 

volume  of  Chips  to  Bernays,  who  was  at  first  too  modest  to 

accept  it. 

To  Professor  Bernays. 

Translation.  Parks  End,  December  15. 

'  My  dearest  Friend, — I  had  long  looked  forward  to  giving  you 
a  public  recognilion  of  my  friendship  and  gratitude.  Though  our 
meetings  have  not  been  frequent  of  late,  yet  they  have  left  the  memory 
of  many  beautiful  and  stimulating  hours,  and  I  hope  indeed  that 
a  lucky  star  will  perhaps  once  more  bring  us  close  to  each  other  for 
a  longer  period.  What  I  miss  most  here  in  Oxford  is  stimulating 
intercourse  in  literary  and  scientific  circles.  That  is  entirely  wanting, 
especially  in  my  special  branch  of  study.  Altogether  the  Englishman 
seems  to  me  to  have  no  interest  for  the  "  Becoming  "  or  "  Growing"  ; 
it  is  all  to  be  tangible  and  ready  made.  All  dialectic  is  wanting  in  the 
true  sense  of  the  word.  However,  there  are  deep  shadows  every- 
where, and  I  do  not  want  to  forget  the  bright  sides  of  English  life,  and 
I  am  afraid  that  I  should  find  it  somewhat  difficult  to  get  accustomed 
again  to  the  rather  narrow  German  trousers.  As  matters  stand  now, 
I  feel  bound  to  stay  in  England  as  long  as  my  father-in-law  is  alive  ; 
what  comes  after  we  will  leave  to  that  guidance  which  so  far  has  led 
me  so  beautifully.  A  house  on  the  Rhine  and  a  Professorship  at  Bonn 
would  be  great  attractions  later  on.     Berlin  would  never  tempt  me ; 

it  requires  too  many  sacrifices  to  the  Non-L .     Here  in  Oxford, 

I  must  say,  everything  is  done  to  make  up  for  what  has  been  done 
amiss.  I  have  been  relieved  from  Modern  Literature,  and  they  are 
thinking  now  of  founding  for  me  a  Professorship  of  Comparative 
Philology,  also  of  raising  my  salary  if  possible,  and  so  I  hope  to  get 
again  more  time  for  my  own  work.  I  feel  very  well,  thank  God,  this 
winter,  and  I  hope  to  get  on  famously  with  my  labours  for  the  Veda^ 

Max  Mijiler  found  that  the  change  to  '  Parks  End '  gave  him 
more  rest  and  leisure  for  uninterrupted  work.  In  High  Street 
he  had  been,  as  it  were,  in  the  gangway,  and  was  liable  to 
constant  interruptions.  Visitors  to  Oxford,  with  half  an 
hour  to  spare,  would  drop  in  unexpectedly,  more  especially 
foreigners  and  Americans,  with  or  without  introductions. 
The  distance  across  the  Parks  to  his  house  was  a  barrier  to 
such  unexpected  invasions,  and,  though  he  had  more  room  in 
his  new  home  to  welcome  and  entertain  his  friends,  his  daily 
life  was  quieter  and  more  regular. 

Among  Max  Muller's  papers  there  was  found  a  small 
memorandum,  '  Our    first    luncheon  party  at   "  Parks  End," 


1867]  Mr.  Gladstone  343 

December,  1867/  with  the  names  of  Mr.  Jowett,  Bob  Lowe, 
Huxley,  H.  Graham,  Rev.  W.  Rogers. 

To  THE  Right  Hon.  W,  E.  Gladstone  (who  was  anxious  to  discuss 
the  law  of  copyright  with  Max  Miiller  and  Dean  Liddell). 

Parks  End,  December  30. 
'Dear  Mr.  G., — I  shall  be  at  home  to-morrow  at  2  p.m.,  and 
delighted  to  hear  any  news  about  the  Greeks  and  their  schoolmasters, 
the  Phoenicians.  If  you  arrive  by  the  1.57  up-train,  your  best  plan 
would  be  to  take  a  fly  at  the  station,  and  tell  the  driver  to  drive  to  the 
house  that  formerly  belonged  to  Mr.  Goldwin  Smith.  That  is  the 
house  I  now  live  in,  at  least  one-half  of  it,  for  the  new  half  which 
I  have  added  is  not  yet  habitable.  I  shall  ask  the  Dean  to  come  to 
luncheon  a  little  after  two  to  meet  you.  Dr.  Scott  is  not  in  Oxford, 
so  far  as  I  know.     Yours  sincerely.' 

Mr.  Gladstone's  signature  heads  the  long  list  of  distinguished 
guests  that  Max  MUller  had  the  honour  of  welcoming  to  his 
house  during  the  next  thirty  years. 


CHAPTER    XVI 

1868-1869 

Death  of  sister.  Visit  of  mother.  Letter  to  Duke  of  Argyll.  LL.D.  at 
Cambridge.  Professorship  of  Comparative  Philology.  Visits  to  Frog- 
more,  Fulham,  and  Gloucester.  Isle  of  Wight.  Tennyson.  Illness  of 
children.  Member  of  French  Institute.  Translations  frojn  the  Vedic 
Hymns,  Vol.  I.     Soden.     Kiel.     Denmark. 

A  FEW  days  after  Mr.  Gladstone's  visit  Max  Miiller  wrote  to 
him  as  follows : — 

To  THE  Right  Hon.  W.  E.  Gladstone. 

Parks  End,  January  5. 
' ...  I  do  not  think  that  many  fresh  deities  were  introduced  by  the 
Phoenicians  into  Greece.  The  influence  they  exercised  on  the  Greeks 
was  more  like  that  which  the  Greek  colonists  exercised  on  the  Italians. 
Jupiter  was  not  Zeus,  nor  Juno  Hera,  nor  Saturnus  Kronos.  There 
was  a  conviction  among  the  Greeks  and  the  Italians  that  their  gods 
must  be  the  same,  and  hence  any  point  of  similarity  was  caught  at  in 
order  to  identify  different  deities.  Something  of  the  same  kind  seems 
to  have  taken  place  when  the  Phoenicians  taught  the  Greeks  their 
ABC.  But  while  the  names  of  the  letters  in  Greek  are  simply 
Phoenician,  Alpha,  Beta,  &c.,  I  do  not  know  of  any  names  of  Greek 
deities  that  demand  a  Phoenician  etymology.  It  is  true  there  is  no 
satisfactory  etymology  of  Poseidon,  but  there  are  hundreds,  nay 
thousands,  of  words  in  Greek,  as  in  English,  which  have  no  satis- 
factory etymology,  but  which  no  one  would  think  of  deriving  from 
Semitic  sources.  ,  .  .  The  subject  is  a  very  important  one,  and  I  expect 
will  excite  some  interest.  .  .  .' 

Early  in  February  Max  Miiller,  who  had  suffered  so  much 
the  previous  year  at  the  loss  of  his  niece,  was  called  on  to  bear 
a  much  heavier  sorrow  in  the  death  of  his  only  sister.  She 
was  ill  but  a  day  or  two,  and  the  first  intimation  of  any 
anxiety  was  the  telegram  with  the  news  of  her  death.     It  was 


i868]  Death  of  Sister  345 

a  terrible  shock,  and  Max  Muller  was  quite  prostrated  by 
the  blow,  which  seemed  all  the  harder  to  bear,  as  his  wife  had 
to  leave  him  a  day  or  two  later,  owing  to  the  alarming  illness 
of  her  mother-aunt  and  two  of  her  sister's  children. 

To    HIS    IMOTHER. 

Trajislation.  Parks  End,  February  i6. 

*  Poor  mother,  who  would  have  thought  that  you  must  yet  bear  such 
a  loss,  after  all  the  sorrow  which  God  has  sent  you  in  your  life  ?  And 
yet  it  was  His  will,  and  He  will  send  the  strength  to  bear  it.  He  has 
taught  us  that  death  is  not  so  terrible  as  it  appears  to  most  men — it  is 
but  a  separation  for  a  few  short  days,  and  then,  too,  eternity  awaits  us. 
For  all  the  sorrow,  I  can  only  think,  it  is  well  with  her ;  she  is  spared 
much,  many  a  heavy  burden  is  taken  from  her.  She  had  a  happy 
youth,  and  in  spite  of  many  sorrows,  in  all  that  makes  the  true  happi- 
ness of  life,  hers  was  a  happy  marriage.  The  children  to  whom  her 
heart  clung  are  gone  before  her,  and  I  think  she  was  glad  to  follow. 
I  have  been  reading  such  beautiful  hymns  of  Paul  Gerhardt's  on 
Death  and  Life — you  will  know  them — but  in  the  grief  and  sorrow  God 
has  sent  us,  one  really  feels  how  true,  how  deep,  how  beautiful  they 
are.  Yet  life  goes  on,  and  its  duties  must  be  carried  out.  To-morrow 
I  must  begin  my  lectures;  I  could  not  do  so  this  week.  Try  to 
trust  in  God,  throw  your  grief  on  Him ;  He  will  help  you  to  bear  it. 
My  only  thought  is  how  I  can  get  you  here  as  soon  as  possible. 
Perhaps  you  can  find  some  one  to  travel  with  you,  and  I  will  meet 
you  at  Dover,  My  doctor  still  says  I  must  not  venture  on  the  sea 
passage.  I  feel  well,  and  cannot  believe  the  trouble  in  my  throat  is 
of  any  consequence.  Bring  your  maid  with  you,  shut  up  your  rooms, 
do  everything  you  can  to  come  soon.' 

To  THE  Same. 
Translation. 

'  You  must  come  to  me  and  spend  the  last  years  of  your  life  with 
me.  You  will  find  here  all  those  who  in  life  are  the  nearest  to  you. 
Dear  Auguste  knew,  as  she  closed  her  eyes,  that  you  would  not  be 
left  alone  in  the  world.  But  what  will  poor  Krug  do  ?  It  goes  to  my 
heart  when  I  think  of  him  and  all  he  has  suffered  this  last  year.  How 
different  life  is  to  what  one  thought  it  when  young,  how  all  around 
us  falls  together  till  we  ourselves  fall  together.  How  meaningless  and 
vain  everything  seems  on  earth,  and  how  closely  the  reality  of  the  life 
beyond  approaches  us.  Many  days  were  beautiful  here,  but  the 
greater  the  happiness  the  more  bitter  the  thought  that  it  all  passes 
away,  that  nothing  remains  of  earthly  happiness  but  a  grateful  heart 


346  Visit  from  his  Mother  [ch.  xvi 

and  faith  in  God,  who  knows  best  what  is  best  for  us.  May  God 
strengthen  and  keep  you.  Even  with  my  wife  and  children  life  seems 
so  empty  to  me,  and  I  keep  saying,  "  My  dear  Auguste !  "  How 
delightful  it  was  being  together  last  summer.  Oh,  God,  who  could  have 
foreseen  this  !  Write  to  me  as  soon  as  you  can,  my  poor  mother. 
I  wish  I  had  you  here.' 

To  HIS  Wife. 

Parks  End,  February  24. 
'  I  had  a  sad,  very  sad  letter  from  my  mother.  My  thoughts  are 
always  with  her,  and  I  can  hardly  bring  myself  to  believe  that  we  have 
really  lost  our  dear  good  Auguste.  She  was  my  oldest  friend  and 
companion,  and  everything  in  my  early  life  was  connected  with  her. 
Now  that  she  is  gone,  all  those  pleasant  recollections  on  which  one 
dwells,  one  hardly  knows  when,  but  yet  which  constantly  pass  through 
one's  mind,  are  altogether  changed,  all  life  and  reality  taken  out  of 
them ;  one's  own  life  brought  more  clearly  before  one's  mind,  as  what 
it  really  is,  a  short  stay  in  a  foreign  land.  And  there  is  still  so  much 
left  us,  so  much  to  be  happy  and  thankful  for ;  and  yet  here,  too,  the 
thought  always  rushes  across  one's  brightest  hours,  it  cannot  last — it 
is  only  for  a  few  years — and  then  it  must  be  given  up.  Let  us  work 
as  long  as  it  is  day,  let  us  try  to  do  our  duty,  and  be  very  thankful  for 
God's  blessings  which  have  been  showered  upon  us  so  richly ;  but  let 
us  learn  also  always  to  look  beyond  and  learn  to  be  ready  to  give  up 
everything,  as  my  poor  mother  has  had  to  give  up  almost  everything 
that  makes  life  happy,  and  yet  she  can  say,  "  Thy  will  be  done."  ' 

To  THE  Same. 

March  31. 

'  It  is  true  that  I  have  plenty  of  happiness,  but  great  happiness 
makes  one  think  so  often  that  it  cannot  last,  and  that  one  will  have 
some  day  to  give  up  all  to  which  one's  heart  clings  so.  A  few  years 
sooner  or  later,  but  the  time  will  come,  and  come  quicker  than  one 
expects.  Therefore  I  believe  it  is  right  to  accustom  oneself  to  the 
thought  that  we  can  none  of  us  escape  death,  and  that  all  our  happi- 
ness here  is  only  lent  us.  But  at  the  same  time  we  can  thankfully 
enjoy  all  that  God  gives  us,  and  few  have  more  reason  to  say  this 
than  I.' 

As  soon  as  she  felt  able  to  travel,  his  mother  came  over  to 
her  son  and  stayed  through  the  summer,  but  preferred  return- 
ing for  the  winter  to  her  own  rooms  in  Chemnitz. 

The  following  is  one  of  the  first  letters  of  a  correspondence 


i868]  Date  of  Human  Language  347 

with  the  Duke  of  Argyll  which  continued  to  within  a  short 
time  of  the  Duke's  death : — 

To  THE  Duke  of  Argyll. 

Oxford,  February  24. 

' .  .  .  I  only  wish  I  could  send  a  more  satisfactory  answer,  but,  as 
far  as  I  can  judge,  every  attempt  at  translating  the  periods  of  natural 
growth  or  structure  into  the  language  of  definite  solar  chronology  has 
proved  a  failure.  The  history  of  language  opens  a  vista  which  makes 
one  feel  almost  giddy  if  one  tries  to  see  the  end  of  it,  but  the  measur- 
ing rod  of  the  chronologist  seems  to  me  entirely  out  of  place.  Those 
who  have  eyes  to  see  will  see  the  immeasurable  distance  between  the 
first  historical  appearance  of  language  and  the  real  beginnings  of 
human  speech  :  those  who  cannot  see  will  oscillate  between  the  wildly 
large  figures  of  the  Buddhists  or  the  wildly  small  figures  of  the  Rabbis, 
but  they  will  never  lay  hold  of  what  by  its  very  nature  is  indefinite. 

'  The  earliest  historical  appearance  of  human  language  takes  place 
in  Egypt.  Whatever  the  date  of  the  earliest  hieroglyphic  inscription 
may  be,  that  is  the  earliest  date  of  Egyptian  language.  I  am  not 
satisfied  as  yet  as  to  the  soundness  of  Egyptian  historical  chronology. 
The  Semitic  languages  make  their  first  historical  appearance  in  the 
cuneiform  inscriptions  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  or,  it  may  be,  of  some  more 
ancient  Babylonian  and  Assyrian  monarchs.  In  real  literature  there 
is  nothing  Semitic  more  ancient  than  the  earhest  portions  of  the  Old 
Testament. 

'  Of  Aryan  language  the  first  literary  relic  is  the  Veda.  With  the 
evidence  now  before  us,  and  after  a  careful  consideration  of  all  objec- 
tions, one  may  honestly  say  that  the  Hymns  of  the  Veda  could  not  be 
more  modern  than  1200  b.  c.  I  believe  they  are  older,  and  my  belief 
is  chiefly  founded  on  the  nature  of  the  Vedic  Sanskrit  as  compared 
with  the  Sanskrit  of  the  laws  of  Manu,  the  Mahdbhdraia,  &c.  I  shall 
just  quote  one  instance.  According  to  all  Sanskrit  grammars,  that 
language,  so  rich  in  other  forms,  is  without  any  trace  of  a  conjunctive 
mood.  And  this  is  perfectly  true  if  we  take  into  account  the  ordinary 
Sanskrit  only.  But  the  Veda  is  full  of  conjunctives,  and  they  are  the 
same  conjunctives  as  those  we  find  in  Greek.  Greek  has  a  medial 
form  of  most  verbs,  so  has  Sanskrit.  Greek  has  a  first  aorist  in  the 
medium,  so  has  Sanskrit.  That  first  aorist  in  Greek  is  a  compound 
form,  (Tv\j/dfiT]v,  and  is  formed  by  an  auxiliary  verb  that  yields  (ra-firjv, 
just  as  I  loved  is  formed  by  an  auxiliary  verb,  viz.  by  did.  The 
Sanskrit  aorist  is  formed  by  the  same  auxiliary  verb,  so  that  f/SfiK-a-a-To 
is  represented  by  Sanskrit  ajdik-sa-ta.  The  conjunctive  of  the  first 
aorist  in  Greek  takes  the  personal  terminations  of  the  present,  and 


348  The  Augment  [ch.  xvi 

loses  the  augment.      The  same  in  Sanskrit,  at  least  in  the  Vedic 
Sanskrit,  where  corresponding  to  deU-crrj-Tai  we  should  find  dik-sa-ie. 

'  If  we  take  this  one  form,  we  might  call  it  in  one  sense  almost 
a  work  of  art,  though  it  is  only  a  product  of  that  art  which  may  be 
called  the  art  of  nature,  and  which  preserves  amongst  an  infinity  of 
possible  forms  those  only  that  are  really  good,  really  adapted  for  the 
work  they  have  to  do.  These  conjunctives  of  the  medial  aorist  exist 
in  Homer  and  in  the  Veda.  They  must  have  existed  before  Greek 
was  Greek  and  Sanskrit  was  Sanskrit,  for  they  are  formed  out  of 
materials  which  exist  neither  in  Greek  nor  in  Sanskrit.  In  the  same 
manner  mais  and  mai  must  have  been  formed  before  Italian  was 
Italian  or  French  French,  for  neither  of  these  dialects  have  the 
materials  out  of  which  mat  or  mais  could  have  been  formed.  But  how 
little  should  we  gain  if  we  argued  as  some  geologists  do  !  It  has 
taken  so  many  centuries  before  the  Latin  magis  dwindled  down  to 
mai  and  mais,  therefore  it  cannot  have  taken  less  time  to  change  the 
original  type  of  deLK-o-Tj-Tai  and  dik-sa-te  into  these  two  forms.  It  is 
far  better  to  look  at  these  forms  and  find  out  how  much  even  their 
typical  ancestor  presupposed,  how  much  wear  and  tear  was  necessary 
before  such  a  compound  could  become  possible  as  we  see  fixed  in  that 
grammatical  system  which  preceded  Sanskrit  and  Greek.  In  that 
compound  we  have  at  least  four  elements.  We  have  the  augment, 
and  no  language,  not  even  the  most  ancient,  has  as  yet  betrayed  the 
secret  as  to  the  material  out  of  which  the  augment  was  formed. 
Secondly,  we  have  the  personal  termination  rai  or  te,  clearly  a  pronoun 
of  the  third  person,  but  diff"erent  from  the  pronouns  of  the  third 
person  such  as  we  find  them  in  Sanskrit  or  Greek.  Thirdly,  an 
auxiliary  verb  ^ra,  the  Sanskrit  as,  to  be,  in  as-mt,  ia-fii,  &c.,  which 
loses  its  initial  vowel  as  it  does  in  Latin  sum  for  es-iim.  This  as 
meant  originally  to  breathe  (in  Sanskrit  as-u,  '  breath '),  and  before  it 
dwindled  down  to  what  we  call  an  auxiliary  verb,  a  mere  verbal 
copula,  again  how  many  centuries  must  have  passed }  Can  we 
measure  them  by  the  distance  that  divides  the  Latin  status  from  stato 
and  ete  ?  I  doubt  it,  yet  we  can  see  deeper  and  deeper  into  the  shaft 
from  which  the  ore  of  human  speech  is  brought,  and  discover  level 
after  level  that  must  have  been  left  behind  before  the  pure  metal,  and 
before  such  amalgamates  could  have  been  produced  as  those  which 
we  see  in  such  a  conjunctive  as  dik-sa-te.  After  that  amalgamate  is 
formed,  and  after  it  has  been  coined  into  a  definite  grammatical  token, 
begins  the  phonetic  decay,  the  influence,  it  may  be,  of  diet,  climate, 
and  all  the  rest ;  and  only  after  all  this  can  we  account  for  the  fact 
that  in  the  Homeric  poems  we  find  a  form  like  deiK-arj-rai,  and  in  the 
Hymns  of  the  Veda  a  form  like  dik-sa-ie. 


i868]  LL.D.  Cambridge  349 

'  In  all  these  considerations  the  question  how  a  root  dik  came  to 
mean  "  to  show  "  and  nothing  else  has  not  been  touched  upon,  though 
that  again  can  only  have  been  the  result  of  a  sifting  process  of  which 
we  can  hardly  form  an  adequate  idea.  If  there  was  proof  that  it  had 
taken  10,000  years  to  form  out  of  given  radical  elements  that  wonder- 
ful system  of  grammar  which  was  quite  finished  before  Sanskrit 
became  Sanskrit  and  Greek  Greek,  I  should  feel  no  surprise.  Before 
that  date  we  should  still  have  the  formation  of  roots.  What  we 
commonly  call  the  history  of  language  is  from  the  very  beginning 
nothing  but  a  history  of  decay — the  period  of  youth  and  growth  is 
past  before  we  know  of  any  language.' 

In  the  month  of  January,  Max  Miiller  had  received  an 
invitation  from  Cambridge  to  deliver  the  Rede  Lecture  in  the 
course  of  the  summer.  The  Vice-Chancellor,in  transmitting  the 
invitation,  observed  that  these  lectures  were  generally  scien- 
tific rather  than  literary,  but  that  Mr.  Ruskin  had  been  the 
lecturer  of  the  previous  year,  adding,  '  Your  subject,  however, 
is  a  science,  whatever  the  Royal  or  any  other  Institution  may 
say  to  the  contrary.'  Max  Miiller  accepted  the  invitation, 
and  in  writing  again  in  April  to  fix  the  day,  the  Vice-Chan- 
cellor told  him  that  the  University  wished  to  offer  him  the 
degree  of  LL.D.  Accordingly,  the  last  week  in  May,  Max 
Miiller  and  his  wife  visited  Cambridge,  where  they  were  the 
guests  of  Dr.  Thompson,  Master  of  Trinity.  Commodore 
Maury,  the  American  hydrographer,  and  Dr.  W.  Wright,  the 
Arabic  scholar,  received  the  degree  of  LL.D.  the  same  day. 
The  Public  Orator,  Dr.  G.  W.  Clark,  thus  presented  Max 
Miiller  :— 

'  Sequitur  deinde  Max  Miiller,  Taylorianus  apud  Oxonienses  Pro- 
fessor, qui,  cum  iuvenis  admodum,  consiliis  et  auspicio  celeberrimi 
viri  Christiani  de  Bunsen,  se  in  Britanniam  transtulisset,  banc  sibi 
sedem  et  novam  patriam  elegit,  atque  ita  profecit  ut  si  loquentem 
audiveris,  non  dubites  in  Anglia  natum,  si  magnitudinem  operum 
respexeris,  Germanum  esse  cognoscas. 

'  Ad  id  vero  potissimum  navavit  operam,  ut  Philologiam  doceret, 
non  cam  quae  circa  verborum  argutias  commoretur,  sed  illam  quae, 
Unguis  Teutonicis,  Graeca,  Latina,  Sanscritica,  inter  se  collatis,  com- 
munem  omnium  originem  exquirat,  incunabula  gentium  recludat, 
historiam  quibusvis  annalibus  antiquiorem  certioremque  evolvat. 

'  Quid  multa  ?  eras,  ipso  audito,  quanta  facundia  difficillimas  res 
expedire  possit,  omnes  iudicaturi  estis.' 


350  Rede  Lecture  [ch.  xvi 

Translation. 

'  I  would  next  speak  of  Max  Miiller,  the  Taylorian  Professor  in 
Oxford,  who  having  while  still  a  youth,  with  the  advice  and  under 
the  auspices  of  that  illustrious  man  Christian  von  Bunsen,  come  over 
to  Britain,  has  chosen  this  land  for  a  new  home  and  country,  and  has 
made  such  progress  that,  having  heard  him  speak,  you  think  he  must 
have  been  born  in  England,  whereas,  if  you  consider  the  importance 
and  quantity  of  his  works,  you  are  quite  sure  that  he  must  be  a 
German.  The  work  he  has  devoted  himself  to  especially  has  been 
the  work  of  teaching  Philology,  not  that  branch  of  it  which  is  con- 
cerned with  the  niceties  and  subtleties  of  words,  but  that  which,  by 
the  comparison  of  the  Sanskrit,  Greek,  Latin,  and  German  languages, 
investigates  their  common  origin,  discovers  the  cradle  of  the  nations, 
and  unfolds  a  history  more  ancient  and  more  certain  than  that 
contained  in  any  written  annals.  What  need  of  further  words ! 
To-morrow,  when  you  have  heard  him  speak,  you  will  all  be  able 
to  judge  with  what  eloquence  he  can  make  the  most  difficult  subjects 
clear  and  plain.' 

The  next  day  Max  Miiller  delivered  the  Rede  Lecture  to 
a  very  large  audience.  It  will  be  found  in  Vol.  IV  of  Chips, 
first  edition.  In  the  middle  of  the  lecture,  Commodore  Maury, 
who  sat  behind  the  lecturer's  wife,  leant  over  and  said  in 
a  loud  whisper, '  I  must  tell  you,  it's  just  elegant  ! ' 

During  the  winter  months  a  movement  had  been  going  on 
in  Oxford  for  the  foundation  of  a  Chair  of  Comparative 
Philology,  which  was  carried  out  in  the  May  Term,  with  the 
proviso  in  the  statute  of  foundation  that  Max  Miiller  was  to 
be  the  first  Professor,  if  he  would  accept  the  post.  He  was 
deeply  gratified  by  this  mark  of  esteem  from  the  resident 
members  of  the  University,  and  it  relieved  him  of  the  duties 
of  the  Chair  of  Modern  Languages,  added  to  his  salary,  and 
enabled  him  to  devote  all  his  time  and  energies  to  his  own 
line  of  studies.  His  inaugural  lecture  was  delivered  in  the 
October  Term.  '  Professor  Max  Miiller,'  says  a  contemporary 
notice,  '  enjoys  the  high  honour — an  honour  the  more  signal 
as  he  is  a  foreigner — of  occupying  the  first  Professorship  ever 
founded  at  Oxford  by  the  University  Corporation  itself;  all 
previous  Professorships  having  been  established  either  by 
royal  benefactions  or  private  announcements.' 

Early  in  June  Max  Miiller  paid  his  first  visit  to  their  Royal 


1868]  First  Visit  to  Frogmore  351 

Highnesses  Prince  and  Princess  Christian,  then  living  at 
Frogmore.  These  visits  were  always  a  rest  and  refreshment 
to  him,  a  delightful  contrast  to  his  quiet  life  of  hard  work, 
and  the  gracious  friendly  feeling  always  shown  to  him  and  his 
called  forth  his  lively  gratitude  to  the  last. 

To  HIS  Wife. 

Frogmore  House,  Jime  i. 
'  I  came  here  in  good  time  last  night,  though  after  a  long  and  hot 
journey.  When  I  arrived  at  Frogmore  the  Prince  and  Princess  were 
just  coming  back  from  a  walk,  and  they  asked  me  at  once  to  take 
a  walk  with  them  in  the  garden,  which  just  now  is  in  great  beauty. 
We  passed  the  Mausoleum,  and  when  we  came  back  sat  down  and 
had  a  long  and  animated  discussion,  all  in  German,  though  the 
Prince  speaks  English  very  well.  We  then  went  in  to  get  ready  for 
dinner,  and  dined  at  half-past  eight :  no  one  present  but  the  Prince, 
the  Princess,  Lady  Susan  Melville,  and  myself.  One  of  the  servants 
was  in  Scotch  attire,  but  no  bagpipes  \  Nothing  could  be  pleasanter. 
The  Princess  kindly  inquired  after  you  and  the  children,  and  is  of 
course  wrapped  up  in  her  own  boy'^,  whom  I  have  not  yet  seen. 
After  dinner,  Lady  Susan  left,  and  we  went  up  a  small  staircase  to 
the  smoking-room,  the  Princess  sitting  down  in  an  armchair  and  the 
Prince  asking  me  to  smoke.  This,  however,  I  could  not  bring 
myself  to  do  till  the  Princess  had  left.  I  sat  up  till  nearly  twelve  with 
the  Prince.  He  is  a  true  Schleswig-Holsteiner,  very  quiet  but  very 
determined,  and  very  frank.  He  has  fine  blue  eyes,  and  is  a  decidedly 
handsome  man.     His  photographs  do  not  do  him  justice.' 

To  HIS  Children. 

Frogmore,  y«7/^  2. 

'  My  dear  little  Girls, — I  have  just  come  back  from  a  beautiful 
drive  through  Windsor  Forest.  We  drove  in  an  open  carriage — 
Prince  and  Princess  Christian,  Lady  Susan  Melville,  and  your  daddy. 
There  was  a  long  avenue  of  rhododendrons  all  in  flower,  and  we 
drove  through  it,  and  you  never  saw  so  many  beautiful  flowers 
together.  And  then  the  Prince  took  me  to  see  the  house  where  all 
the  dogs  live  that  belong  to  the  Queen.  It  was  like  the  Zoological 
Gardens,  but  all  the  animals  were  diff"erent  kinds  of  dogs — greyhounds 
and  deerhounds,  like  old  Oscar,  and  Teckels,  like  those  mama  had  at 

■^  Bagpipes  were  a  horror  to  Max  Miiller. 

*  Prince  Christian  Victor,  who  died  the  day  after  Max  Miiller. 


352  Life  of  Bimsen  [ch.  xvi 

Ray  Lodge  ;  and  some  very  scarce  but  valuable  dogs,  called  "mops  "  in 
German :  there  are  only  three  of  them  left  in  England,  and  the  Queen 
takes  great  care  of  them.  Prince  Christian  is  a  German  prince,  and 
he  married  Princess  Helena,  a  daughter  of  the  Queen ;  and  they  are 
very  happy  together,  just  like  mama  and  papa,  only  they  are  very  rich 
and  have  a  beautiful  house  and  garden ;  and  they  have  one  little  boy, 
a  little  older  than  our  boykin,  and  he  is  a  very  handsome  little  fellow, 
■with  large  blue  eyes  and  rosy  cheeks.' 

To  Professor  Lepsius. 

Translation.  Parks  'E'U'd,  June  i8. 

'My  honoured  Friend, — .  .  .  Bunsen's  Life  has  gone  straight  to 
my  heart,  as  it  has  with  you.  Oh,  if  we  could  even  in  this  life  forget 
all  that  is  unessential,  all  that  makes  it  so  hard  for  us  to  recognize 
true  greatness  and  goodness  in  the  character  of  those  with  whom 
this  life  brings  us  into  contact  for  a  little  while  !  How  much  we  lose 
by  making  little  things  so  important,  and  how  rarely  do  we  think 
highly  enough  of  what  is  essential  and  lasting !  Bunsen  surely  was 
one  of  the  greatest  spirits  of  our  times  !  Where  are  the  greater  ones  ? 
To  have  known  him,  belongs  to  those  things  which  have  bestowed 
upon  my  life  the  greatest  value  and  the  greatest  charm.  I  should 
much  like  to  hear  from  you  where  something  reliable  and  trustworthy 
may  be  found  with  regard  to  Egyptian  mythology.  Is  Bunsen's 
opinion  about  a  Phoenician  origin  well  founded  ?  Are  not  there  any 
real  Egyptian  gods  ?  And  can  their  origin  and  their  development 
be  traced  ?  .  .  .  Some  time  ago  I  wrote  for  the  Times  a  notice  of 
Bunsen's  Life,  but  until  Parliament  rises  there  is  not  much  hope  of 
its  appearing ;  it  has  been  clipped  a  good  deal,  and  I  think  a  little 
later  on  I  shall  pubUsh  it  unmutilated.' 

To  M.  Renan. 

Parks  End,  y««^  26. 

'  My  dear  Friend, — I  can  truly  feel  for  you  in  the  loss  which  you 
have  suffered  ;  it  will  sooner  or  later  come  to  all  of  us.  But  life 
is  different  after  we  have  lost  our  father  and  mother.  I  have  my 
mother  staying  with  me,  and  should  enjoy  her  presence  here  very 
much  if  it  were  not  for  the  sad  cause  which  brought  her  here — the 
death  of  my  only  sister,  with  whom  she  used  to  live  in  Germany. 
With  every  one  of  these  losses  life  seems  to  become  more  unreal, 
there  is  less  and  less  to  live  for,  to  care  for ;  and  if  one  still  cares 
for  one's  work,  it  is  because  it  makes  one  forget  life  as  it  is,  and  life 
as  we  thought  it  was  or  might  be.  ...  I  hear  your  new  work  is  nearly 


i868]  Visit  to  Fulham  353 

finished  and  I  am  curious  to  see  what  you  think  of  St.  Paul.  I  hope 
you  have  seen  Jowett's  book  on  the  Thessalonians,  Galatians,  and 
Romans ;  it  is  very  good,  original,  and  honest.  I  am  able  at  last  to 
work  again,  and  I  hope  my  health  is  quite  re-established.  I  am 
printing  my  first  translation  of  the  Rig-veda ;  I  sent  you  a  specimen 
the  other  day,  and  hope  to  send  you  the  first  volume  by  September. 
I  am  also  reprinting  my  Chips,  which  have  just  been  preached 
against  in  Westminster  Abbey.' 

To  THE  Same. 

Parks  End,  1868. 

'  You  speak  in  far  too  laudatory  terms  of  my  own  work,  and  I  am 
afraid  it  will  only  raise  the  bile  of  certain  people.  I  was  amused 
by  what  you  said  about  the  Concessions  aux  Negres.  You  are  right 
to  a  certain  extent,  but  the  same  applies  to  all  countries.  If  you 
want  to  carry  people  along  with  you,  you  must  begin  where  you  find 
them,  otherwise  you  run  on  like  an  engine  without  any  carriages 
attached  to  it.  The  best  proof  that  I  do  not  concede  too  much 
is  that  the  science  of  religion  has  been  preached  against  in  West- 
minster Abbey  by  a  real  bishop.  However,  they  do  not  mean  to 
burn  me  yet,  and  I  hope  I  shall  still  convince  the  Bishop  that  we 
heretical  Germans  are  far  better  Christians  than  the  most  orthodox 
of  bishops.  I  am  printing  my  translation  of  the  Veda.  I  had  called 
it  in  my  preface  a  Traduction  raisonn^e,  if  one  may  use  such  an 
expression,  and  I  am  glad  to  find  you  use  that  very  word  in  your 
Rapports.  I  have  also  finished  my  edition  of  the  Prdtisdkhya,  in 
which  I  was  forestalled  by  Regnier.  His  edition  is  really  excellent, 
and  I  cannot  sufficiently  regret  that  he  should  have  been  taken  away 
from  Sanskrit.  The  school  of  Burnouf  will  become  extinct  with  him. 
After  carefully  examining  every  line  of  his  Prdtisdkhya  while  printing 
my  own,  I  am  bound  to  say  there  is  not  another  Sanskrit  scholar 
living  who  would  have  done  his  work  as  well  as  Regnier,  It  is  bad 
enough  that  the  throne  should  be  usurped,  but  why  Chairs  of  Sanskrit 
or  Hebrew.?  However,  I  am  afraid  I  am  talking  treason,  and  with 
Ewald's^  example  before  me  I  ought  to  be  careful.' 

Another  pleasant  visit  paid  this  year  was  to  the  Bishop  of 
London  and  Mrs.  Tait,  at  Fulham,  on  one  afternoon  of  which 
Max  Mliller  and  his  wife  were  taken  to  the  Volunteer  Camp 
at  Wimbledon,  and  watched  the  shooting  for  the  Queen's 
Prize.  Since  the  Ray  Lodge  days  he  had  ceased  himself  to 
be  an  active  Volunteer. 

^  He  had  refused  in  1867  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  Prussia  and 
was  pensioned  off. 

I  A  a 


354  Visit  to  Gloucester  [ch.  xvi 

Soon  after  this  Max  Mliller  made  a  short  visit  to  Gloucester 
and  its  neighbourhood,  guided  by  his  friend  Mr.  Bellows. 
Of  this  visit  Mr.  Bellows  writes: — 

'When  at  your  house  in  1868  I  found  Professor  Max  Miiller  had 
some  thought  of  visiting  the  Phillips  Library  at  Cheltenham  to 
examine  the  Oriental  MSS.  it  contained,  and  I  asked  him  to  come  to 
Gloucester  for  a  few  days,  when  he  could  do  this,  besides  joining 
one  of  our  field  excursions  of  the  Cotteswold  Club  to  Berkeley  Castle, 
&c. :  a  little  programme  that  was  soon  after  carried  out.  I  recollect 
that  to  impress  him  the  more  favourably  with  our  Gloucestershire 
scenery  I  told  him  of  an  old  friend  of  ours,  James  Atkins,  a  well- 
known  botanist,  having  come  to  Painswick  several  years  before  to 
spend  a  fortnight,  and  that  he  was  so  pleased  with  the  Cotswold 
Hills  that  he  had  stayed  there  ever  since. 

'  Professor  Max  Miiller  smiled,  and  rejoined,  "  Do  you  know  that 
that  was  what  happened  to  me,  here  at  Oxford !  /  came  here  to 
spend  a  fortnight,  and  I  have  been  here  ever  since  ! " 

'  I  first  ventured  to  write  to  Professor  Max  Miiller  on  some 
philological  matter — I  am  not  sure  what,  but  I  think  something 
about  the  old  Cornish  language,  about  which  I  wanted  to  beg  his 
help.  When  I  came  to  know  him  personally  I  was  irresistibly  attracted 
by  the  power  of  sympathy  that  was  his  most  striking  characteristic, 
as  I  am  sure  others  will  admit  that  it  was,  and  the  secret  of  the 
charm  that  made  him  a  leader  of  men.  This  power  of  sympathy  he 
possessed  in  a  larger  degree  than  any  other  person  I  have  ever  met, 
except  Count  Tolstoi  :  for  greatly  as  they  differed  in  their  other 
gifts,  as  well  as  in  their  entire  environments,  Max  Miiller  and  Tolstoi 
were  alike  in  this. 

*  Even  the  high  attainments  Professor  Max  Miiller  unquestionably 
possessed  did  not  so  affect  those  with  whom  he  came  in  contact  as 
did  this  force  of  sympathy,  to  which  he  owed  his  broad-mindedness, 
and  his  insight  into  the  essence  of  religion  itself:  I  will  not  say  of 
the  religions  of  the  East  merely,  but  the  general  relation  of  the  soul 
of  man  to  the  truth,  in  which  all  these  are  included.  I  need  only 
refer  to  his  preface  to  Chips  from  a  German  Workshop  as  a  noble 
example  of  his  sympathy  for  men  of  widely  differing  modes  of 
thought.  It  reads  like  an  expansion  of  the  nineteenth  psalm,  where 
the  universality  of  the  sunlight  and  sunheat  in  the  outward  creation  is 
shown  as  the  correlative  to  the  uncreated  light  and  power  that  is 
unlimited  in  its  operation,  by  time  or  space.  And  now  he  is  gone, 
and  no  one  will  ever  again  take  his  place.  This  very  thought  is 
assurance,  for  it  means  that  he  fills  a  place  in  another  state  of 
existence  for  which  he  alone  was  created.' 


i868]  Stay  at  Bonchiirch  355 

One  of  the  visits  paid  under  Mr.  Bellows'  guidance  was  to 
Mr.  Bryan  Hodgson,  who,  as  Resident  at  Nepal,  had  acquired 
an  extensive  acquaintance  with  the  tribes  and  languages  of 
the  Himalayan  slopes.  Mr.  Hodgson  lived  to  a  great  age, 
and  died  in  1895.  It  is  from  his  researches  that  our  know- 
ledge of  Northern  Buddhism  is  chiefly  derived.  He  formed 
a  valuable  collection  of  above  300  MSS.,  a  few  of  which  he 
gave  to  the  Bodleian. 

To  PvIr.  Bryan  Hodgson. 

Parks  End,  August  25,  1868. 

*  My  dear  Hodgson, — What  would  I  give  for  your  quiet  Vihar  at 
Alderley — your  otium  cum  digniiate — doing  exactly  as  you  like,  read- 
ing or  writing  what  you  like,  without  being  driven  to  publish  and 
republish,  without  lectures,  without  printer's  devils,  &c.  &c.  I  can  assure 
you  I  am  sometimes  nearly  beside  myself  with  all  I  have  to  attend  to ; 
to  say  nothing  of  mere  Grihastha  matters,  which  are  sometimes 
troublesome  too.  However,  it  cannot  be  helped,  and  I  only  mention 
it  as  my  excuse  for  not  having  written  to  you  before.  I  have  looked 
at  your  papers  and  the  drawing,  and  I  think  it  would  be  a  great  pity 
if  those  carefully  executed  sketches  were  not  published.  Then  as 
to  my  lecture  ("  Stratification  of  Language  ")  I  cannot  think  that  we 
differ  so  much.  I  have  frequently  availed  myself  of  lexicographic 
evidence.  But  grammatical  evidences  have,  as  you  know,  a  different 
value,  and  for  the  object  I  had  in  view  in  my  lecture  the  grammatical 
structure  of  language  was  of  the  greatest  importance.' 

In  the  autumn  a  new  edition  of  both  volumes  of  the  Lcchires 
on  Language  was  called  for.  It  was  the  fifth  edition  of  Vol.  I, 
the  second  of  Vol.  II.  The  new  edition  of  two  volumes  was  of 
3,000  copies.  At  the  same  time  a  large  second  edition  of 
Chips,  Vols.  I  and  II,  was  published,  and  Max  Miiller  found 
that  his  writings  in  this  one  year  had  brought  in  above  ;^i, 200. 

Except  the  short  visits  mentioned,  the  summer  had  been 
spent  in  work  at  Oxford,  and  as  soon  as  his  mother  returned 
to  Germany,  he  took  his  wife  and  children  to  Bonchurch,  and 
gave  himself  up  to  rest  and  outdoor  life  for  a  fortnight.  Long 
walks  were  taken  with  his  wife  in  all  directions,  and  all  parts 
of  the  beautiful  island  were  explored.  One  delightful  day  was 
given  to  Carisbrooke,  where  the  rector,  Mr.  James,  an  early 
Oxford  friend,  received  the  Max  Miillers,  showing  them  the 

A  a  2 


356  Vt'stt  to  Tennyson  [ch.  xvi 

Castle  and  the  fine  Roman  villa,  which  had  not  been  long 
excavated. 

Another  expedition,  in  which  their  eldest  child  shared,  was 
to  Freshwater,  where  a  night  was  spent  with  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Tennyson.  The  poet  was  in  rather  a  silent  mood  till  after 
the  ladies  withdrew,  when,  over  their  pipes,  he  read  out  some 
of  his  latest  poems  to  Max  Miiller,  his  rich  deep  voice  sound- 
ing through  the  house  till  far  into  the  small  hours. 

To  HIS  Mother  (for  her  birthday). 

Translation.  Bonchurch,  October  9. 

'  Each  birthday,  even  the  happiest,  has  its  sad  side.  It  is  a  station 
nearer  death ;  but  whilst  in  youth  and  the  full  enjoyment  of  life  this 
thought  seems  terrible,  it  loses  much  of  its  terror  as  one  gets  older, 
for  the  parting  from  the  few  whom  we  leave  behind  is  made  up  for  by 
the  hope  of  rejoining  the  many  who  are  gone  before  us.  So,  though 
this  birthday  must  be  very  sad  to  you,  you  must  accustom  yourself 
more  and  more  to  the  thought  that  here  is  not  our  abiding  city,  that 
all  that  we  call  ours  here  is  only  lent,  not  given  us,  and  that  if  the 
sorrow  for  those  we  have  lost  remains  the  same,  we  must  yet  acknow- 
ledge with  gratitude  to  God  the  great  blessing  of  having  enjoyed  so 
many  years  with  those  whom  He  gave  us  as  parents,  or  children,  or 
friends.  One  forgets  so  easily  the  happy  years  we  have  had  with 
those  who  were  the  nearest  to  us.  Even  these  years  of  happiness, 
however  short  they  may  have  been,  were  only  given  us,  we  had  not 
deserved  them.  I  know  well  there  is  no  comfort  for  this  pain  of  part- 
ing ;  the  wound  always  remains,  but  one  learns  to  bear  the  pain,  and 
learns  to  thank  God  for  what  He  gave,  for  the  beautiful  memories  of 
the  past,  and  the  yet  more  beautiful  hope  for  the  future.  If  a  man 
has  lent  us  anything  for  several  years,  and  at  last  takes  it  back,  he 
expects  gratitude,  not  anger,  and  if  God  has  more  patience  with  our 
weakness  than  men  have,  yet  murmurs  and  complaints  for  the  life 
which  He  measured  out  to  us  as  is  best  for  us,  are  not  what  He 
expected  from  us.  A.  spirit  of  resignation  to  God's  will  is  the  only 
comfort,  the  only  relief  under  the  trials  God  lays  upon  us,  and  with 
such  a  spirit  the  heaviest  as  well  as  the  lightest  trials  of  life  are  not 
only  bearable,  but  useful,  and  gratitude  to  God  and  peace  in  life  and 
in  death  remain  untroubled.  May  this  quiet  and  peaceful  resignation 
beautify  and  brighten  the  evening  of  your  life,  that  is  the  one  wish 
I  have  for  your  sixty-eighth  birthday.  .  .  .  We  were  yesterday  at  Fresh- 
water, where  Tennyson  has  his  house,  and  he  invited  us  (G.  and 
Ada)  to  stay  with  him.     It  was  very  interesting.' 


i868]  Education  in  India  357 

The  following  letter  was  written  to  the  Duke  of  Argyll 
soon  after  his  appointment  as  Secretary  of  State  for  India  : — 

To  THE  Duke  of  Argyll. 

Oxford,  December  16. 

* ...  As  for  more  than  twenty  years  my  principal  work  has  been 
devoted  to  the  ancient  literature  of  India,  I  cannot  but  feel  a  deep  and 
real  sympathy  for  all  that  concerns  the  higher  interests  of  the  people 
of  that  country.  Though  I  have  never  been  in  India,  I  have  many 
friends  there,  both  among  the  civilians  and  among  the  natives,  and 
I  believe  I  am  not  mistaken  in  supposing  that  the  publication  in 
England  of  the  ancient  sacred  writings  of  the  Brahmans,  which  had 
never  been  published  in  India,  and  other  contributions  from  different 
European  scholars  towards  a  better  knowledge  of  the  ancient  literature 
and  religion  of  India,  have  not  been  without  some  effect  on  the 
intellectual  and  religious  movement  that  is  going  on  among  the  more 
thoughtful  members  of  Indian  society.  I  have  sometimes  regretted 
that  I  am  not  an  Englishman,  and  able  to  help  more  actively  in  the 
great  work  of  educating  and  improving  the  natives.  But  I  do  rejoice 
that  this  great  task  of  governing  and  benefiting  India  should  have 
fallen  to  one  who  knows  the  greatness  of  that  task  and  all  its  oppor- 
tunities and  responsibilities,  who  thinks  not  only  of  its  political  and 
financial  bearings,  but  has  a  heart  to  feel  for  the  moral  welfare  of 
those  millions  of  human  beings  that  are,  more  or  less  directly, 
committed  to  his  charge. 

'India  has  been  conquered  once,  but  India  must  be  conquered 
again,  and  that  second  conquest  should  be  a  conquest  by  education. 
Much  has  been  done  for  education  of  late,  but  if  the  funds  were 
tripled  and  quadrupled,  that  would  hardly  be  enough. 

'  The  results  of  the  educational  work  carried  on  during  the  last 
twenty  years  are  palpable  everywhere.  They  are  good  and  bad,  as 
was  to  be  expected.  It  is  easy  to  find  fault  with  what  is  called  Young 
Bengal,  the  product  of  English  ideas  grafted  on  the  nadve  mind. 
But  Young  Bengal,  with  all  its  faults,  is  full  of  promise.  Its  bad 
features  are  apparent  everywhere,  its  good  qualities  are  naturally 
hidden  from  the  eyes  of  careless  observers.  .  .  .  India  can  never  be 
anglicized,  but  it  can  be  reinvigorated.  By  encouraging  a  study  of 
their  own  ancient  literature,  as  part  of  their  education,  a  national 
feeling  of  pride  and  self-respect  will  be  reawakened  among  those 
who  influence  the  large  masses  of  the  people.  A  new  national  litera- 
ture may  spring  up,  impregnated  with  Western  ideas,  yet  retaining  its 
native  spirit  and  character.  The  two  things  hang  together.  In  order 
to  raise  the  character  of  the  vernaculars,  a  study  of  the  ancient 


m 


358  Illness  of  Children  [ch.  xvi 

classical  language  is  absolutely  necessary :  for  from  it  these  modern 
dialects  have  branched  off,  and  from  it  alone  can  they  draw  their  vital 
strength  and  beauty.  A  new  national  literature  will  bring  with  it 
a  new  national  life  and  new  moral  vigour.  As  to  religion,  that  will 
take  care  of  itself.  The  missionaries  have  done  far  more  than  they 
themselves  seem  to  be  aware  of,  nay,  much  of  the  work  which  is  theirs 
they  would  probably  disclaim.  The  Christianity  of  our  nineteenth 
century  will  hardly  be  the  Christianity  of  India.  But  the  ancient 
religion  of  India  is  doomed — and  if  Christianity  does  not  step  in, 
whose  fault  will  it  be  ? ' 

The  following  letter  alludes  to  a  little  indulgence  Max 
Muller  allowed  himself  more  than  once.  The  forests  round 
Dessau  are  famous  for  their  wild  boar,  and  through  his  cousin^ 
Baroness  Stolzenberg,  he  was  able  occasionally  to  secure  one 
from  the  ducal  forester.  The  arrival  of  the  first  one  entire 
made  a  sensation  at  the  Oxford  Railway  Station,  and  a  mes- 
sage was  sent  up  that  a  dead  '  Bear '  had  arrived  there  for 
Professor  Max  MUller.  The  dinner  given  to  eat  the  haunch 
was  a  great  success,  and  one  head  of  a  house  was  observed  to 
enjoy  three  helpings. 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  Parks  End,  December  20. 

*  Yesterday  we  had  a  large  dinner-party,  the  Vice-Chancellor,  &c., 
and  had  the  haunch  of  wild  boar,  which  was  excellent.  We  had 
already  lived  a  week  on  the  boar,  which  was  a  very  good  one,  and 
arrived  in  good  condition.  A  young  man  in  London  who  comes  here 
sometimes  to  work  for  me  brought  it  in  its  skin.  The  skin  is  being 
dressed  as  a  mat,  the  head  we  have  sent  to  my  father-in-law,  and  the 
rest  we  are  slowly  eating  up.  It  has  amused  me  having  it,  and 
brought  back  old  days.' 

The  first  months  of  1869  brought  great  anxiety  to  Max 
Miiller  and  his  wife.  Early  in  January  they  went  with  their 
two  eldest  girls  to  stay  with  a  cousin  at  Taplow,  where,  after 
a  few  days,  their  eldest  child  sickened  with  scarlet  fever. 
The  alarm  was  very  great,  as  there  was  a  large  party  of  young 
cousins  living  in  the  house,  and  the  whole  family  moved  at 
once,  the  mother  and  her  sick  child  alone  remaining  isolated 
on  the  top  floor  of  a  huge  country  house.  Max  Miiller,  who 
had  already  returned  to  Oxford,  had  the  younger  children 


1869]  Member  of  French  Institute  359 

with  him,  and  could  not  therefore  go  to  his  wife  and  sick 
child  for  fear  of  infection.  It  was  a  very  severe  case,  and  the 
eldest  child  was  only  slowly  recovering  when  the  second  little 
girl  developed  the  terrible  illness,  and  was  brought  back  to  be 
nursed  with  her  sister.  Max  Miiller  suffered  acutely  from  the 
anxiety,  which  lasted  nearly  two  months,  greatly  aggravated 
too  by  the  feeling  that  they  had  driven  the  whole  family  from 
their  home.  Mercifully  the  infection  did  not  spread.  The 
second  child  lay  for  more  than  a  fortnight  at  death's  door. 
One  night,  when  her  case  seemed  hopeless,  the  father  came  to 
see  her,  but  the  lengthy  process  of  disinfection  made  it 
impossible  for  him  to  repeat  the  visit,  as  his  lectures  had 
begun.     His  daily  letters  were  the  one  support  of  his  wife. 

'  How  little  one  thinks  that  these  heavy  trials  and  afBictions  may 

come  upon  us  any  day.     One  lives  on  as  if  life  were  to  last  for  ever, 

and  as  if  we  should  never  part  with  those  who  are  most  dear  to  us. 

Life  would  be  intolerable  were  it  otherwise,  but  how  little  one  is 

prepared  for  what  life  really  is.' 

January  24. 

'  I  am  longing  to  see  you  and  our  dear  litde  Ada.  I  am  afraid  you 
do  not  tell  me  all,  and  I  cannot  tell  you  how  I  feel  for  your  solitude 
in  all  this  fearful  anxiety.  There  is  but  one  help  and  one  comfort  in 
these  trials,  that  is  to  know  by  whom  they  are  sent.  If  one  knows 
that  nothing  can  happen  to  us  without  Him,  one  does  not  feel  quite 
helpless  even  under  the  greatest  terrors  of  this  life.  I  tremble  always 
when  I  open  your  letters.' 

One  ray  of  sunshine  came  to  brighten  this  time  of  gloom, 
in  Max  Miiller's  election  as  a  Foreign  Member  of  the  French 
Institute,  the  youngest  man  ever  elected.  The  choice  lay 
between  him  and  Theodor  Mommsen,  who  was  some  years  his 
senior.  In  writing  to  congratulate  him,  Max  Miiller's  child- 
like friend,  Stanislas  Julien,  the  great  Sinologue,  says:  'et 
maintenant  vous  pouvez  porter  I'habit  brode ' — the  beautiful 
dress  invented  for  the  members  of  the  Institute  by  Richelieu, 
and  which  Max  Miiller,  before  he  was  made  a  Privy  Councillor, 
always  wore  at  Court  by  the  Queen's  permission. 

To  Max  JMUller. 

Paris,  i^''  viars. 

'  J'ai  ^t^  heureux,  Monsieur,  de  concourir  a  votre  nomination 
comme  associ^  Stranger  de  I'lnstitut.    Prdcisement  I'^t^  dernier  j'avais 


360  Letter  from  Guizot  [ch.  xvi 

lu  vos  Lectures  k  la  British  Insiihition  sur  la  science  et  la  formation 
du  langage,  et  j'avais  dtd  extr6mement  frappd  de  I'^l^vation,  de  la 
profondeur  et  de  I'abondance  des  iddes  que  vous  y  avez  expos^es. 
Je  ne  suis  pas  un  juge  competent  de  vos  travaux  sur  les  V/das,  mais 
je  me  f^licite  d'avoir  un  peu  contribu^  a  vous  en  fournir  les  materiaux, 
et  je  vous  remercie  d'en  avoir  gardd  le  souvenir,  Mon  seul  regret  est 
de  ne  vous  avoir  pas  acquis  vous-meme  a  la  France.  C'est  une 
fortune  que  j'envie  un  peu  a  I'Angleterre,.  tout  en  lui  en  faisant  mon 
compliment.  Recevez,  Monsieur  et  savant  confrere,  I'assurance  de 
ma  consideration  la  plus  distingu^e.  '  Guizot.' 

Traftslation. 

'I  was  glad,  Monsieur,  to  contribute  to  your  nomination  as  a  Foreign 
Member  of  the  Institute.  It  was  only  last  year  that  I  read  your 
Lectures  at  the  British  Institution  on  the  "  Science  and  Formation  of 
Language,"  and  I  was  very  much  struck  with  the  elevation,  the  depth, 
and  the  richness  of  the  ideas  which  you  there  brought  forward.  I  am 
not  a  competent  judge  of  your  labours  on  the  Rig-veda,  but  I  con- 
gratulate myself  in  having  contributed  a  little  in  furnishing  you  with 
materials  for  it,  and  I  thank  you  for  remembering  this.  IVIy  one 
regret  is,  not  to  have  secured  you  yourself  for  France.  It  is  a  piece 
of  good  fortune  for  which  I  envy,  though  at  the  same  time  I  con- 
gratulate, England.  Receive,  Monsieur  and  learned  confrere,  the 
assurance  of  my  highest  esteem.  '  Guizot.' 

To  HIS  Wife. 

February  14. 

'  One  does  not  like  to  think  of  anything,  or  feel  happy  about 
anything,  till  this  illness  of  the  children  is  quite  over ;  yet  you  will  see 
from  the  enclosed  letters  that  I  have  felt  very  happy  to-day  when 
I  heard  that  I  had  been  elected  one  of  the  eight  Foreign  Members 
of  the  Academy.  It  has  been  my  ambition,  I  might  almost  say  my 
foolish  ambition  through  life,  to  be  some  day  what  I  saw  Humboldt 
was,  when  as  a  mere  boy  I  first  called  on  him  in  Paris,  a  Foreign 
Member  of  the  French  Institute;  and  now  the  thing  has  come  to 
pass,  and  I  do  feel  very  happy  about  it.  Still,  what  is  that  till  we 
know  that  our  little  Mary  is  out  of  danger,  and  that  we  may  look 
forward  to  a  happy  meeting  ? ' 

March  15. 
'  I  assure  you  when  I  think  of  what  might  have  been,  I  seem  to 
have  no  room  for  any  feeling  but  that  of  unceasing  thankfulness. 
"  Forget  not  all  His  benefits."     One  ought  to  keep  up  the  recollection 
of  these  great  blessings,  for  daily  life  is  so  very  apt  to  wash  it  away.' 


1869]  Dr.  Kielhorn  361 

Early  in  January  Max  Miiller  received  a  pressing  invita- 
tion from  Professor  Huxley,  who  had  just  been  made  President 
of  the  Ethnological  Society,  to  lecture  on  the  ethnological 
aspects  of  Indian  Philology. 

To  Professor  Huxley. 

Parks  Y.v.t>,  January  8,  1869. 

'  It  is  very  difficult  to  say  no  to  such  pleading  as  yours.  But 
I  have  made  a  vow  to  undertake  nothing  new  till  what  I  have  now 
in  hand  is  finished,  and  it  would  be  dishonest  not  to  keep  it.  I  am 
truly  glad  that  you  have  taken  the  Ethnological  Society  in  hand. 
I  have  not  followed  all  the  squabbles  there  seem  to  have  been,  but 
I  feel  certain  that  something  ought  to  be  done  to  raise  the  character 
of  ethnological  or  anthropological  research,  and  there  is  no  one  who 
can  do  it  as  well  as  you.  I  shall  willingly  help  you  hereafter  when 
I  am  a  little  freer,  but  there  are  three  books  in  the  Press  that  must 
be  finished  first — (i)  the  first  volume  of  the  translation  of  the  Rig- 
veda,  (2)  the  Prdtisdkhya,  the  oldest  work  on  phonetics  (this  is  printed), 
and  (3)  the  fifth  volume  of  the  text  of  the  Rig-veda,  with  the  native 
commentaries.  I  hope  this  will  all  be  done  before  the  year  is  out, 
but  even  then  I  have  promised  Longman  two  more  volumes  of  Chips. 

'  I  should  be  so  glad  if  you  would  come  to  Oxford  from  a  Saturday 
to  Monday  and  stay  with  us.  Term  begins  towards  the  end  of 
January ;  if  you  could  let  me  know  a  week  before,  I  could  then  make 
sure  of  some  friends  who  would  be  glad  to  meet  you.' 

Among  the  many  young  Germans  whom  Max  Miiller  was 
able  to  assist  to  positions  in  India  few  became  more  distin- 
guished, or  have  done  better  work  for  Sanskrit  scholarship, 
than  Dr.  Kielhorn,  now  Professor  at  Gottingen.  The  following 
is  one  of  the  many  letters  that  passed  between  them : — 

To  Dr.  Kielhorn. 

Translation.  'Parks'E^d,  January  10. 

' .  .  .  I  am  delighted  with  your  photograph,  you  look  so  well,  and 
the  old  Pundit  at  your  side  looks  a  veritable  Guru  ^  in  the  true  sense 
of  the  word,  I  am  glad  that  the  Government  is  giving  a  grant  for 
the  purchase  of  MSS.  I  had  already  proposed  this  matter  when 
Lord  Elgin  was  Governor,  and  advised  the  Government  not  to  make 
the  matter  too  public,  as  that  raises  the  price  of  MSS.  at  once.  Well, 
a  beginning  is  made. 

'  I  have  finished  the  Prdtisdkhya,  and  the  translation  is  progressing. 

*  Teacher. 


362  Religion  of  the  Hindus  [ch.  xvi 

I  have  sent  you  and  Biihler  my  second  edition  of  Chips  through  the 
Government,  also  to  Dr.  Wilson. 

'  Kind  regards  to  Biihler.  I  have  not  heard  from  him  for  a  very 
long  time,  but  have  just  received  his  Apastamba,  which  gives  me 
much  pleasure ;  it  is  an  old  friend  of  mine.  What  do  you  think  of 
a  Corpus  Inscriptionum  Indicarum  ?  Could  that  be  done  in  Bombay  ? 
Bhao  Dagi  is  sure  to  have  much  material.  It  ought  really  to  be 
begun  soon.' 

To  THE  Duke  of  Argyll. 

Taplow  Covkt,  January  14,  1869. 

*  It  is  certainly  true  that  the  religion  of  the  Hindus,  as  far  as  we 
can  gather  it  from  their  sacred  hymns  in  the  Veda,  is  free  from  every- 
thing that  strikes  us  as  degrading  in  the  present  state  of  religion  and 
morality  in  India.  But  between  the  ancient  religion  of  India  and 
the  religious  worship  of  the  present  generation  there  have  been 
several  falls  and  several  rises.  Buddhism,  in  the  sixth  century  before 
our  era,  was  a  reaction  against  the  corruptions  that  had  crept  into 
the  ancient  religion  even  at  that  early  time.  Then  Buddhism,  starting 
with  the  highest  aspirations,  degenerated  into  monasticism  and 
hypocrisy,  and  a  most  rigorous  form  of  the  old  Brahmanic  religion 
took  possession  of  India,  and  drove  Buddhism  out  of  every  corner 
of  the  country.  Since  that  time  there  have  been  several  religious 
reforms,  though  of  a  more  local  character,  and  this  makes  it  very 
difficult  to  generalize  and  treat  the  whole  religious  life  of  India  as 
one  organic  body  of  religious  thought.  Yet  so  much  may  be  said 
with  perfect  truth,  that  if  the  religion  of  India  could  be  brought  back 
to  that  simple  form  which  it  exhibits  in  the  Veda,  a  great  reform 
would  be  achieved.  Something  would  be  lost,  for  some  of  the  later 
metaphysical  speculations  on  religion,  and  again  the  high  and  pure 
and  almost  Christian  morality  of  Buddha,  are  things  not  to  be  found 
in  the  Veda.  But,  as  far  as  the  popular  conceptions  of  the  deity  are 
concerned,  the  Vedic  religion,  though  childish  and  crude,  is  free  from 
all  that  is  so  hideous  in  the  later  Hindu  Pantheon.  ^ 

'  With  regard  to  the  inevitable  decay  of  religion,  a  difference  ought 
to  be  made  between  two  classes  of  religion,  natiojial  and  personal. 
There  are  ancient  religions,  like  that  of  Greece,  and  that  of  India 
too,  which  grow  up  like  national  languages,  when  it  is  impossible  to 
speak  of  individual  influences,  because  all  individual  influence  is 
determined  by  the  silent  and  almost  unconscious  approval  or  dis- 
approval of  the  community.  In  these  religions  I  think  we  can  watch 
for  a  time  a  decided  progress,  a  gradual  elimination  of  what  is  bad, 
i.e.  what  is  not  acceptable  to  the  national  conscience. 


1869]  M.  M!s  Prdtisdkhya,  etc.  363 

*  But  religions,  like  Buddhism,  Mohammedanism,  and  Christianity 
too,  belong  to  a  different  class.  They  start  with  a  high  ideal  con- 
ceived by  a  representative  man,  representative  either  of  a  nation  or 
of  the  whole  of  humanity,  and  that  high  ideal  is  hardly  ever  realized  ; 
it  has  to  adapt  itself  to  larger  circles  and  lower  levels,  and  can  only 
be  kept  from  utter  degeneration  by  constant  efforts  at  reform.' 

To  M.  Michel  Br6al. 

Parks  End,  February  19. 

'  I  knew  you  would  be  pleased  at  the  result  of  the  last  election,  but 
I  was  glad  all  the  same  to  receive  your  congratulations,  and  to  know 
that  you  approve  of  the  choice  of  that  distinguished  body,  which  no 
doubt  before  long  will  count  you  among  its  members.  To  me  it 
is  the  highest  honour  that  could  possibly  be  bestowed  upon  me. 
I  believe  I  may  honestly  say  it  has  been  through  life  the  only  object 
of  what  you  may  call  a  foolish  ambition.  That  I  should  obtain  it 
so  soon  I  did  not  expect,  and  I  am  afraid  my  success  will  secure 
me  many  di'psus,  but  I  have  long  learned  that  no  one  does  us  so 
much  service  as  our  dipsiis,  nos  a?nis  les  ennemis,  and  I  do  not  think 
my  head  will  be  quite  turned,  as  I  know  too  well  that  "  merit  is 
the  good  opinion  which  our  friends  have  of  us,"  as  Lord  Palmerston 
used  to  say.  I  hope  I  shall  have  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you  and 
making  the  acquaintance  of  Madame  Breal  before  this  year  is  over. 
As  soon  as  three  books  of  mine  which  are  now  in  the  Press  are 
finished,  I  hope  to  present  them  in  person  to  the  Academy.  The 
Prdtisdkhya  is  finished,  the  first  volume  of  the  translation  is  printed 
as  far  as  page  224,  and  there  is  a  third  little  book  printing,  which 
is  to  be  a  surprise.  I  hope  when  I  and  my  wife  come  to  Paris, 
we  shall  find  you  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  all  the  pleasures  and 
treasures  of  a  Grihastha.  ]\Iany  thanks  for  your  Ide'es  laientes  du 
Lajigage,  which  I  read  at  once  with  the  greatest  pleasure,  as  I  do 
everything  you  write.  You  know  how  to  prepare  your  meats,  and 
do  not  expect  your  readers  to  eat  raw  flesh.  M.  Brachet's  Granwiar 
is  out.  Now  that  Parliament  is  sitting,  there  is  little  chance  of  getting 
a  review,  but  I  shall  see  what  I  can  do.  M.  Harris  is  hard  at  work 
translating  my  Chips.  There  is  an  Italian  translation  coming  out  of 
my  lecture  on  "  Stratification."  I  need  not  say  that  the  lecture  is 
quite  at  your  service,  if  you  think  a  French  translation  would  interest 
people  in  France.  Schleicher's  death  is  a  very  great  loss  to  us,  more 
even  than  Bopp's,  who  had  finished  his  work.' 

Max  Miiller  found  that  incessant  work  was  the  only  help 
in  these  months  of  anxiety,  and,  as  is  shown  in  the  various 


364  Comparative  Mythology  [ch.  xvi 

letters,  he  had  been  far  from  idle.  The  first  volume  of  Trans- 
lations from  the  Vcdic  Hymns  came  out  in  May.  His  lectures 
this  term  were  on  *  Sanskrit  Grammar  as  a  Foundation  for 
Philological  Research.'  In  the  following  letter  to  Sir  George 
Cox,  he  upholds  Sanskrit  and  Comparative  Philology  as  the 
necessary  foundation  for  a  study  of  Comparative  Mythology : — 

Parks  End,  March  3,  1869. 

' .  .  .  I  should  like  to  see  you  and  talk  the  matter  of  Comparative 
Mythology  over  with  you.  I  cannot  help  feeling  that  you  work  at 
this  subject  under  great  difficulties,  and  I  sometimes  doubt  whether 
you  ought  to  give  your  principal  energies  to  that  subject.  I  speak  to 
you  quite  openly,  for  I  believe  you  would  be  offended  if  I  did  not. 
The  most  minute  criticism  of  etymological  coincidences  seems  to  me 
the  only  safe  foundation  of  Comparative  Mythology.  When  there  is 
no  etymological  foundation  I  should  not  venture  to  take  a  step,  however 
clear  the  material  coincidences  of  character,  circumstances,  and  the 
general  dhiouement  might  be.  I  believe  you  have  done  good  service 
by  pointing  out  the  necessity  of  admitting  a  common  origin,  even 
when  the  evidence  of  the  common  nomenclature  is  wanting,  but 
I  doubt  whether  with  those  principles  it  is  safe  to  enter  upon  the 
treatment  of  the  whole  subject.  The  dangers  are  very  great,  and 
much  harm  may  be  done.  And  when  you  come  to  fables  or  stories 
of  modern  date,  the  dangers  become  still  greater.  Here  there  is  an 
immense  literature  to  master  first,  i.  e.  the  historical  and  purely 
historical  evidence  of  the  migration  of  fables.  When  the  ground  has 
so  far  been  cleared,  there  comes  the  labour  of  tracing  back  really  old 
common  Aryan  stories  to  their  roots,  whether  mythical  or  proverbial. 
If  therefore  you  ask  me,  I  tell  you  openly,  do  not  make  Comparative 
Mythology  the  principal  work  of  your  life,  unless  you  make  up  your 
mind  first  to  study  Sanskrit  and  Comparative  Philology.  I  believe 
you  can  do  far  more  real  and  important  work  in  other  fields  of 
research,  though  I  should  be  very  sorry  if  we  were  not  from  time  to 
time  to  get  hints  and  impetus  from  you  on  a  subject  where  you 
certainly  have  seen  beyond  the  horizon  of  other  scholars.  I  am 
just  printing  a  curious  collection  of  Buddhist  stories  contained  in 
Buddhaghosha's  commentary  on  the  Dhammapada,  and  therefore  not 
later  than  about  a.d.  400.' 

Early  in  April  he  had  all  his  children  safe  under  his  roof 
again,  and  it  was  soon  evident  that  any  summer  plans  must 
be  made  with  reference  to  their  health.  The  doctor  prescribed 
a   foreign  bath,  and  it  was  finally  settled   that   after  Com- 


1869]  Translation  of  Veda  365 

memoration   the   whole   family  should  go  to  Soden  in  the 
Taunus,  where  Max  Muller's  mother  would  join  them. 

Before  leaving  home  Max  Muller  heard  from  his  friend 
Dr.  John  Muir,  from  Edinburgh,  that  he  had  received  the  first 
volume  of  his  Translations  from  the  Ve  die  Hymns,  'in  which 
you  show  a  great  deal  of  minute  learning.  But  if  you  go  into 
everything  in  the  same  elaborate  way  in  future,  you  will 
require  to  live  to  the  age  of  Methuselah  to  finish  your  task. 
I  cannot  but  express  the  wish  that  you  had  translated  more 
and  annotated  less  ;  that  you  had  given  what  the  world 
expected  from  you,  a  translation  at  once  scholarlike  and 
elegant,  and  entering  into  the  spirit  of  Vedic  antiquity, 
exhibiting  in  short  the  results  of  profound  research  without 
much  display  of  the  apparatus  of  learning.'  The  same  com- 
plaint was  made  by  many  other  subscribers,  and  Max  Muller 
soon  found  that  his  plan  of  translation  was  far  too  elaborate. 
A  second  volume  was  published,  but  not  till  many  years  later, 
as  Vol.  XLVT  of  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  the  volume 
already  published,  of  which  Dr.  Muir  complains,  being  reprinted 
with  many  additional  Hymns  as  Vol.  XXXII  of  that  series,  in 
place  of  another  work  of  which  Max  Muller  was  disappointed. 
Some  idea  may  be  gained  of  the  enormous  labour  bestowed  on 
this  volume  of  translations  from  the  long  list  of  works  on  the 
Veda  which  Max  Muller  had  consulted,  and  to  which  he  fully 
admits  his  indebtedness.  The  list  fills  six  pages  octavo.  Max 
Muller  held  that  the  first  translators  of  the  Veda  should  be 
decipherers,  '  bound  to  justify  every  word  of  the  translation  in 
exactly  the  same  way  in  which  decipherers  of  hieroglyphic  or 
cuneiform  inscriptions  justify  any  step  they  take.' 

In  another  letter  Dr.  John  Muir  expresses  the  wish  that 
more  light  should  be  thrown  on  Buddha,  and  trusts  that 
Max  Muller  intends  to  write  more  about  him.  This  wish  was 
fulfilled  next  year  by  the  translation  from  the  Pali  of  Buddha's 
Dhammapada,  or  Path  of  Virtue,  the  book  he  alludes  to  in 
the  letter  to  M.  Breal  as  '  a  surprise.' 

To  M.  Regnier  (former  tutor  to  the  Comte  de  Paris,  and 
a  distinguished  Sanskritist). 

Parks  End,  Oxford,  May  13,  1869. 
'  My  dear  Friend, — It  is  really  very  provoking  to  know  that  you 


/ 


366  Coquerel's  Apostles'  Creed         [ch.  xvi 

are  in  England,  and  that  it  is  impossible  to  effect  a  meeting.  I  have 
a  lecture  every  day,  and  during  the  Whitsuntide  holidays  we  have 
friends  staying  with  us,  and  even  if  I  could  leave  them  for  a  day,  I  am 
kept  here  because  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  who  is  the  Visitor 
of  our  College  (All  Souls),  will  be  here  from  Saturday  till  Tuesday, 
and  all  the  Fellows  have  to  be  in  attendance.  I  cannot  ask  you  to 
give  me  a  day  as  I  know  how  much  your  presence  is  valued  by  your 
old  friends,  but  if  you  should  by  any  fortunate  chance  find  yourself 
free  for  a  day,  it  would  be  a  great  treat  to  me  and  my  wife  to  receive 
you  at  our  house  and  show  you  our  children,  who,  I  am  thankful  to 
say,  are  either  getting  stronger  or  are  really  quite  well  again.  Sun- 
shine seems  to  have  returned  to  our  house  with  the  spring,  and  at 
present  there  are  few  clouds  to  be  seen,  at  least  no  more  than  we  all 
want  to  make  the  sky  really  beautiful. 

*  I  shall  be  busy  here  till  about  the  end  of  June,  and  I  hope  then  to 
go  to  Paris,  though  I  am  afraid  I  shall  find  few  of  my  friends  there. 
My  plan  was  to  take  lodgings  at  St.  Germain  or  some  other  place 
near  Paris,  and  to  settle  there  for  some  months  with  my  wife  and  four 
children,  taking  our  English  nurse  and  a  Swiss  bonne  with  us.  But 
this  plan  has  become  somewhat  doubtful  because  my  mother  wishes 
to  spend  the  summer  with  us  in  England,  and  in  that  case  I  should 
probably  go  to  Paris  alone  and  stay  only  for  a  fortnight,  and  then 
go  to  fetch  my  mother  from  Germany.  Could  you  or  Madame 
Regnier  give  us  any  hint  as  to  where  and  how  to  settle  ourselves  near 
Paris,  if  we  carry  out  our  original  plan  ? 

'I  am  now  printing  my  last  volume  (second  edition,  Sanskrit 
Grammar),  of  which  I  enclose  the  title.  Prdtisdkhya  and  Rig-veda 
(translation)  are  finished,  and  I  look  forward  with  great  pleasure  to 
presenting  my  "  thrins  "  to  the  Academy. 

*I  had  a  letter  from  M.  Guizot,  which  I  value  more  than  many 
a  cordon  and  crachat^ 

Shortly  before  leaving  for  Germany,  Max  MUller  offered 
Messrs.  Longmans  a  translation  of  Coquerel's  Apostles  Qrcd, 
an  offer  that  was  rejected,  as  Mr.  Longman  did  not  consider 
the  book  sufficiently  orthodox.  Against  this  opinion  Max 
Miiller  protests  in  the  following  letter  : — 

Oxford,  June  24. 

'  My  dear  Longman, — I  am  sorry  to  hear  that  you  think  Coquerel's 
book  would  not  sell,  though,  if  it  were  of  so  startling  a  character  as 
you  imagine,  I  should  think  that  it  would  excite  some  interest,  and 
have  even  a  commercial  success. 

'  But  allow  me  to  say,  that  though  I  should  not  venture  to  criticize 


1869]  La  Bible  dans  Vlnde  367 

your  judgement  as  far  as  the  commercial  success  of  the  book  is  con- 
cerned, I  must  protest  most  strongly  against  the  judgement  you  have 
formed  of  its  religious  character. 

'  The  book  is  written  in  a  liberal,  but  in  a  deeply  religious  spirit, 
teaching  men  to  distinguish  between  the  dead  crust  and  the  living 
kernel  of  Christianity,  and  warning  them  against  throwing  away  what 
is  true,  eternal,  and  divine,  because  in  course  of  time  it  has  been  sur- 
rounded and  almost  hidden  by  what  is  conventional,  changeable,  and 
human.  It  is  an  interpretation  and  historical  vindication  of  the 
antiquated,  almost  unintelligible,  and  certainly  widely  misunderstood 
language  of  the  so-called  Apostles'  Creed,  a  document  which,  I  feel 
sure,  no  educated  man  and  no  clergyman  in  England  would  take  to 
be  the  work  of  the  Apostles.  The  book  is  written  throughout  in  the 
most  correct  language,  and  there  are  passages  in  it  which  the  most 
eloquent  of  our  bishops  need  not  be  ashamed  of  in  the  pulpit. 

'  I  write  this,  not  because  I  wish  you  to  publish  the  MS.,  but  because 
I  shall  be  truly  sorry  if  you  think  I  had  offered  you  a  book  to  publish 
w^hich  would  shock  people  far  more  than  anything  you  have  published.' 

To  THE  Dean  of  Westminster. 

Parks  Y.iht),  June  29,  1869. 

*  My  dear  Stanley, — That  book  of  Jacolliot's  ^  is  as  silly,  shallow, 
impudent  a  composition  as  ever  I  saw.  It  is  sad  to  think  that  people 
can  still  be  taken  in  with  such  a  book.  Would  you  believe  that 
Gladstone  was  reading  it  in  the  midst  of  the  Irish  debate  !  The  book 
quotes  from  the  Veda  I  The  extracts  are  no  more  from  the  Veda 
than  from  the  Koran.  I  felt  so  disgusted  that  I  could  read  no  more  ; 
and  then  people  ask  me  to  review  such  a  book — they  might  as  well 
ask  me  to  fight  a  shoe-black ! 

*  What  I  sent  you  as  a  first  instalment  of  the  Veda  is  real  and  old — 
of  course  no  one  will  read  that !  Nor  do  I  care.  I  meant  to  write  an 
unreadable  book,  and  I  believe  I  have  succeeded. 

'  But  I  shall  soon  send  you  something  that  is  readable — a  col- 
lection of  Buddha's  own  sayings.  I  believe  the  final  struggle  between 
Buddhism  and  Christianity,  whenever  that  comes  to  pass,  will  be 
a  hard  one,  and  will  end  in  a  compromise — there  is  a  prophecy! 
that  will  have  to  be  tested  some  thousand  years  hence — therefore, 
at  all  events,  it  is  safe.  But  I  am  quite  serious,  and  I  know  you 
would  not  refuse  Buddha  admittance  at  Westminster,  after  you  have 
read  his  Xo'yta.  How  small  the  Irish  Church  looks  from  a  more 
(ex)centric  point  of  view,  and  that  is  the  real  charm  and  the  real 
blessing  of  researches  into  the  ancient  history  of  thought  and  faith  ; 
they  make  one  feel  happy,  quiet,  and  strong,  like  Scotch  mountain  air.' 

^  La  Bible  dans  PInde. 


368  Soden  [ch.  xvi 

To  THE  Right  Hon.  W.  E.  Gladstone. 

Parks  'E^D,July  9,  1869. 

'  Dear  Mr.  Gladstone, — "  Do  not  speak  to  the  man  at  the  helm  " 
may,  I  suppose,  be  translated  freely  into  "  Do  not  write  to  the  Prime 
INIinister."  If  I  break  this  useful  rule,  it  is  only  for  one  word  of 
explanation.  The  volume  which  I  took  the  liberty  to  send  to  you 
is  hardly  meant  to  be  read ;  I  know  it  is  perfectly  unreadable,  except 
for  Sanskrit  scholars.  It  is,  in  fact,  but  the  underground  foundation 
on  which  the  pillars  are  to  rest  which  are  to  support  the  bridge  on 
which  people  hereafter  may  walk  across  from  the  nineteenth  century 
after  to  the  nineteenth  century  before  our  era.  At  the  same  time  I  may 
say  that  the  few  Vedic  Hymns  which  I  have  translated,  or  rather  de- 
ciphered, in  the  first  volume,  are  genuine  relics  of  the  earliest  phase  of 
human  thought  within  our  reach.  Jacolliot's  book,  La  Bible  dans  TInde, 
which  I  looked  at,  is  beneath  criticism,  it  is  simply  untrue.  The  author 
has  been  deceived,  has  deceived  himself,  and  tries  to  deceive  others. 
I  am  sorry  that  my  ticket  for  Antwerp  is  taken  for  next  Thursday, 
and  that  I  shall  not  be  able  to  avail  myself  of  your  kind  invitation  to 
breakfast,  or  to  carry  off  the  book  which  you  say  is  waiting  for  me.' 

The  book  by  Jacolliot,  La  Bible  dans  Hndc,  alluded  to  in 
the  letters  to  Dean  Stanley  and  Mr.  Gladstone,  was  a  mere 
imposture,  the  author  purporting  to  have  found  the  essential 
features  of  the  Biblical  narrative,  the  Garden  of  Eden,  Flood, 
&c.,  given  in  the  sacred  books  of  the  Brahmans.  Max  Miiller 
was  in  London  one  day  during  the  debates  on  the  Disestab- 
lishment of  the  Irish  Church,  when  he  heard  a  quick  footstep 
behind  him,  and  some  one  touched  him  on  the  shoulder.  It 
was  Mr.  Gladstone.  '  Oh,  why,'  exclaimed  the  Prime  Minister, 
'  have  you  not  told  us  of  these  wonderful  discoveries  in  India  ?  ' 
and  then  poured  forth,  in  the  middle  of  St.  James's  Street,  his 
wonder  and  admiration  oi  La  Bible  dans  tLnde^  which  he  had 
been  studying,  when  any  less  versatile  statesman  would  have 
been  entirely  absorbed  in  his  great  Irish  measure.  It  took 
some  time,  not  only  in  St.  James's  Street,  but  by  letter,  before 
Mr.  Gladstone  would  give  up  his  belief  in  Jacolliot's  nonsense. 

The  stay  at  Soden,  dull  in  some  ways,  was  made  interesting 
to  Max  MUller  by  finding  an  old  friend,  Professor  Hertz, 
whom  he  had  not  seen  since  they  were  students  together  at 
Leipzig.  He  was  watching  over  a  young  daughter  dying  of 
decline,  and,  before  they  left  Soden,  Max  followed  his  friend's 


I 


1869]  Kiel  369 

child    to   her   last  resting-place.      His   deep   sympathy  was 
a  help  and  stay  to  the  poor  parents,  and  till  he  joined  his 
loved   child  some  years  later,  Professor  Hertz  often  wrote, 
recalling  the  time  at  Soden  and  the  intercourse  with  the  friend 
of  his  youth.     It  was  at  Soden  also  that  Max  Miiller  first 
heard  from  Dr.  Appleton,  of  St.  John's  College,  his  plans  for 
starting  the  Academy.     Max  Muller  had  taken  his  whole  party 
for  an  excursion  to  the  ruins  of  Cronberg,  on  one  of  the  hills 
of  the  Taunus  range,  and  his  children  were  revelling  in  the 
enjoyment  of  a  complete  day  of  holiday  with  their  father,  whose 
incessant  work  made  such  a  treat  a  rare  one.     Dinner  in  the 
open  air  was  just  over,  when  Dr.  Appleton  was  seen  to  descend 
from  the  coach  running  between  Soden  and  Cronberg.     He 
had  arrived  at  Soden  to  find  Max  Muller  gone  out  for  the 
day,  and,  absorbed  in  his  own  schemes,  did  not  hesitate  to 
follow  him  and  entirely  engross  him  for  the  rest  of  the  day, 
to   the   dismay  of  his   children.     When   once  started,  Max 
Muller   was    a  constant  contributor  to  the  Academy,  till  it 
changed  hands,  and  entirely  altered  its  character  as  a  literary 
paper  about  two  years  before  his  death.     From  Soden  the 
party  went  to  Kiel,  where  the  Platt-Deutsch  poet  Klaus  Groth, 
with  whom  Max  had  formed  an  intimate  friendship  during  the 
poet's  visit  to  England  a  few  years  before,  had  secured  a  de- 
lightful apartment  for  them  in  one  of  the  pretty  villas  that 
line  the  shores  of  the  beautiful  harbour  of  Kiel.     It  stood  at 
the  entrance  to  Dusternbrook,  a  fine  beech  forest,  the  trees  of 
which  hung  over  the  water  of  the  harbour.     The  garden  of 
the  villa  ran  down  to  the  water,  which  is  scarcely  salt,  and  has 
little  or  no  tide.     Here  a  happy  six  weeks  was  spent,  varied 
by  long  day  excursions  with  Klaus  Groth  and  his  charming 
wife  to  all  the  most  beautiful  spots  round  Kiel.     A  two  days' 
visit  was  paid  to  Plauen  and  the  lakes  of  Holstein  in  one 
direction,  whilst  in  another  they  visited  Husum,  '  the  grey  town 
on  the  grey  (North)  sea,'  with  its  flat  coast  and  dykes  as  in 
Holland,  to  make  acquaintance  with  Theodor  Sturm,  another 
Platt-Deutsch   poet.      Later   on,  before   leaving   Kiel,  Max 
Muller  and  his  wife  went  to  Copenhagen,  with  which  they  were 
delighted,  enjoying  the  treasures  of  the  Museum  of  Northern 
Antiquities,  and  the  beautiful  pictures  of  native  Danish  art  in 
I  B  b 


370  German  Philological  Congress      [ch.  xvi 

the  palaces.  They  also  visited  Elsinore,  and  looked  across  to 
Sweden  ;  the  sea,  the  day  they  visited  Elsinore,  was  alive  with 
vessels  waiting  for  a  favourable  wind  to  take  them  through 
the  Sound  into  the  Cattegat.  The  Max  Mullers  returned  to 
Kiel  by  the  Belts,  and  stayed  a  night  at  Schleswig  to  see  the 
cathedral  with  its  wonderful  wood  carvings  of  the  fifteenth 
century. 

During  the  stay  at  Kiel,  the  German  Philological  Congress 
held  their  annual  meeting  there,  attended  by  people  from  all 
parts  of  Europe.  Mark  Pattison,  Rector  of  Lincoln  College, 
was  present,  M.  Jules  Oppert  from  Paris,  and  many  others,  and 
it  gave  Max  Muller  an  opportunity  of  meeting  many  engaged 
in  like  studies  with  himself.  He  read  his  paper  on  Buddhist 
Nihilism  referred  to  before  (p.  192)  and  made  his  first  speech 
in  German  at  the  farewell  banquet. 

Many  evenings  during  the  visit  to  Kiel  were  spent  either  at 
Klaus  Groth's  house,  or  at  Forsteck,  an  exquisite  place  belong- 
ing to  Herr  Meyer,  a  Hamburg  merchant,  commanding  a  view 
of  the  broadest  portion  of  the  great  Kieler  Bucht,  or  estuary, 
where,  at  the  time  of  the  Crimean  War,  the  whole  English 
Baltic  Fleet  lay  for  weeks.  On  these  occasions  Klaus  Groth 
always  read  out  some  of  his  Platt-Deutsch  poems,  which,  to 
English  ears,  are  more  intelligible  read  aloud  than  when  read 
to  oneself:  the  strange  spelling  misleading  the  eye.  The 
pleasure  of  the  time  at  Kiel  was  greatly  added  to  by  the  pre- 
sence of  a  cousin,  Captain,  now  General,  Stockmarr,  with  his 
wife  and  daughter,  who  joined  many  of  the  expeditions.  '  We 
have  had  many  happy  hours  together,'  writes  Max  to  another 
cousin,  whom  he  tried  to  draw  to  Kiel ;  but  at  that  time  the 
railway  communication  between  Kiel  and  places  on  the  Baltic 
shore  was  too  complicated  for  short  visits,  especially  where 
children  were  of  the  party.  It  was  for  this  reason  that  his  old 
friend  Dr.  Prowe,  from  Thorn  in  East  Prussia,  was  unable  to 
comply  with  Max's  earnest  wish  for  a  meeting. 

Early  in  October  the  whole  party,  including  the  mother, 
returned  to  Oxford,  the  two  eldest  children  thoroughly  restored 
to  health.  The  lectures  announced  for  this  term  were  a  con- 
tinuation of  the  course  on  Sanskrit  Grammar.  Among  the 
many  letters  waiting  his  return  was   an  invitation  from  the 


1869]  Translation  of  Veda  371 

Khedive  of  Egypt  to  be  present  at  the  opening  of  the  Suez 
Canal,  but  he  had  to  decHne  the  honour,  as  taking  him  away 
too  long  from  his  work. 

To  Professor  Benfey. 

Translation.  Parks  End,  Oxford,  November  7,  1869. 

'  Dear  Colleague, — Having  returned  to  England  some  three  weeks 
ago,  I  had  so  many  letters  to  answer  that  I  only  now  find  time  to  thank 
you  for  your  valuable  present.  I  have,  so  far,  only  glanced  at  your 
History  of  Philology,  but  even  this  glance  has  shown  me  how  much 
material  you  have  again  accumulated  in  this  work,  and  how  useful  and 
instructive  your  book  is  in  every  way.  I  hope  soon  to  have  time  to 
read  it  quietly,  but  I  feel  I  must  not  delay  in  sending  you  my  best 
thanks. 

'  My  path  did  not  lead  me,  alas  !  past  Gottingen  this  time,  and  my 
hope  of  meeting  you  perchance  at  Kiel,  at  the  Philological  Congress, 
was  not  fulfilled.  .  .  . 

'  IMy  first  volume  of  the  Veda  translation  has,  I  hope,  reached  you, 
and  I  should  be  glad  to  receive  your  opinion  about  it.  According  to 
my  judgement  there  is  only  07ie  scientifically  justifiable  method  of  in- 
terpreting the  Veda,  viz.  to  settle  completely  every  word  which  raises 
the  least  doubt.  The  work  is  slow  and  laborious,  but  if  it  is  not  done 
you  never  come  to  a  conclusion,  and  the  same  questions  turn  up  again 
and  again.  Of  course,  for  you  and  me  there  are  certain  things  which 
do  not  need  proofs,  but  we  also  made  our  way  slowly  through  all  this, 
therefore,  why  not  save  others  this  trouble  ?  why  not  cut  off,  once  for  all, 
all  unfounded  objections  at  the  outset  ? 

'  I  hope  to  send  you  soon  a  book  on  Buddha ;  that  makes  me  think 
of  your  review  of  my  Essays  :  accept  my  best  thanks.  .  .  .  Alas  !  I  have 
to  get  a  new  edition  of  my  Sanskrit  Grammar  ready,  which  I  should 
like  to  have  done  with.  .  .  .' 

The  Christmas  was  passed  in  Oxford,  a  real  German 
Christmas,  with  a  tree,  to  which  a  few  Germans  in  Oxford  were 
invited,  and  at  which  the  various  German  dishes  and  sweet- 
meats, imported  by  the  old  mother,  bore  a  conspicuous  part. 


B  b  a 


CHAPTER   XVII 

1870 

Lectures  on  the  Science  of  Religion.  Keshub  Chunder  Sen.  Franco- 
German  War.  LL.D.  at  Edinburgh.  Letters  to  Dean  Stanley. 
To  'the  Enghsh  People.'  Work  for  Sick  and  Wounded.  North 
Wales.    Letters  to  Dr.  Abeken  and  Mr.  Gladstone.   Chips,  Vol.  IIL 

This  year,  that  was  to  be  so  full  of  stirring  events,  opened 
quietly  for  Max  Miiller,  who  began  at  once  to  prepare  the 
lectures  he  had  undertaken  to  give  at  the  Royal  Institution 
in  February  and  March  on  the  '  Science  of  Religion.' 

To   Dean  Stanley. 

January  19. 

'  I  return  Clark's  ^  letter.  I  quite  feel  with  you  that  a  man  like 
Clark  ought  not  to  be  satisfied  with  simply  withdrawing ;  he  ought  to 
work  and  fight,  and  not  look  to  others  to  carry  a  new  Reformation. 
I  do  not  know  much  of  him,  but  all  I  do  know  of  him  makes  me 
like  him  very  much.  His  words  would  carry  weight  with  many 
people.  It  might  seem  bold  and  imprudent  in  Temple,  but  still 
I  think  it  would  be  right  if,  as  a  Bishop,  he  answered  Clark's  letter, 
and  told  him  publicly  that  the  Old  Testament  was  not  originally 
written  in  the  language  of  the  nineteenth  century,  but  in  old,  heavy, 
poetical  Oriental  phraseology,  and  that,  unless  his  difficuldes  extend 
far  beyond  the  limits  indicated  by  him,  he  might  well  continue  to  read 
the  Ten  Commandments,  and  afterwards  preach  a  sermon,  and  tell 
his  congregation,  if  they  need  to  be  told,  that  God  never  stood  on 
a  hill  and  opened  His  mouth  to  tell  them  in  Hebrew  what  the  still 
small  voice  had  told  Moses,  and  other  prophets  too,  nay,  everybody 
who  would  but  listen  to  that  voice,  viz.  that  there  are  laws  independent 
of  man,  nay,  in  spite  of  man,  yet  irresistibly  present  in  the  human 
conscience.  .  .  .  Then  why  not  say,  "God  spake  these  words  and 
said  "  ?     Is  our  nineteenth-century  language  so  much  better,  and  is  it 


^  Public  Orator  at  Cambridge. 


1870]      Lectures  on  the  Science  of  Religion        373 

altogether  free  from  imagery  or  idolism  ?  I  shall  have  to  say  much 
stronger  things  in  my  lectures,  and  I  am  not  afraid.  People  know 
that  there  are  far  greater  difficulties  that  must  be  met — downright 
atheism  among  the  high  and  the  low.  It  is  so,  I  assure  you,  and 
you  probably  know  it  better  than  I.  And  then  to  hear  people  fight 
about  Colenso's  difficulties,  as  if  true  religion  had  anything  to  do 
with  them,  is  disheartening.  However,  let  us  look  to  Rome  and  that 
hideous '  performance  which  passes  all  mythology,  and  be  thankful. 
Ever  yours.' 

The  very  title  of  the  lectures  at  the  Royal  Institution 
excited  opposition  and  criticism,  many  people  objecting  to 
the  possibility  of  a  scientific  study  of  religions.  They  were, 
however,  very  well  attended,  but  Max  Miiller  purposely  post- 
poned the  publication,  hoping  to  make  the  lectures  more 
complete,  as  it  had  been  impossible  to  deal  fully  with  so  vast 
a  subject  in  the  narrow  limits  of  four  lectures.  They  were 
first  published  in  1873,  and  then  only  slightly  enlarged,  as 
Max  Miiller  had  found  he  could  not  give  the  necessary  time 
to  perfect  them  ;  but  as  they  had  been  pirated  in  America, 
he  was  driven  in  self-defence  to  print  them  in  England.  The 
subject  was  subsequently  carried  out  in  his  Hibbert  and 
Gifford  Lectures. 

On  March  20  he  writes  to  tell  his  wife  he  had  been  offered 
the  degree  of  LL.D.  at  Edinburgh,  '  I  really  ought  to  take 
care  not  to  have  my  head  turned  with  all  the  honours  ;  there 
is  really  nothing  left  that  I  care  for  now,  and  I  sometimes 
think  the  course  must  soon  be  run  and  all  the  work  over.' 

The  visit  to  Edinburgh  had  to  be  postponed  to  the  summer, 
partly  on  account  of  the  lectures,  partly  because  his  old 
mother  was  still  with  him. 

To  HIS  Wife. 

Frogmore,  March  31. 

'  One  line  to  say  that  I  arrived  safe.  At  the  station  a  carriage  was 
waiting  for  me,  but  the  Prince  is  in  London,  and  will  only, be  back 
in  time  for  dinner.  I  am  in  my  old  room  again,  and  all  the  servants 
seem  to  be  the  same  as  before,  which  is  a  good  sign.  Love  to  the 
mother,  and  kisses  for  the  children.  The  Prince  has  just  called  me 
away.' 

^  The  Doctrine  of  the  Immaculate  Conception  of  the  Virgin. 


374  Keshiih  Chunder  Sen  [ch.  xvn 

To  THE  Same. 

Frogmore,  April  i. 

'  We  have  just  come  back  from  London,  where  we  had  a  very 
interesting  luncheon  at  the  Deanery.  No  one  there  but  Keshub 
Chunder  Sen  and  the  Prince  and  I.  We  soon  got  into  a  warm 
discussion,  and  it  was  curious  to  see  how  we  almost  made  him  confess 
himself  a  Christian.  He  will  come  to  Oxford,  and  then  I  hope  to 
see  more  of  him.  He  is  not  as  handsome  as  Satyendranath  Tagore, 
but  very  intelligent  and  pleasing.  Last  night  we  had  a  dinner-party — 
the  Dean  of  Windsor  and  Mrs.  Wellesley,  Colonel  and  Mrs.  Gordon, 
who  is  a  sister  of  Peel,  the  Fellow  of  All  Souls,  and  Mr.  Ruthven. 
We  used  to  know  him  in  the  Berkshire  Volunteers.  The  Princess  is 
very  kind,  and  asked  after  you  and  the  children.' 

This  was  Max  Muller's  first  acquaintance  with  Keshub 
Chunder  Sen,  which  ripened  into  real  friendship,  and  they 
corresponded  till  the  death  of  the  latter  in  1884.  Unfortunately 
all  Max  Miiller's  letters  to  Keshub  Chunder  Sen,  touching 
on  the  important  work  of  the  Brahma  Somaj,  seem  to  have 
been  lost  or  destroyed. 

Two  public  lectures  were  given  at  Oxford  in  the  May 
Term — '  On  the  Origin  of  Mythology,'  and  '  On  the  Migration 
of  Fables.'  The  latter  was  repeated  on  June  3  at  the  Royal 
Institution.  Max  Miiller  writes  to  his  wife,  who  was  nursing 
her  father : — 

Deanery,  Westminster,  Jime  4. 

'  I  believe  my  lecture  ("  On  the  Migration  of  Fables  ")  went  off  very 
well ;  the  place  was  as  full  as  it  could  hold.  But  I  lost  all  heart  for 
it  when  you  were  not  there.  I  must  go  to  Oxford  to-day,  as  Keshub 
Chunder  Sen  waits  for  me  at  the  station, 

'  Dr.  Scott  has  accepted  the  Deanery  of  Rochester,  and  Jowett  will 
be  Master  of  Balliol.  I  am  truly  glad,  for  though  it  comes  late  it 
will  make  up  for  many  years  of  disappointment.  Few  people  know 
what  it  is  to  see  the  work  which  one  could  do  best  taken  away  from 
one,  and  few  people  make  allowance  for  it,  and  how  it  embitters  one. 
I  do  like  to  see  things  come  right  in  the  end,  though  I  know  they 
are  always  right  even  if  we  do  not  see  it.  I  do  not  think  that 
Jowett's  friends  have  always  thought  of  what  he  has  suffered,  and 
I  trust  he  will  have  many  years  to  enjoy  his  Mastership.' 


1870]  Iberians — Basks  375 

To  Professor   Freeman. 

June,  1870. 

'  I  have  read  your  second  and  third  lectures  \  and  I  have  no 
remarks  to  make  beyond  what  I  said  about  your  first  lecture,  that 
I  hope  they  will  be  taken  to  heart.  I  sometimes  wonder  that  it  should 
be  necessary  to  say  these  things  again  and  again,  but  I  believe  the 
confusion  in  the  popular  mind  arises  chiefly  from  a  confusion  of  ter- 
minology, using  a  terminology  which  was  meant  for  linguistic  pur- 
poses for  historical  or  physiological  work.  Let  people  classify  blood 
as  much  as  they  like,  only  let  them  use  their  own  bottles  for  that, 
and  not  bottles  that  were  labelled  for  the  purpose  of  holding  lan- 
guages. I  confess  to  my  mind  blood  is  an  irrational  and  ungraspable 
quantity,  but  if  people  like  to  dabble  in  it,  let  them  have  their  san- 
guinary amusement.  I  also  confess  that  I  consider  all  historical 
notices  as  to  race  extremely  precarious  until  you  come  to  writers  of 
our  own  century.  Before  Caesar  no  one  knew  the  difference  between 
a  Celt  and  a  German,  as  little  as  many  of  our  missionaries  know  the 
difference  between  a  Hottentot  and  Bushman,  or  between  a  Tatar 
and  IMongolian.  Nearly  all  that  is  built  on  the  statements  of  the 
ancients  as  to  race,  is  built  on  sand ;  it  may  be  very  learned,  but  it 
will  not  stand  a  breath  of  harsh  criticism.  One  thing  I  cannot 
understand.  Who  has  invented  the  Iberians?  I  see  them  of  late 
cropping  out  here,  there,  and  everywhere.  Whoever  brought  them 
to  England  first?  It  is  by  no  means  easy  to  get  a  clear  idea  what 
the  ancients  meant  by  the  Iberians  in  Spain,  and  whether  that  name 
may  be  used  synonymously  with  Bask.  But  the  historical  Iberians 
or  Ebro-people  of  Spain  never  came  to  England,  except  at  the  time 
of  the  Armada. or  thereabouts.  And  least  of  all  would  they  explain 
the  black  colouring  matter  among  the  English,  for  according  to  Napier 
and  Prichard  the  Basks  are  fair,  their  eyes  blue,  grey,  bluish,  and  light 
brown,  never  dark  brown.  Some  observations  are  different,  and  give 
us  twenty-five  brown  against  twenty-one  blue  eyes,  and  this  is  used  as 
an  argument  in  favour  of  a  theory  that  the  Basks  came  from  two 
distinct  ethnological  stems.  In  some  places  the  people  with  blonde 
hair  form  a  decided  majority.  As  to  the  skulls,  the  confusion  is 
equally  great;  see  Pruner  Bey,  Sur  les  crd?ies  basques,  1867.  Then 
what  use  can  the  Iberians  be  in  England  ?  People  who  believe  that 
the  Iberians  came  to  England  to  introduce  a  dark  pigment,  will  soon 
believe  that  the  Buddhists  came  over  from  India  to  build  Stonehenge.' 

And  now  for  nearly  a  year  to  come  Max  Miiller's  heart  and 
thoughts  were  to  be  absorbed  by  the  great  Franco-German 
^  '  History  of  the  Cathedral  Church  of  Wells.' 


376  Franco-German  War  [ch.  xvn 

War.  When  able  to  fix  his  attention  on  his  work  he  went 
on  with  the  fifth  vokime  of  the  Rig-veda,  and  was  busy  in 
preparing  a  third  volume  of  Chips  for  the  Press,  of  which  an 
edition  of  3,000  was  printed  ;  while  this  year  also  saw  the 
publication  of  his  translation  of  the  Dhammapada. 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  July  17,  1870. 

*  These  last  experiences  are  terrible ;  one  cannot  bear  to  think 
of  it.  A  murderous  attack  just  because  it  seems  necessary  to  the 
Emperor  to  make  himself  popular  with  his  army.  The  feeling  in 
England  is  strong  against  France.  I  do  not  for  a  moment  doubt 
the  result.  Germany  may  lose  some  battles,  but  Germany  cannot  be 
killed.  The  present  devil's  brood  in  France  will  fall  after  one  lost 
battle.  There  is  perhaps  nothing  better  for  the  ultimate  consolidation 
of  Germany  than  this  war,  for  no  one  who  speaks  German,  be  he 
Hanoverian  or  Saxon,  can  hold  himself  aloof  It  is  the  last  chance 
for  Austria.  If  she  is  great  enough  to  forget  the  past  and  to  join 
Prussia  against  France  her  future  is  secured  ;  if  she  follows  Beust's 
policy  now  she  is  done  for.  Who  knows  how  long  this  war  may 
last  ?  I  should  like  to  live  to  see  the  end.  The  enthusiasm  in 
Germany  must  be  tremendous ;  all  the  young  Germans  in  England 
are  leaving,  and  I  would  gladly  go  with  them.  All  my  plans  are, 
of  course,  upset.  I  hoped  to  go  to  Ems  in  August,  and  then  we 
might  have  met,  but  one  cannot  think  of  that  now.  It  is  not  really 
necessary,  but  it  did  me  such  good  before  that  I  would  have  used 
it  as  a  precaution.  Now  we  shall  stay  quietly  here.  On  August  i 
I  have  to  go  to  Edinburgh  to  be  made  an  honorary  doctor.  I  put 
it  off  once,  and  cannot  do  so  again.  Later  on  we  may  go  to  the 
sea,  but  that  is  uncertain.  My  assistant.  Dr.  Thibaut,  received  a  tele- 
graphic despatch  to-day,  and  is  already  on  the  way  to  Rastadt,  which 
of  course  disturbs  my  work  a  good  deal.' 

The  following  letter  adverts  to  a  scheme  that  Max  MUller 
had  much  at  heart  at  one  time,  but  it  led  to  no  practical 
results  in  England  : — 

To  William  Longman,  Esq. 

Oxford,  July  12. 

*  What  I  talked  about  with  Mr.  Cox  was  not  a  volume  of  essays, 
but  something  very  different.  I  shall  try  to  explain  it  to  you  as 
shortly  as  I  can. 

'  In  Germany  the  plan  has  been  adopted  for  some  years  of  pub- 


1870]  '  Series  of  Essays  '  377 

lishing  a  continuous  series  of  lectures  and  essays,  and  it  seems  to 
have  answered  well,  and  gradually  to  take  the  place  of  monthly  and 
quarterly  journals. 

*  In  a  Monthly  or  Quarterly  you  must  print  many  articles  which 
are  mere  padding ;  the  publisher  has  to  pay  for  them,  and  the  buyer 
has  to  pay  for  them,  though  neither  one  nor  the  other  wants  to  have 
them.  For  instance,  if  a  man  wants  to  have  my  four  lectures  on  the 
"  Science  of  Religion  "  he  must  pay  loj.,  and  then  he  has  to  cut 
them  out,  and  they  look  untidy. 

'  Now  if  there  existed  a  "  series  of  essays,"  each  essay  might  be 
sold  for  \s.  or  less,  and  people  would  then  be  able  to  get  what  they 
really  want.  Those  who  now  subscribe  to  Quarterlies  would  sub- 
scribe to  the  whole  series  ;  those  who  want  the  Physical  Science  only 
would  take  those  numbers  only  which  treat  of  Physical  Science,  &c. 

'  You  would  want  about  six  names  to  represent  the  different 
branches  of  knowledge,  who  should  be  responsible  for  the  character 
of  the  essays,  and  give  a  character  to  the  series.  I  have  spoken  to 
Huxley  and  others,  and  find  a  general  concurrence. 

'  You  will  probably  object  that  it  would  be  troublesome  and  expensive 
as  a  matter  of  publishing.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  gives  you 
a  constant  means  of  advertising.  The  series  itself  would  hardly 
require  more  advertising  than  a  Quarterly :  you  would  give  a  string 
of  tides  from  time  to  time. 

'  I  should  propose  as  a  title  for  the  series  "  Our  Time,  a  series 
of  essays  and  lectures,  under  the  editorship  of  i,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6."  One 
series  in  Germany,  "Populare  Vortrage,"  has  reached  to  several  hun- 
dreds of  essays.  In  France  you  have  something  like  it  in  the  Revue  des 
Cours  Litte'raires,  only  that  that  is  published  every  month,  while  my 
plan  is  to  publish  whenever  there  is  fresh  material. 

'  I  am  not  a  man  of  business,  but  I  thought  that  Mr.  Cox  might 
act  as  a  general  editor,  supported  by  six  special  editors,  whose  names 
would  be  a  guarantee  with  the  pubUc' 

To  THE  Dean  of  Westminster. 

Parks  End,  Oxford,  July  24. 

'  I  send  you  a  copy  of  my  lectures  on  the  "  Science  of  Religion." 
I  do  not  wish  to  publish  them  now,  but  I  had  sixteen  copies  taken,  of 
which  yours  is  one.  By-and-by  they  will  form  part  of  a  larger  work, 
if  life  and  strength  last  long  enough  to  enable  me  to  carry  out  a  plan 
for  which  all  my  studies  have  formed  the  preparation. 

'  My  heart  is  too  full  to  say  anything  about  this  terrible  war. 
I  believe  it  is  a  cup  that  could  not  pass.     France  cannot  break  a 


378  LL.D.  Edinburgh  [ch.  xvn 

united  and  strong  Germany,  and  the  reckless  gambler  who  usurps  the 
throne  of  France  took  advantage  of  this  national  jealousy  to  save 
himself  from  his  inevitable  end  for  a  few  years  longer.  But  the 
misery  it  brings  to  thousands  of  happy  homes  passes  all  description  ! 
This  war  can  only  end  either  in  the  destruction  of  Germany,  or  in 
a  revenge  without  a  parallel  in  history.' 

To  THE  Same. 

Parks  End,  Oxford, /w/j^  26,  1870. 

'  I  feel  by  no  means  quite  happy  about  the  "  Traitd  de  paix  entre  la 
France  et  la  Prusse."  If  it  is  genuine,  however,  then  neutraUty  on  the 
part  of  England  would  be  criminal.  Even  Turkey  came  forward  to 
assist  her  enemy  Greece  when  it  became  a  question  of  putting  down 
brigandage.  England  and  Germany  hunted  down  one  Corsican — 
they  ought  to  combine  for  the  same  purpose  now.  You  may  have 
watched  the  feelings  of  those  who  lost  a  husband,  a  brother,  a  son, 
or  a  friend  in  the  tragedy  of  Marathon ;  multiply  that  feeling  by 
millions,  and  you  may  imagine  then  what  the  state  of  Germany  must 
be  at  the  present  moment,  when  every  family  trembles  for  the  life  of 
those  whom  they  love  most,  and  who  are  to  be  mowed  down  by  the 
French  cannon,  simply  because  one  great  criminal  has  been  driven 
mad  and  desperate.  War  in  Germany  is  different  from  war  in 
England.  It  was  easy  for  the  Duke  of  Wellington  to  preach  modera- 
tion at  Paris.  He  had  to  revenge  defeat,  but  no  outrages,  whilst 
every  German  soldier  that  marches  into  Paris  (and  I  trust  I  shall  live 
to  see  it !)  has  to  revenge  the  blood  of  brothers,  and  tears  such  as  only 
a  mother  can  shed.  I  should  like  to  see  England,  not  Russia,  as  the 
friend  and  ally  of  Germany  in  this  holy  war.' 

At  the  end  of  July  Max  Miiller  went  to  Edinburgh,  to 
receive  the  degree  of  LL.D.  at  the  same  time  as  his  friend 
Dr.  Acland.  The  few  days'  holiday  refreshed  and  cheered 
him,  weighed  down  as  he  was  by  the  thought  of  the  war,  and 
all  that  was  at  stake  for  his  native  country.  He  wrote  to 
his  wife  : — 

Edinburgh,  y«/j/  31. 

'  This  town  is  glorious  and  inspiriting,  the  true  capital  of  England, 
far  more  royal  than  London.  Were  I  King,  I  should  reside  here  and 
leave  London  to  be  the  great  harbour  and  emporium  of  the  country.' 

The  following  is  Professor  Macpherson's  speech  in  presenting 
Max  Muller  for  the  degree  of  LL.D.  :— 


1870]  Professor  Macphersons  Speech  379 

'  I  have  now  to  present  to  you  in  the  name  of  the  Senatus,  as  one 
deemed  worthy  of  the  same  degree,  another  very  eminent  Professor 
in  the  University  of  Oxford — Max  Miiller.  I  do  not  think  it  necessary 
to  mention  any  of  the  numerous  University  honours  which  he  has 
received,  or  to  give  you  a  catalogue  of  the  great  Hterary  and  scientific 
societies  that  have  sought  to  do  themselves  honour  by  enrolling  him 
amongst  their  members.  His  name  is  too  well  known  among  us  to 
require  such  an  enumeration.  Those  who  have  not  had  the  pleasure 
of  listening  to  his  delightful  lectures  in  this  city  know  him  well  through 
his  writings.  In  the  University  of  Oxford  he  has  done  more,  probably, 
than  any  other  man  to  establish  the  study  of  modern  languages  in 
what  used  to  be  considered  the  throne  of  the  dead  languages ;  and 
he  did  so  at  a  period  when  he  was  engaged  in  giving  to  the  world 
writings  which  were  composed  in  a  language  which  was  dead  long 
before  Greek  and  Latin,  I  may  say,  were  born.  When  England  was 
engaged  in  the  Crimean  War,  it  was  Max  MuUer  who  supplied 
English  ignorance  by  wridng  upon  the  languages  of  the  seat  of  war. 
When  philologists  were  beating  about,  seeking  here  and  there  some 
solution  or  explanation  of  the  endless  facts  which  had  been  accumu- 
lating for  half  a  century,  it  was  Max  IMiiller  who  came  forward  with 
his  Science  of  Language.  And  now,  when  England  is  agitated  with 
discussions  on  religious  faiths  and  religious  doctrines.  Max  Miiller 
again  steps  forward  with  his  Science  of  Religion,  his  lectures  upon 
which  bear  all  the  impress  of  his  learning  and  his  genius,  and  breathe 
a  spirit  of  religious  love  and  toleration,  which,  if  it  could  be  extended 
to  other  religious  discussions,  would  take  from  them  the  reproach  of 
acrimony  which  has  so  often  been  cast  upon  them.  It  is  a  remarkable 
circumstance,  considering  the  great  stake  which  Britain  has  in  the 
East,  that  it  was  left  to  Max  Miiller  to  bring  in  a  worthy  shape  before 
the  world  the  text  of  the  Rig-veda — the  value  of  which  is  acknow- 
ledged by  all  scholars  and  by  all  thinkers  throughout  the  world.  As 
to  the  manner  in  which  he  has  done  so,  a  verdict  of  approval  has  been 
pronounced  by  the  scholars  of  all  Europe ;  and  as  to  his  acquaintance 
with  Eastern  religious  systems,  the  best  testimony  to  that  is  the 
appreciation  which  his  work  has  received  from  the  Brahmins  of  India, 
who  revere  the  name  of  Max  Miiller,  thank  him  for  his  labours,  and 
regard  him  as  the  great  exponent  of  their  religious  doctrines  in 
Europe.  With  regard  to  his  qualifications  for  the  performance  of 
such  a  task,  I  know  of  no  man  who  could  have  combined  with  these 
qualities  the  power  of  generalization  which  he  possesses,  the  power  of 
detecting  truth  beneath  the  accumulations  of  mythology  and  beneath 
the  decay  of  tongues,  the  power  of  educing  principle  and  order  where 
apparently  there   is   nothing   but   confusion   and   chaos.     It   is    the 


380  Work  for  Sick  and  Wounded    [ch.  xvn 

combination  of  these  qualifications  which  has  enabled  him  to  render 
such  incomparable  service  to  the  Science  of  Comparative  Philology 
and  Comparative  Mythology,  and  which  has  made  him  conspicuous 
both  as  a  discoverer  and  as  a  presenter  in  the  most  interesting  and 
popular  form  of  the  results  of  the  labours  and  discoveries  of  others. 
No  man  has  done  so  much  to  raise  these  to  the  dignity  of  a  science ; 
no  man  has  done  so  much  to  popularize  topics  which  formerly  were 
considered  fit  for  discussion  only  in  the  closet ;  and  he  has  done  this 
without  departing  from  the  method  of  severe  scientific  treatment :  he 
has  done  it  by  the  charm  of  the  manner  in  which,  in  a  pure  and  lucid 
English  which  the  natives  of  his  adopted  country  do  sincerely  envy 
while  they  rejoice  to  read  it,  he  presents  an  endless  array  of  facts  in 
new  and  surprising  combinations.  In  a  word,  his  edition  of  the  Rtg- 
veda,  his  lectures  upon  the  "  Science  of  Language,"  and  his  lectures 
upon  the  "  Science  of  Religion,"  place  him  in  the  very  foremost  rank 
of  scholars  and  of  thinkers,  whether  as  regards  extent  of  knowledge, 
or  force  and  originality  of  speculation.' 

Max  MUller  always  felt  at  Edinburgh,  and  later  at  Glasgow, 
the  stimulating  influence  of  intercourse  with  men  ready  to 
talk  on  the  subjects  in  which  they  were  engaged,  and  to  which 
they  had  devoted  their  lives,  and  contrasted  it  with  the  fear 
of  '  talking  shop  '  that  prevails  in  England.  On  his  return 
he  was  again  absorbed  in  the  war,  and  all  the  work  in  his 
house  for  the  sick  and  wounded. 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  August  14. 

'You  can  fancy  all  our  thoughts  are  with  Germany,  and  I  wish 
I  were  there.  Such  a  triumph  of  a  good  cause  has  seldom  been  seen 
in  history.  Where  are  Adolf  and  Fritz  ^  ?  I  hope  on  the  Rhine, 
perhaps  already  in  France.  The  English  are  quite  amazed  at  these 
results,  and  not  quite  pleased,  but  that  does  not  matter.  G.  collects 
and  works.  She  has  collected  already  £100,  and  shrinks  from  no 
trouble.  Here  large  collections  are  being  made.  That  Emilie  is 
still  so  angry  with  Germany  astonishes  me ;  the  heart  of  every  German 
must  beat  with  joy,  and  all  must  be  forgotten  that  recalls  the  old 
misery.' 

To  E.  A.  Freeman,  Esq. 

August  14. 

'  I  ought  to  have  written  to  you  before,  but  you  may  imagine  where 
all  my  thoughts  are  just  now.     Though  I  never  doubted  of  ultimate 

*  Soldier  cousins. 


1870]  Bismarck  381 

success,  I  was  afraid  of  reverses  in  the  beginning.  Now  I  expect  the 
war  will  soon  be  over,  and  what  I  looked  forward  to  for  the  last 
eighteen  years  almost  every  day  as  I  opened  the  paper — the  downfall 
of  the  Empire — has  come  to  pass  at  last.  A  more  demoralized  and 
demoralizing  government  than  that  of  Louis  Napoleon,  history  I  be- 
lieve has  seldom  known.  There  will  be  a  national  bankruptcy  too, 
I  have  no  doubt,  and  millions  of  French  money  will  be  found  in  the 
English  funds.  Peace  will  be  easy,  for  Germany  wants  no  conquests, 
not  even  Alsace  and  Lorraine ;  the  land  is  fine  enough,  but  the  people 
are  not  worth  having.  Perhaps  France  will  in  future  be  less  eager 
to  guarantee  the  status  quo  of  Germany !  Now  about  the  Illyrians  ; 
though  I  do  not  hke  to  quote  my  own  books,  I  think  I  can  answer 
your  questions  best  if  for  the  Illyrians  I  refer  you  to  a  tolerably  full 
account  of  them  in  my  Survey  of  Languages,  second  edition,  pp.  50-60, 
and  as  to  the  untrustworthiness  of  classical  authorities  for  ethnological 
purposes,  to  a  note  in  my  Lectures  on  the  Science  of  Language, 
Volume  I,  p.  130.' 

To  THE  Dean  of  Westminster. 

Parks  End,  Oxford,  August  23,  1870. 

'Yes,  these  are  great  days,  almost  overpowering  events.  If  all 
goes  well,  and  if  the  author  of  this  atrocious  war  is  punished,  people 
even  in  England  will  believe  again  that  there  is  a  God  in  history; 
I  tremble  for  the  Crown  Prince — the  French  will  fight  with  fury  when 
they  fight  pro  aris  et  focis,  and  not  for  glory  and  empire.  I  think  we 
ought  on  the  whole  to  be  satisfied  with  the  state  of  public  feeling  in 
England.  Unfortunately  Gladstone's  mind  has  taken  hold  of  the  idea 
of  neutrality,  and  squeezed  it  and  defined  it  till  it  means  abdication  of 
the  right  of  judging  between  right  and  wrong,  between  war  and 
murder.  This  is  a  most  demoralizing  policy,  but  it  cannot  be  helped 
now.  All  Uberal  and  independent  thinkers  are  caught  in  Gladstone's 
ministerial  net.  I  wish  Goldwin  Smith  were  in  England — some  such 
man  is  wanted  just  now. 

'  I  do  not  wonder  that  there  is  a  feeling  of  mistrust  with  regard 

to  Bismarck.     In  home  politics  he  is  as  bad  as  Lord  would 

be,  if  he  were  Prime  Minister.  But  one  may  oppose  a  man  as 
a  Minister  without  despising  him,  and  the  same  Minister,  however 
self-willed  and  tyrannical  at  home,  may  be  the  right  man  as  Foreign 
Minister.  I  do  not  love  Bismarck,  but  I  feel  prepared  to  defend  every 
step  he  has  taken  since  1866  against  all  comers.  He  seems  to  have 
been  sans  reproche,  though  no  doubt  also  sans  peur.  If  he  was  a  bird 
of  the  same  feather  as  Benedetti,  why  should  he  have  opposed  the 
Emperor  if,  by  merely  shutting  his  eyes,  he  could  have  got  all  he 


382  Letters  to  '  the  English  People  *     [ch.  xvii 

could  possibly  want  for  Germany,  and  at  the  same  time  entangle 
England  and  France  in  a  war  ?  If  Bismarck  is  to  blame  in  his  foreign 
policy,  every  German  patriot  shares  his  blame.  We  wanted  to  be 
united,  and  we  have  had  the  naivete  to  think,  as  the  French  papers 
say,  that  we  could  arrange  our  internal  affairs  without  consulting 
France.  If  France  thinks  she  has  a  right  to  interfere  at  Rome,  at 
Madrid,  and  now  at  Berlin  too,  she  must  learn  that  this  cannot  be. 
France  has  been  cruelly  treated  by  the  Emperor — how  extraordinary 
that  there  should  be  no  man  to  take  his  place,  and  to  save  France  1 

'  We  have  collected  about  £120  at  Oxford,  though  nearly  everybody 
is  away.  My  wife  has  a  regular  workshop  going  on  all  day  long, 
making  bandages,  &c.  &c.  Did  Lady  Augusta  receive  my  book  for 
Princess  Louise,  or  came  it  too  late  ? ' 

To  THE  Same. 

Parks  End,  Oxford,  Atigust  30. 
'. . .  I  cannot  tell  you  how  this  war  crushes  me.  I  sometimes  feel  as 
if  I  could  bear  it  no  longer  and  must  be  off.  What  savages  we  are  in 
spite  of  all  these  centuries  !  But  surely  the  Teutonic  race  is  better 
than  the  Latin  and  Slavonic,  and  the  Protestants  are  better  Christians 
than  the  Romans;  and  the  German  cause  is  surely  thoroughly 
righteous,  and  the  French  thoroughly  unrighteous.  I  always  think  of 
the  simple  soldiers — those  who  were  everything  at  home,  and  are 
nothing  in  the  field  of  battle — unknown,  unnoticed,  and  probably 
better  and  braver  than  emperors  and  kings  and  generals.  I  cannot 
get  my  thoughts  away  from  them.' 

On  August  29  Max  Mtiller  wrote  the  first  of  his  five  letters 
in  the  Times  addressed  '  to  the  English  People.'  They  were 
reprinted,  together  with  letters  from  Mommsen,  Strauss,  and 
Carlyle,  in  a  small  volume,  early  in  1871,  and  sold  for  the 
good  of  the  Victoria  Institute  for  German  Widows  and  Orphans. 
The  first  letter  was  called  forth  by  a  violent  attack  made  by 
his  old  and  honoured  friend,  Sir  Harry  Verney,  on  the  policy 
of  Germany,  accusing  Bismarck  of  having  been  willing  to 
accept  Holland,  and  give  up  Belgium  and  Switzerland  to 
France.  Such  had  been  more  or  less  Benedetti's  scheme,  but 
it  is  well  known  now  that  Bismarck  did  not  listen  to  these 
ideas.  Max  Miiller  was  no  admirer  of  Bismarck,  but  he  felt 
bound,  much  as  he  disliked  the  unconstitutional  proceedings 
that  had  marked  his  internal  government,  to  protest  against 
this  attack  on  his  public  honour. 


1870]  Dr.  Aheken  383 

To  Dr.  Abeken  (then  acting  as  Bismarck's  secretary)  ^ 
Translatio7i.  Oxford,  September  9. 

'  I  send  you  enclosed  cuttings,  but  doubt  whether  you  will  receive 
them  in  these  chaotic  times.  If  you  do  receive  my  letter,  it  is  to  tell 
you  that  here  also  a  German  heart  beats  full  of  pride  and  joy,  and 
often  with  pain,  when  it  thinks  of  the  friends  who  have  dreamt  of  this 
great  time  of  Germany's  elevation,  but  who  have  not  lived  to  see  it 
realized/ 

To  HIS  Mother. 
TransJaiwn.  Septefnher  11. 

*  What  great  times  we  live  in  I  though  so  far  away,  I  can  hardly  keep 
myself  quiet ;  one  lives  on  newspapers  and  telegrams.  And  then  I  had 
so  much  work  that  had  to  be  done,  that  I  was  at  last  quite  exhausted 
from  excitement  and  work,  and  went  alone  for  a  week  to  Brighton. 
The  sea  air  and  bathing  did  me  great  good,  and  I  came  back  on 
Thursday.  G.'s  father  was  here  on  a  visit,  so  G.  could  not  go  with 
me,  though  she  needs  change,  and  I  think  in  a  few  days  we  shall 
make  a  little  tour  together  in  Wales.  You  have  no  idea  how  hard 
G.  has  worked.  She  will  tell  you  all  she  has  collected.  ...  The 
feeling  in  Germany  must  be  very  sad,  in  spite  of  the  mighty  results, 
for  what  terrible  sorrow  there  must  be  throughout  the  country  1  Here 
in  England  feelings  are  much  divided.  I  have  fought  fiercely  in  the 
Times,  and  I  think  it  has  told.  The  best  part  of  the  nation  is  for 
Germany,  but  the  aristocracy  has  strong  sympathy  with  France. 
People  are  amazed  at  the  gigantic  resources  of  Germany,  and  the 
utter  moral  rottenness  of  France.  Well,  in  the  next  few  weeks  Paris 
will  be  won ;  then  our  troops  will  march  home.  Alsace  and  Lorraine 
will  be  governed  militarily,  and  in  France  they  can  then  slaughter 
themselves  as  they  like.' 

To  MoNCURE  Conway,  Esq. 

September  14. 

'  My  wife  has  been  collecting  as  much  as  she  could  get,  and  I  know 
from  letters  received  that  her  collection  has  done  real  good  to  the 
sufferers  in  different  hospitals.  You  know  that  German  hospitals  are 
full  of  French  wounded,  and  I  believe  if  any  distinction  is  made 
between  the  French  and  German  wounded  in  these  hospitals,  it  is  in 
favour  of  the  French.     Anyhow,  in  the  presence  of  death,  nationality 

'  Dr.  Abeken  had  been  a  great  friend  of  Baron  Bunsen,  at  whose 
house  Max  Miiller  had  learnt  to  know  and  estimate  this  upright,  single- 
minded  man  at  his  right  value. 


384  King  of  Prussia  [ch. 


XVII 


vanishes  and  humanity  takes  its  place.  My  wife  begs  me  to  say  that 
she  will  gladly  forward  any  sum  however  small.  She  has  more 
appeals  than  she  can  respond  to.  I  should  pay  no  attention  to  news- 
paper rumours  as  to  what  the  Germans  mean  to  do  with  regard  to  the 
conditions  of  peace.  The  King's  behaviour  towards  the  Emperor 
is  mistaken  chivalry  towards  a  fallen  enemy,  nothing  more.  I  think, 
however,  that  there  ought  to  be  a  formal  abdication,  or  a  formal 
decree  of  a  Constituent  Assembly  transferring  the  sovereign  power 
from  the  Emperor  to  the  Provisional  Government,  or  to  a  President ; 
otherwise  it  seems  impossible  to  make  a  treaty  of  peace.  I  believe  the 
general  opinion  in  Germany  requires  no  territorial  aggrandizement,  but 
the  military  authorities  will  probably  require  a  better  strategic  frontier 
line,  which  Germany  asked  for  at  the  Congress  of  Vienna,  but  which 
she  could  not  obtain  then,  owing  to  the  intrigues  of  Austria  and 
Russia.  If  the  inhabitants  of  that  district  are  devoted  to  France,  and 
cannot  bear  the  idea  of  belonging  again  to  Germany,  they  are  free  to 
emigrate.     Surely  patriotism  has  made  greater  sacrifices  than  this.' 

During  September  Max  Miiller  heard  from  his  old  friend 
Stanislas  Julien,  the  famous  Sinologue,  in  a  state  of  almost 
childish  panic  at  the  approach  of  the  German  armies.  He 
had  recently  lost  his  wife.  Max  Miiller  at  once  offered  him 
an  asylum  under  his  roof;  but  the  old  man,  though  viveinent 
toiiche  at  his  friend's  invitation,  resolved  to  stay  and  guard  his 
precious  library  and  house,  on  which  he  had  spent  large  sums, 
and  he  went  through  all  the  sufferings  of  the  siege.  But  it 
undermined  his  health,  and  he  died  about  two  years  later. 

To  MoNCURE  Conway,  Esq. 

Parks  End,  Sepfemher  16,  1870. 

'  I  read  your  letter  with  great  interest.  I  believe  you  are  quite  right 
in  your  estimate  of  Bismarck,  but  I  think  you  underrate  the  capacities 
of  the  King.  The  King  is  a  strange  mixture  ;  he  was  a  mere  soldier, 
but  he  learnt  much  during  his  long  stay  in  Bunsen's  house.  He  M'ill 
never  be  guilty  of  such  folly  as  to  reinstate  Napoleon ;  but  the  situation 
is  difficult.  Suppose  Paris  surrendered,  which  I  trust  it  will  do  after 
the  first  shot,  what  can  the  German  army  do  but  go  into  winter 
quarters  in  Alsace  and  Lorraine  ?  There  may  be  a  provisional  treaty 
of  peace,  but  it  seems  to  me  that,  as  the  Constituent  Assembly  is  con- 
voked, it  can  be  ratified  by  that  Assembly  and  its  delegates  only.  If 
the  Constituent  Assembly  should  fail,  then  nothing  remains  but  to 
convoke  the  Legislative  Assembly  and  the  Senate,  both  of  which  still 


1870]  Imperialism  in  France  385 

exist  both  de  jure  and  de  facto.  I  confess  I  cannot  understand  the 
enthusiasm  for  the  French  Republic.  A  republic  is  perhaps  the  most 
perfect  form  of  government,  but  also  the  most  difficult.  There  are 
good  and  there  are  bad  republics,  and  the  present  French  Republic 
seems  to  me  the  most  imperfect  political  organization  that  can  be 
imagined.  I  should  prefer  the  Russian  or  the  Chinese  regime  to  the 
present  state  of  things  in  France.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  en- 
thusiastic admirers  of  this  republic,  which  has  nothing  but  the  name 
of  a  republic,  exceed  in  folly  the  old  Legitimists,  to  whom  a  King, 
however  foolish  and  wicked,  is  a  kind  of  idol  to  be  worshipped  with 
unquestioning  devotion.  It  is  very  possible  that  Alsace  might  recover 
itself  and  become  German,  but  I  doubt  whether  it  is  wise  to  weaken 
France  at  the  very  moment  that  Germany  becomes  so  much  more 
powerful.  As  to  making  France  harmless,  that  can  never  be  done,  and 
I  doubt  whether,  for  the  sake  of  Germany,  it  is  desirable.  I  hope 
Moltke  will  take  as  little  as  possible,  and  Bismarck  will  make  it  quite 
clear  that  what  is  taken  is  taken  for  strategic  purposes  only,  and  not 
for  the  sake  of  aggrandizement,  and  in  order  to  recover  some  few 
millions  who  formerly  were  Germans.  I  hope  you  will  publish  your 
impressions  of  the  war  and  Bismarck.' 

To  THE  Same. 

Parks  End,  September  i8,  1870. 

'  I  did  not  know  that  the  description  of  the  battle  of  Rezonville  in 
the  Daily  News  was  yours,  and  I  am  glad  to  hear  that  we  shall  have 
it  in  a  more  permanent  form  in  next  Eraser.  I  do  not  expect  that 
anybody  will  see  such  fighting  again,  though,  from  what  I  see  in  the 
French  papers,  there  will  be,  I  fear,  some  mad  attempt  of  fighting  in 
and  around  Paris.  The  worst  effect  of  Imperialism  is  that  it  has 
stunted  a  whole  generation,  and  there  is  hardly  one  man  who  towers 
a  head  above  the  mob.  They  have  no  statesmen,  and  Jules  Favre 
himself  is  reported  to  have  declared  that  he  could  not  make  peace 
because  his  life  would  not  be  safe  I  Is  that  statesmanlike  or  soldierlike  ? 
Pr^vot  Paradol  would  not  have  said  that !  It  is  fearful  to  see  such 
a  country  as  France  so  entirely  demoralized,  abandoned,  ruined  ;  it 
will  take  generations  to  build  her  up  again.  Circumstances  so  ex- 
ceptional as  the  present  state  of  France  would  seem  to  justify  exceptional 
measures  on  the  part  of  the  other  Powers.  England  will  not  act 
alone,  and  unfortunately  there  is  no  cordial  feeling  between  England 
and  the  United  States.  Besides,  Mr.  Motley  is,  I  suppose,  no  longer 
Minister.  What  I  should  like  to  see  would  be  a  journey  of  Mr.  Glad- 
stone and  Motley  to  the  head  quarters  of  the  King  of  Prussia.     They 

I  C  C 


386  Visit  to  North   Wales  [ch.  xvn 

would  be  able  to  arrange  a  peace  without  a  single  threat,  for  Germany- 
is  as  anxious  for  peace  as  France  is,  and  they  might  lay  the  founda- 
tions of  a  league  between  the  three  Teutonic  Powers  that  would  be 
a  guarantee  of  peace  for  centuries.  France  would  listen  to  America, 
Germany  to  England,  and  England  and  America  would  be  drawn 
together  again  by  the  good  work  which  they  would  do  in  common. 
Bismarck  is  quite  powerful  enough  to  make  Germany  feel  ashamed  of 
any  wish  of  territorial  aggrandizement ;  and  all  that  Moltke  wants  are 
the  house-door,  the  bolt  and  keys  of  Germany.  I  shall  have  to  run 
away  from  Oxford  for  a  few  weeks  before  term  begins,  and  I  hope  to 
be  off  by  Tuesday  for  North  Wales.' 

To  THE  Dean  of  Westminster. 

Carnarvon,  September  30,  1870. 

'  My  dear  Stanley, — I  was  so  overdone  that  I  ran  away  to  Wales. 
We  had  splendid  weather,  and  enjoyed  our  rambles  immensely.  Alas  1 
the  English  Government  is  weaker  than  I  expected ;  they  do  not  seem 
to  perceive  that,  since  the  destruction  of  the  Western  Empire,  nothing 
like  the  present  events  has  happened.  Germany  would  be  thankful 
for  a  little  friendly  coercion,  but  what  Germany  expected  was  a  recogni- 
tion of  the  righteousness  of  her  cause,  a  fact  now  admitted  by  France, 
but  not  yet  by  England,  except  by  Lord  Russell.  This  kind  of 
neutrality  demoralizes  England,  and  blunts  the  edge  of  her  moral 
conscience.     I  expected  something  very  different  from  Gladstone.' 

The  end  of  September  the  Max  Miillers,  both  tired  out 
with  work  for  the  sick  and  wounded,  spent  a  delightful 
fortnight  in  North  Wales,  climbing  Cader  Idris  and  Snowdon, 
and  exploring  each  lovely  valley. 

Scarcely  had  they  settled  quietly  at  home  than  the  work 
began  again,  and  Max  M tiller  found  himself  involved  on  all 
sides  in  long  correspondence  on  the  subject  filling  his  heart 
as  well  as  his  thoughts. 

To  Dr.  Abeken. 
Trayislation.  Parks  End,  Oxford,  October  6,  1870. 

'Dear  Sir  and  Friend, —  .  .  .  Gladstone  is  the  soul  of  the 
Cabinet,  a  man  of  slow  resolution,  but  of  inflexible  will  if  once  the 
resolution  has  been  made.  As  far  as  I  know  him,  he  is  on  our  side, 
not  from  natural  sympathy,  but  from  conviction,  from  a  feeling  of 
right  and  of  duty.  He  was  the  only  Minister  who  recognized  our 
right  in  the  Danish  question,  and  who  called  the  Treaty  of  London 


1870]  Alsace  and  Lorraine  387 

a  bad  continuation  of  the  Vienna  treaties.  His  sympathies  are  more 
Latin  than  Teutonic,  as  you  know,  and  the  commercial  prosperity 
of  France  had  so  dazzled  him,  that  he  declared  hardly  a  year  ago  that 
France  would  grow  to  be  the  Queen  of  Europe.  It  will  be  difficult 
for  him  and  for  many  Englishmen  to  take  in  the  new  position  of  the 
world  calmly  and  from  the  right  point  of  view ;  but  he  is  nearly  the  only 
English  statesman  whose  stern  uprightness  I  have  never  doubted,  and 
who  is  so  entirely  guided  by  noble  motives  even  where  he  makes  mistakes. 

'  I  intend  writing  to  Gladstone,  somewhat  to  this  effect : — 

'  I.  The  thought  of  conquest  of  territory  and  the  acquisition  of  non- 
German  subjects  is  foreign  to  us. 

'2.  It  is  a  fate  which  Germany  has  not  brought  about,  that  has 
brought  Alsace  and  Lorraine  into  the  possession  of  the  German  army. 

'  3.  No  prince  and  no  statesman  in  Germany  is  strong  enough  to 
give  up  again  for  any  price  a  possession  so  dearly  bought. 

'  4.  The  settling  of  the  boundary  requires  no  Congress  or  diplomatic 
understanding.  It  is  a  purely  military  question,  and  in  consequence 
can  only  be  decided  by  a  Military  Commission.  Germany  does  not 
wish  for  any  Frenchmen,  nor  for  one  inch  of  country,  only  what  is 
indispensable  to  her  future  security. 

'  I  am  writing  this  in  a  great  hurry  to  catch  the  post. 

'  Well,  once  more  :  do  not  give  any  weight  to  the  anti-German  out- 
breaks of  the  English  Press ;  they  come  mostly  from  a  French  and  Old- 
Danish  source. 

'  The  republican  sympathies  are  absurd,  and  only  help  us  and  do 
no  harm.  Sir  H.  Verney  has  improved,  but  not  enough  yet:  he  is 
getting  old. 

'  The  collections  in  England  are  beautiful,  larger  than  for  their  own 
patriotic  funds  after  the  Crimean  War.  A  recognition  on  the  side  of 
Germany,  especially  before  the  French  do  so,  would  have  a  good  effect, 
and  might  be  a  good  occasion  of  mentioning  some  useful  truths.' 

To  THE  Right  Hon.  W,  E.  Gladstone. 

Parks  End,  October  6,  1870. 
'  My  dear  Mr.  Gladstone, — If  you  knew  what  an  effort  it  has  been 
to  me  not  to  write  to  you  on  some  of  the  events  of  the  last  months, 
you  would  require  no  assurance  of  my  readiness  to  answer,  as  well  as 
I  can,  the  inquiries  contained  in  your  letter  of  October  4,  which 
I  received  this  morning.  I  have  no  hesitation  in  asserting  that  the 
conquest  of  territory  inhabited  by  people  that  are  not  German  in 
national  sentiment  is  an  idea  repugnant  to  the  German  mind.  Count 
Bismarck,  whose  power  arises  chiefly  from  his  accurate  knowledge  of 
the  German  character,   and   who   is   simply  carrying   out   with   the 

c  c  a 


388  Alsace  and  Lorraine  [ch.  xvn 

prudence  and  courage  of  a  statesman  what  all  German  patriots  have 
been  yearning  for  during  the  last  fifty  years,  would  never  venture  on 
a  war  of  conquest.  The  tradition  that  Alsace  and  Lorraine  belonged 
once  to  Germany  has  never  been  forgotten  by  the  people.  German 
statesmen  claimed  these  provinces  in  1815,  but  Russia  supported 
France  in  resisting  their  claim.  One  of  our  most  popular  German 
poets,  Max  von  Schenkendorf,  who  died  in  181 7,  wrote: — 
"  Doch  dort  in  den  Vogesen 

Liegt  ein  verlornes  Gut, 

Da  gilt  es,  deutsches  Blut 

Vom  Hollenjoch  zu  losen." 
But  an  offensive  war  against  France,  to  recover  that  "  lost  patrimony," 
would  have  been  impossible  in  Germany. 

'  Events,  however,  have  happened  for  which  Germany  is  not  re- 
sponsible. France  has  attacked  Germany  with  the  avowed  purpose 
of  annexing  German  soil.  The  French  army  has  been  beaten  back, 
and  the  German  army,  in  pursuing  the  enemy,  finds  itself  in  actual 
possession  of  Alsace  and  Lorraine.  The  sacrifices  on  the  part  of 
Germany  have  been  enormous :  there  is  hardly  a  German  family  from 
the  Vistula  to  the  Rhine  which  is  not  in  mourning.  It  is  a  mercy 
that  there  have  been  no  German  reverses,  and  that  the  atrocities  of 
former  French  invasions  have  not  been  repeated.  There  would  have 
been  a  feeling  of  righteous  anger  and  fury  before  which  no  stone 
would  have  remained  upon  another  at  Paris.  It  is  a  mercy  that  this 
feeling  of  revenge  does  not  exist.  But  a  new  current  of  national 
feeling  has  sprung  up  in  Germany,  which  rests  simply  on  facts,  and 
which  no  King,  no  Minister,  would  be  able  to  resist.  Alsace,  they 
say,  is  ours,  and  our  sons  shall  not  have  died  in  vain.  The  thousands 
and  thousands  of  German  hearts  that  lie  buried  in  Alsace  and  Lorraine 
have  made  that  soil  German  once  more.  Were  Prussia  to  yield 
Strassburg  and  Alsace,  she  would  cease  to  be  Prussia. 

'  In  answer  to  your  first  question,  therefore,  I  have  no  doubt  that 
Count  Bismarck  did  say  what  M.  Jules  Favre  reported  him  to  have 
said,  that,  whether  the  inhabitants  of  Alsace  hate  us  or  no,  we  shall 
hold  Alsace  for  Germany. 

'  You  say  "  it  would  surprise  you  to  find  that  I  thought  these  people 
could  properly  be  annexed  to  Germany,  if  their  heart  is  in  France  as  their 
country."  My  answer  is  this.  To  conquer  a  province  for  the  sake  of 
territorial  aggrandizement,  and  to  annex  people  who  do  not  Nvish  to  be 
annexed,  would  be  an  outrage  of  the  moral  sense  of  Europe.  This 
is  what  France  intended  to  do.  To  hold  a  hostile  province  which  has 
been  conquered  in  a  defensive  war,  and  with  it  the  people  who  inhabit 
that  province,  is  an  evil,  I  grant,  but  it  may  be  a  necessary  evil,  and  it 


1870]  Alsace  and  Lorraine  389 

can  never  be  a  crime.  Anyhow,  a  culprit  who  is  sent  to  prison  has 
no  right  to  complain  that  he  is  being  annexed.  I  say  nothing  of  the 
language  of  Alsace  and  Lorraine,  for  the  annexation,  if  it  takes  place, 
does  not  take  place  on  linguistic  grounds.  I  say  nothing  of  the 
friendly  or  unfriendly  feeling  of  the  people,  for  the  annexation  is  not 
advocated  on  sentimental  grounds. 

'  The  annexation  is  the  result  of  a  war  forced  upon  Germany,  and 
the  occupation  of  French  territory  must  be  justified  on  military  and 
strategic  grounds.  Germany  is  determined  to  make  herself  as  safe 
against  France  as  she  can  make  herself,  and  no  Power  in  Europe 
would  gainsay  her  right,  nay,  her  duty,  to  do  what  she  considers  best 
for  her  future  security. 

'  The  frontier  line  that  is  to  protect  Germany  against  France  can 
hardly  be  considered  a  matter  to  be  settled  by  a  Congress  of  diplo- 
matists :  it  can  be  properly  settled  by  a  Military  Commission  only. 
Count  Bismarck  knows  perfectly  well  that  a  disaffected  province  is  no 
addition  to  the  strength  of  a  country,  but  he  would  probably  bow  to 
the  judgement  of  Count  Moltke  in  determining  the  positions  that  seem 
best  to  secure  the  safety  of  Germany.  On  such  points,  however,  the 
opinion  of  military  authorities  from  other  countries  might  justly  claim 
to  be  heard,  and  might  induce  the  German  strategists  to  draw  the  line 
so  as  to  include  as  little  as  possible  of  purely  French  soil,  and  to  annex 
as  few  as  possible  of  purely  French  inhabitants.  The  question  of 
Luxemburg  might  possibly  be  reopened  and  facilitate  arrangements 
in  Alsace  and  Lorraine.  I  believe  that  the  statements  of  the  hostile 
feeling  pervading  all  classes  of  society  in  Alsace  are  exaggerated.  It 
is  true  that  I  judge  from  the  accounts  published  by  German  travellers  ; 
but  they  were  published  before  the  war,  and  when  no  one  thought  of 
annexation.  As  to  accurate  statistics,  they  are  to  be  found  in  R.  Bockh, 
Der  Deutschen  Volkszahl  und  Sprachgebte(,'S>tTLY\w,  1870.  The  German 
portion  of  Alsace  comprises  half  a  million  inhabitants,  that  of  Lorraine 
297,500,  of  which  one-ninth  part  has  become  French  during  the  last 
two  centuries.  The  German  inhabitants  of  Alsace  and  Lorraine, 
though  they  were  never  considered  as  the  equals  of  true  Frenchmen, 
have  no  doubt  been  greatly  humoured  by  the  French  Government ; 
and  as  long  as  France  was  "  La  Grande  Nation,"  and  Germany  no 
nation  at  all,  it  was  easy  to  rouse  a  feeling  of  pride  among  the 
Alsacians,  not  against  Germany,  which  did  not  exist,  but  against 
the  petty  nationalities  of  Baden,  Hesse,  Wurtemberg,  Bavaria,  &c. 
In  future,  when  France  will  be  no  longer  "  La  Grande  Nation,"  though 
always  "une  grande  nation,"  the  idea  of  being  a  German,  and  not 
a  Frenchman,  will  be  less  intolerable  than  heretofore. 

'  And  if  there  are  people  in  the  annexed  portions  of  Alsace  and 


390  Military  Conference  [ch.  xvn 

Lorraine  who  cannot  bear  the  idea  of  belonging  to  Germany,  surely 
it  is  not  too  much  to  expect  from  their  patriotism  that  they  should 
follow  the  example  of  thousands  of  German  families  which  emigrated 
to  Philadelphia  when  Alsace  was  annexed  to  France.  When  the 
flower  of  a  nation  is  ready  to  die  for  their  country,  those  who  have 
the  option  of  emigrating  from  Alsace  to  France  proper  are  not  so 
greatly  to  be  pitied. 

'  My  great  anxiety  through  all  this  war  has  been  the  unfriendly 
feeling  that  is  springing  up  between  England  and  Germany.  The 
whole  future  of  the  world  seems  to  me  to  depend  on  the  friendship  of 
the  three  Teutonic  nations,  Germany,  England,  and  America.  If 
Germany  is  estranged  from  England,  she  must  become  the  ally 
of  France  and  Russia,  which  would  mean  another  century  of 
imperiaHsm  and  despotism.  Can  nothing  be  done  to  heal  the 
breach  ? ' 

To  Dr.  Abeken. 
Translation.  October  7,  1870. 

' . .  .  The  idea  of  a  Congress  is  ridiculous,  but  it  is  much  liked, 
especially  among  the  diplomatists,  though  Gladstone  does  not  care 
for  it.  .  .  .  He  would  like  to  treat  the  matter  more  from  a  military 
point  of  view.  A  Military  Commission  would  deal  with  the  question 
in  a  more  technical  way,  and  there  would  be  less  talk  about  France's 
dishonour,  and  such-like  phrases.  Should  the  question  about  Luxem- 
burg come  up  again,  it  would  be  a  most  natural  thing  to  invite  the 
Powers  concerned  to  a  Military  Conference.  Of  course  I  understand 
nothing  of  all  these  matters,  and  I  only  speak  as  a  member  of  the  Parlia- 
ment of  "  public  opinion."  The  only  thing  for  which  I  feel  useful, 
and  perhaps  have  been  of  use,  is  to  keep  up  the  good  feeling  between 
England  and  Germany.  If  this  is  also  your  purpose,  please  consider 
me  at  your  service  at  any  time.     Ever  yours. 

'  Is  there  no  quicker  way  to  Versailles  than  via  Berlin  ? ' 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  October  9. 

'  Though  you  wish  for  no  congratulations  on  your  birthday,  I  must 
still  write  to  you,  to  comfort  you  in  your  loneliness.  Many,  many  who 
used  to  meet  you  on  this  day  with  joy,  are  gone  before  you,  and  you 
miss  their  presence  which  you  so  enjoyed.  But  they  are  lost  to  your 
sight  only,  not  to  your  heart,  and  that  which  really  belonged  to  you 
in  them,  can  never  be  lost  to  you.  Our  life  here  is  not  our  own 
work,  and  we  know  that  it  is  best  for  us  all,  just  as  it  is.  We  ought 
to  bear  it,  and  we  must  bear  it ;  and  the  more  patiently,  yes,  the  more 


1870]    Feeling  in  Germany  against  England     391 

joyfully  we  accommodate  ourselves  to  it,  the  better  for  us.  We  must 
take  life  as  it  is,  as  the  way  appointed  for  us,  and  that  must  lead 
to  a  certain  goal.  Some  go  sooner,  some  later,  but  we  all  go  the 
same  way,  and  all  find  the  same  place  of  rest.  Impatience,  gloom, 
murmurs,  and  tears  do  not  help  us,  do  not  alter  anything,  and  make 
the  road  longer,  not  shorter.  Quiet  resignation,  thankfulness,  and 
faith  help  us  forwards,  and  alone  make  it  possible  to  perform  the 
duties  which  we  all,  each  in  his  own  sphere,  have  to  fulfil.  May 
God,  who  has  laid  many  burdens  on  you,  give  you  the  courage  to 
bear  them  quietly  to  the  end.  The  darker  the  night,  the  brighter  the 
stars  in  the  heavens. 

'  We  have  had  a  delightful  time  in  North  Wales,  walking  every- 
where, as  if  we  were  as  young  as  ten  years  ago.  I  wish  Emilie  had 
come  to  England,  as  she  could  not  go  to  Paris ;  though,  if  she  has 
no  feeling  for  this  wonderful  uprising  of  the  German  Fatherland,  we 
should  not  have  had  much  peace  together,  for  I  can  think  of  hardly 
anything  else,  and  G.  is  more  German  even  than  I  am.  Even  for 
you  it  must  be  glorious  to  have  lived  to  see  these  great  events.  The 
sacrifice  is  great  and  terrible,  but  it  has  not  been  in  vain.  Peace 
cannot  be  far  off.  The  French  are  already  becoming  reasonable, 
and  should  be  thankful  to  have  a  province  like  Alsace,  only  half 
French  and  once  entirely  German,  which  they  can  give  up  without 
shame ;  the  shame  for  them  is  in  quite  a  different  direction,  not  in  the 
punishment,  but  in  the  light-hearted  folly  of  which  they  must  now  pay 
the  cost. 

'  We  have  still  a  little  money  by  us,  if  anything  special  is  wanted, 
and  plenty  of  warm  things  for  the  winter.  The  collections  in  England 
have  been  splendid.  Why  do  the  people  in  Germany  abuse  England 
so  ?  They  could  not  expect  England  to  go  to  war,  and  that  export 
of  arms  is  nothing.     Such  snarling  is  unworthy  of  Germany.' 

To  THE  Right  Hon.  W.  E.  Gladstone. 

Parks  End,  October  9. 

'  Dear  Mr.  Gladstone, — I  wish  the  French  could  be  made  to  see 
that  there  is  no  dishonour  in  taking  the  punishment  which  this  war 
has  brought  on  them.  If  Jules  Favre  can  bring  himself  to  call  the 
war  criminal,  can  he  wish  the  crime  to  go  unpunished,  or  does  he 
think  that  such  a  crime  can  be  atoned  for  by  a  mere  fine  ?  Jules 
Favre  and  all  who  protested  against  the  war  may  well  say,  "  Delicta 
maiorum  immeritus  lues,  Romane,"  &c.,  &c.' 


392  Siege  of  Parts  [ch.  xvn 

To  Mr.  Bellows. 

Parks  End,  October  ii. 
*I  was  glad  to  hear  so  promising  an  account  of  your  little  Max. 
I  have  a  little  boy  some  three  years  old,  and  I  imagine,  just  like  you, 
there  is  nothing  like  him.  I  am  sorry  to  hear  of  the  interruption 
of  your  Dictionary.  I  shudder  when  I  think  of  Paris.  I  spent  some 
happy  years  there,  and  have  still  several  old  friends  living  there,  and  to 
think  of  that  town  being  bombarded  !  And  yet  what  is  the  German 
army  to  do  ?  and  is  not  every  one  of  the  thousands  of  people  that 
have  been  killed  more  precious  than  the  whole  of  Paris  ? ' 

To  Dr.  Abeken. 

Translation.  Parks  End,  Oxford,  October  ii,  1870. 

'  Dear  Sir  and  Friend, —  ...  It  is  clearer  than  ever  to  me,  that 
if  you  wish  for  a  common  understanding  with  England,  you  will  find 
it  best  secured  on  a  military  basis.  That  Germany  has  a  right  to 
secure  her  position  strategically  is  granted.  It  remains  to  demon- 
strate, (i)  that  there  is  no  other  means  to  such  security  but  the 
annexation  of  Alsace  and  a  part  of  Lorraine ;  (2)  that  the  fortresses, 
which  threatened  Germany  formerly,  will  not  become  a  menace  to 
France  henceforth. 

'  There  are  in  England  also  some  voices  in  favour  of  a  ple'biscite  in 
the  parts  to  be  annexed.  To  me  it  seems  an  un-German  comedy, 
which  however  might  be  acted  in  Alsace  with  good  prospect  of 
success,  "  by  desire." 

'  The  French  refugees  are  very  numerous  in  England,  and  they 
make  mischief  in  all  circles  of  society.  Germany  is  too  great  to 
enter  upon  a  paper  war.  Also  with  regard  to  the  export  of  arms, 
nothing  can  be  done  before  Parliament  meets.' 

To  THE  Same. 

Translation.  Oxford,  Parks  End,  October  25. 

'First  of  all,  many  thanks  for  your  valuable  letter.  I  had  not 
expected  an  answer  from  you,  for  I  know  what  you  have  on  your 
shoulders  now,  but  it  was  a  great  satisfaction  to  me  to  know  that 
I  was  not  mistaken,  and  that  with  regard  to  England  our  goal  is 
the  same.  Much  might  be  said  with  regard  to  the  paths  to  this  goal, 
but  there  is  no  time  for  that  now.  Here  the  situation  of  things  is 
a  very  difficult  one.  Lord  Granville  is  neither  a  Clarendon  nor 
a  Palmerston,  but  he  has  the  best  intentions,  and  is  amiable  to  every- 
body. He  has  many  French  friends,  and  of  course  the  French  are 
everywhere  in  London  now.     The  Times  is  very  kind  at  present.     It 


1870]  Second  Letter  to  'the  People  of  England'   393 

has  printed  a  letter  of  mine  to-day,  which  I  enclose.  It  is  meant  for 
England,  of  course,  or  I  should  have  used  stronger  language.  The 
speech  of  Du  Bois-Raymond  is  much  too  strong  for  English  readers, 
and  would  only  rouse  ill  feelings. 

'  You  know,  perhaps,  that  a  French  loan  has  to-day  been  launched 
on  the  English  market.  You  know,  of  course,  also  that  a  German 
loan  would  have  great  success  here.  Though  it  does  Prussia  much 
credit  that  she  seeks  for  no  foreign  loans,  yet  in  so  doing  she  forgoes 
much  of  the  sympathy  which  in  England,  as  everywhere  else,  is  felt 
for  one's  debtors.  Many  of  the  most  eager  friends  of  the  French  are 
interested  in  the  French  funds — hinc  mtiliae  lacrymae  !  .  .  . 

'  If  I  can  be  of  any  help,  do  make  use  of  me.  My  influence  on 
the  Times  is,  however,  nil\  they  only  print  what  suits  them.  All  I  can 
do  is  to  make  what  I  write  palatable.' 

The  second  letter  to  '  the  People  of  England,'  in  the  Times 
of  October  22,  was  in  answer  to  M.  Aries  Dufour's  appeal 
to  the  English  nation  to  save  Alsace  and  Lorraine.  The  three 
last  letters  were  answers  to  '  Scrutator's '  letters  in  the  Times. 
It  is  an  open  secret  now  who  was  the  inspirer  of '  Scrutator's ' 
letters.  '  The  hands  were  the  hands  of  Esau,  but  the  voice  was 
the  voice  of  Jacob  ; '  and  before  he  wrote  his  last  letter  Max 
Miiller  felt  very  certain  that  he  '  was  called  on  to  withstand 
in  argument  one  of  the  most  powerful  athletes  of  our  time.' 

It  is  impossible  now  not  to  see  how  much  of  the  present 
ill  feeling  in  Germany  against  England  dates  from  the  year 
1870.  Without  swerving-  an  inch  from  the  position  of  neutrality 
rightly  observed  by  the  English  Government,  the  justice  of 
the  cause  for  which  Germany  was  fighting,  and  the  reckless 
wickedness  of  the  French  in  attacking  her,  might  have  been 
acknowledged  by  those  in  power,  whereas  Mr.  Gladstone's 
preference  for  the  Romance  over  the  Teutonic  nations  was 
well  known  in  Germany,  and  the  general  apathy,  if  not  anti- 
pathy, of  the  English  to  the  German  cause  was  universally 
attributed  in  Germany  to  his  influence. 

The  third  volume  of  Chips  came  out  in  the  autumn,  a  very 
large  edition  being  printed.  A  second  edition  of  Max  Miiller's 
Sanskrit  Grammar  also  was  brought  out.  Both  were  well 
received.     One  review  states  that : — 

*  Every  paper  in  INIr.  ]\Iax  Miiller's  third  volume  of  Chips  from 
a  German  Workshop  is  valuable.     Applied  to  them,  the  term  exhaustive 


394   Chips,  Vol.  Ill — Sanskrit  Grammar   [ch.  xvn 

has  really  a  meaning.  Mr.  Max  Miiller  always  draws  from  a  full  cask. 
He  does  not  write,  as  so  many  now  do,  because  he  is  expected  to 
say  something,  but  because  he  has  something  to  say.  The  subject 
does  not  make  him,  he  makes  the  subject.  His  range,  too,  is  some- 
thing enormous.' 

The  Globe  considered  that : — 

'A  more  delightful  volume  has  not  been  published  for  a  very  long 
time.  Bearing  marks  on  almost  every  page  of  the  profoundest  scholar- 
ship, it  is  absolutely  free  from  all  taint  of  that  pedantry  which  is 
the  besetting  sin  of  most  German  writers.' 

Of  the  Sanskrit  Grammar  a  review^er  says  : — 

'  It  has  been  the  aim  of  Mr.  Miiller  to  produce  a  work  which  should 
combine  the  clearness  of  Bopp  with  the  accuracy  of  Colebrooke  and 
the  native  writers  whom  that  great  scholar  took  as  his  model.  In 
this  his  success  has  been  so  great  that  the  Sanskrit  Grammar  for 
Beginners  is  by  far  the  best  book  that  can  be  put  into  the  hands  of 
a  student.  In  a  word,  it  combines  Oriental  fullness  and  accuracy  with 
the  European  method.  It  says  much,  both  for  the  progress  of 
Sanskrit  in  this  country,  and  for  the  value  of  Mr.  Miiller's  own  labours, 
that  this  admirable  Grammar  has  already  reached  a  second  edition.' 

To  E.  A.  Freeman,  Esq. 

November  12. 

*  I  thought  it  possible  that  my  new  volume  of  Chips  might  tempt 
you  to  a  review.  I  am  not  going  to  write  any  captatio  benevoleniiae, 
though  I  am  going  to  ask  a  favour.  In  the  two  essays  "  Are  there 
Jews  in  Cornwall  ? "  and  "  St.  Michael's  Mount,"  I  have  had  to  work 
through  a  good  deal  of  matter  with  which  no  one  is  so  familiar  as 
you,  viz.  ecclesiastical  antiquities.  I  want  very  much  to  know  from 
some  competent  person  whether  I  am  right  or  wrong.  Therefore 
the  favour  I  ask  is  this :  if  you  should  review  my  book,  would  you 
look  at  these  two  essays  more  particularly,  and  give  me  the  benefit 
of  your  criticism  on  any  points  where  I  may  have  gone  wrong? 
I  meant  to  have  written  to  you  to  ask  your  advice  on  these  essays 
before  they  were  printed,  but  I  know  you  are  a  busy  man,  and  there- 
fore did  not  wish  to  take  up  any  of  your  time.  In  the  essay  on 
"  Cornish  Antiquities "  you  will  find,  I  think,  that  we  hold  the  same 
opinions  on  English  Ethnology. 

'  I  am  quite  miserable  about  Gladstone.  England  will  never  have 
such  an  opportunity  again.  Now  it  is  lost,  irretrievably  lost.  With 
Germany  as  a  friend,  the  Black  Sea  question  would  have  been  solved 
amicably,  and  the  German  vote  in  America  would  have  kept  the  Irish 


1870]     Mr.  Gladstone's  Romance  Sympathies     395 

vote  in  order,  so  as  to  prevent  mischief  about  the  Alabama.     Now 
the  sin  is  sinned ! ' 

To  THE  Right  Hon.  W,  E.  Gladstone. 

Parks  End,  November  12,  1870. 
'  My  dear  Mr.  Gladstone, — I  am  surprised  to  hear  that  my  new 
volume  of  Chips  from  a  German  Workshop  has  not  yet  reached  you. 
I  have  written  to  my  publisher,  but  I  hope  that  by  this  time  the 
volume  may  be  already  in  your  hands.  No  doubt  the  mihtary 
authorities,  who  maintain  that  the  south-western  frontier  of  Germany 
is  not  secure  without  taking  in  part  of  Alsace  and  Lorraine,  ought 
to  be  fully  persuaded  that  they  do  not  deceive  themselves  and  render 
their  hue  of  defence  less  secure  than  it  is  at  present.  I,  of  course, 
know  nothing  of  military  science,  but  I  have  great  confidence  in  the 
calm  judgement  of  Moltke.  It  was  for  that  very  reason  that  I  thought 
a  Military  Conference  the  only  scheme  that  could  lead  to  practical 
results,  though,  as  long  as  cession  of  territory  was  excluded  on  prin- 
ciple, discussion  would  have  been  useless.  I  am  afraid  that  now 
a  conference  of  military  authorities  is  no  longer  possible.  I  have 
often  watched  with  wonder  a  pointsman  on  a  crowded  railway 
station,  who  holds  in  his  hands  the  fates  of  thousands,  and  who  by 
a  movement  of  his  hand,  hardly  perceptible  to  others,  sends  one 
train  to  the  right  and  the  other  to  the  left.  ...  I  feel  as  if  two  trains, 
both  holding  dear  friends,  had  just  started,  though  not  in  the  direction 
in  which  I  hoped  they  would  have  gone.' 

To  E.  A.  Freeman,  Esq. 

November  27,  1870. 
*My  dear  Freeman, — .  .  .  I  want  to  know  whether  I  am  right 
in  declining  Dr.  Bannister's  arguments.  Could  a  man  at  that  time 
have  held  land  under  a  Jew  ?  What  is  the  most  likely  meaning  of 
lejeu  ?  not  le  Jut/,  surely  ?  I  meant  Gladstone's  Roman  and  Romance 
sympathies  for  France,  and  his  utter  inability  to  appreciate  the 
character  of  the  struggle  now  going  on  between  Germany  and  France. 
He  is  fully  convinced  in  his  heart  that  every  German  is  a  heretic 
sive  Protestant,  a  barbarian,  and  a  villain.  He  might  make  a  few 
charitable  exceptions  in  favour  of  two  or  three  Germans  whom  he 
happens  to  know,  and  who  have  had  the  benefit  of  a  tub,  physical 
and  intellectual,  in  England.  Happily  the  feeling  towards  England 
in  really  influential  quarters  in  Germany  is  good.  Bismarck's  papers 
have  never  joined  in  the  anti-English  barking  of  the  newspapers. 
The  talk  about  the  exportation  of  arms  is  silly.  I  wish  the  French 
had  bought  their  arms  in  Germany.     The  sooner  there  is  an  end  of 


39^  First  Visit  to  Hazvarden         [ch.  xvn 

that  kind  of  international  law  the  better.  Let  everybody  sell  what 
he  can,  and  let  everybody  capture  what  he  can;  everything  else  is 
mere  deception  and  hypocrisy.  If  Gladstone  had  ever  to  confess 
that  he  was  the  writer  of  the  article  in  the  Edinburgh,  it  might  make 
mischief,  for  even  Bismarck  is  only  a  man.  But  what  the  real  states- 
men in  Germany  want  is  an  alliance  offensive  and  defensive  with 
England :  there  is  no  better  way  for  securing  peace  in  Europe. 
France  and  Russia  are  the  disturbers  of  the  peace ;  but,  with  the 
English  fleet  and  the  German  army  as  the  police  of  Europe,  no  cock 
would  dare  to  crow  at  Paris,  no  bear  would  growl  at  St.  Petersburg. 
England  might  have  had  the  alliance  of  Germany  for  the  asking,  and 
at  that  very  time  the  writer  in  the  Edinburgh  Review  calls  the  King 
of  Prussia  a  hypocrite,  Bismarck  a  villain,  and  the  German  people 
half-civilized  brutes ! ' 

To  his  mother  Max  M tiller  writes: — 

Translation.  November  29. 

*  I  never  said  I  should  like  to  be  a  Frenchman,  but  that  I  should 
like  to  see  France  strong  again,  for  strong  neighbours  are  good  for 
keeping  a  country  up  to  the  mark,  and  keep  it  from  arrogance.' 

Early  in  December  Max  Miiller  paid  the  first  of  several 
pleasant  visits  to  Havv^arden  Castle.  He  woke  early  in  the 
morning  to  find  a  white  world,  and  looking  through  the 
window  saw  Mr.  Gladstone  making  his  way  alone  through 
the  snow  to  early  morning  church.  He  willingly  braved  the 
elements  later  in  the  day  to  secure  a  quiet  talk  with  the  Prime 
Minister. 

To  HIS  Wife. 

Ha  WARDEN  Castle,  December  10,  1870. 
'  I  shall  not  have  much  time  before  breakfast,  but  I  just  wanted 
to  let  you  know  that  here  I  am,  quite  safe.  A  fine  large  place,  full 
of  people.  The  Bernstorffs  are  not  here ;  too  busy  in  London.  General 
Burnside  was  here,  dined,  and  then  went  off  to  New  York  for 
a  week.  He  is  a  fine  fellow — just  like  a  strong,  tall,  English  general — 
and  he  is  truly  German,  and  has  told  Mr.  Gladstone  some  useful 
truths.  Frederick  Peel  is  here  and  Mr.  Haywood,  all  very  pleasant. 
No  talk  yet  with  Mr.  Gladstone,  except  about  University  matters,  but 
the  fight  will  come,  I  expect.' 

December  11. 

'  There  is  so  much  snow  that  everybody  had  to  stay  in.  However, 
Mr.  G.  and  I  took  a  walk  through  the  snow  and  talked  it  all  over, 
and  I  told  him  that  any  German  statesman  who  gave  up  Strassburg 


1870]  Vmtors  at  H award  en  397 

deserved  to  be  hanged,  and  he  shook  himself  a  litde,  but  I  think 
he  begins  to  see  that  we  Germans  are  not  such  ogres  as  he  thought. 
G.  is  an  old  friend  of  Abeken's,  but  had  lost  sight  of  him/ 

To  Dr.  Abeken. 

Translation.  Oxford,  Parks  End,  December  13,  1870. 

'  Dear  Friend, — Your  letter  of  December  5  arrived  here  in  good 
time  last  Friday,  just  when  I  was  leaving  for  Hawarden  Castle,  where 
Gladstone  had  invited  me.  Count  BernstorfF  was  to  be  there,  but 
could  not  get  away  from  London.  General  Burnside  was  there, 
a  good  ally  of  the  German  cause.  Above  all,  however,  I  must  tell 
you  that  Mr.  Gladstone  and  Mrs.  Gladstone  keep  your  name  in 
friendly  and  grateful  memory;  both  send  their  kindest  regards  to 
you,  and  Mr.  Gladstone  expressed  repeatedly  how  sad,  though 
unavoidable,  it  was  in  this  earthly  existence,  that  the  personal  inter- 
course with  men  whom  we  had  learnt  to  love  and  value  highly  had 
to  be  broken  off.  It  was  most  fortunate  that  I  could  communicate  to 
G.  the  greater  part  of  your  letter ;  it  made  a  great  impression  on  him. 
As  I  told  you  before,  Gladstone's  sympathies  are  by  no  means  for 
Germany,  neither  is  he  familiar  with  the  German  language  or  litera- 
ture, or  the  German  character  or  ways  ;  also  the  French  refugees  have 
taken  great  hold  upon  him.  He  distrusts  Germany,  especially  Prussia, 
and  certain  unceremonious  demonstrations  have  put  him  into  a  bad 
humour.  But  he  would  like  to  be  persuaded,  that  is  clear  to  me, 
and  if  once  he  perceives  the  justice  of  the  German  claims  he  is  sure 
to  be  loyal  to  his  perceptions.  The  Due  de  Grammont  has  mystified 
him  so  much,  that  Gladstone  confessed  him  to  be  unreliable.  Bene- 
detti's  letter  in  the  Standard  made  it  easy  for  me  to  refute  the  Duke 
by  means  of  the  Count.  If  Benedetti  keeps  his  promise  of  continuing 
the  letters,  the  only  thing  remaining  of  the  two  cats  will  be  the  tails ! 

*  Our  conversation  dealt  chiefly  with  the  provinces  to  be  surrendered. 
According  to  G.,  all  our  feeling  of  human  dignity  is  outraged  by 
forcing  even  one  single  being  to  give  up  his  nationality.  Of  course 
I  could  only  rejoin  that  our  feelings  would  be  still  more  outraged 
by  shooting  down  even  one  man,  and  that  in  order  to  avoid  this 
alternative,  i.e.  war,  the  surrender  of  certain  provinces  with  their 
inhabitants  has  to  be  taken  into  consideration.  Then  followed  the 
question  of  the  real  or  apparent  necessity  of  the  Vosges  frontier. 
I  could  only  reply  that  this  was  a  question  for  experts  in  military  and 
strategic  history,  and  had  been  discussed  continually  since  1648,  and 
that  friend  as  well  as  foe,  German  as  well  as  Frenchmen,  were  per- 
fectly at  one  on  this  point. 

*  The  question  is  whether  a  short  representation  of  this  matter,  with 


398  Dislike  of  England  in  Germany  [ch.  xvn 

which  every  lieutenant  of  the  Prussian  Staff  is  capable  of  dealing, 
would  be  adequate  now.     At  the  close  I  could  only  add  that  at  the 
present  juncture  of  affairs,  and  in  the  present  mood  of  the  German 
people  and  army,  a  statesman  who  allows  himself  to  be  compelled  to 
surrender  Strassburg  by  threats  and  not  by  force  would  be  considered 
guilty  of  high  treason.     G.  replied  that  the  greatest  mistakes  of  the 
statesmen  of  our  century  lay  in  giving  greater  consideration  to  the  phy- 
sical than  to  the  moral  powers,  and  that  the  realization  of  the  German 
wishes  would  become  a  misfortune  for  Germany.     Of  course  I  could 
only  reply  that  Germany  had  the  right  and  was  in  duty  bound  to 
decide  the  question,   and  that  she  alone  would  have   to   bear   the 
consequences  and  the  responsibility.     Many  interesting  conversations 
followed,  but  I  do  not  know  whether  they  are  of  any  interest  to  you. 
Gladstone,  of  course,  only  spoke  for  himself,  and  he  remarked  several 
times  :    "  This  is  my  opinion.     What   the  Cabinet   thinks   is   quite 
a  different  question."     He  considers  the  feeling  in  England  not  at 
all  unfriendly  towards  Germany,  and  I  must  confess  that  the  German 
Press  seems  to  me  much  more  hostile  than  the  English.     How  comes 
this  ?     In  England  it  is  supposed  that  the  German  Press  says  nothing 
which  is  not  sanctioned  by  highest  authority.     This  is  a  general 
opinion,  very  difficult   to   correct.     If  Germany  wishes   an   under- 
standing with  England  in  the  future,  both  sides  must  agree  to  work 
for  it.     The  opponents  of  a  German-English  alliance  do  not  fail  to 
work  against  it.     I  told  Gladstone  clearly  that  the  only  sure  guarantee 
for   the   peace    of  Europe    consisted   in    combined   action   between 
Germany  and  England,  and  if  the  fleet  of  England  and  the  army 
of  Germany  took  up  again  their  old  fraternal  relations  no  cock  in 
France  would  crow,  no  bear  in  the  East  would  growl.     I,  of  course, 
remarked  in  our  conversations  that  he  must  consider  me  zfranc-tireur, 
as  I  had  never  worn  a  uniform  and  never  would  wear  one,  and  that 
the  happiness  of  two  sister  nations,  in  whose  union  the  happiness  of 
mankind  consisted,  was  my  earnest  wish.    There  were  several  members 
of  Parliament  present,  and  also  some  other  influential  people,  and 
I  had  sometimes  to  maintain  a  sharp  conflict,  but  "  the  losses  on  our 
side  were  not  important." 

'  I  threw  in  occasionally  a  hint  that  hostile  relations  between  Germany 
and  England  would  force  the  former  to  found  a  formidable  navy,  also 
that  the  German  vote  in  America  had  up  to  the  present  neutralized 
the  Irish  vote.  I  stayed  at  Hawarden  till  last  night,  and,  though 
I  have  accomplished  nothing,  we  have  certainly  parted  friends. 

'  I  heard  from  the  German  Embassy  that  a  messenger  was  leaving 
next  Thursday,  and  that  he  might  take  a  letter.  This  gives  me  an 
opportunity  of  sending  you  a  volume,  at  the  end  of  which  you  will 


1870]  Letter  to  Fontane  399 

find  about  eighty  letters  to  Bunsen :  some  of  them,  I  think,  might 
interest  you. 

'  My  wife  sends  her  kindest  regards.  We  wish  you  a  bright  Christmas, 
bright  through  that  which  alone  can  give  us  true  joy,  i.  e.  the  con- 
sciousness of  having  done  our  duty  and  having  attained  great  things. 
Should  you  think  that  the  sincere  gratitude  of  one  unknown  might 
be  welcome  to  our  great  dux  and  auspex,  I  ask  you,  should  the 
opportunity  occur,  to  give  expression  of  my  feelings  of  admiration 
and  gratitude  to  Count  Bismarck ;  you  will  do  it  so  much  better  than 
I  could  do  it  myself.' 

Besides  several  relatives,  many  of  Max  MUller's  school  and 
University  friends  were  taking  active  part  in  the  great  war, 
as  the  following  letter  to  Fontane,  the  novelist,  shows : — 

Translation,  Parks  End,  December  20,  1870. 

'  My  dear  Fontane, — Nothing  for  a  long  time  has  given  me  greater 
pleasure  than  your  letter.  I  had  indeed  seen  in  the  papers  that  you 
had  escaped  with  a  whole  skin,  but  I  am  glad  to  hear  at  first  hand 
that  you  have  returned  to  Berlin  well  and  strong,  and  that  all  goes 
well  with  you.  The  feeling  here  against  Germany  is  bad,  and  from 
pure  ignorance ;  in  Germany  the  feeling  seems  even  worse  against 
England,  and  from  the  same  cause.  It  makes  one  wild,  and  I  have 
hardly  any  other  thought  than  how  one  can  help  to  cure  this  evil. 
Help  as  far  as  you  can ! ' 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  Oxford,  December  20. 

'  One  gets  no  rest  with  this  terrible  war,  and  there  seems  small  hope 
yet  of  peace.  I  had  a  most  interesting  visit  at  Gladstone's  from  December 
9-12.  It  was  a  great  honour,  and  it  is  possible  it  has  done  some 
good.  He  wrote  the  whole  time,  so  we  had  to  stay  in  the  house,  and 
many  were  the  discussions.  Bismarck  is  much  disliked  in  England : 
he  does  mad  things,  and  who  knows  what  enemies  he  may  make. 
Well,  I  have  done  my  best,  and  heard  much  that  was  interesting. 
Also  I  get  some  news  from  Versailles,  but  that  is  between  us.' 

To  Professor  Bernays. 

Translation.  Parks  End,  December  21,  1870. 

'  My  dearest  Friend, — I  feel  with  you  the  horrors  of  this  time,  and 
though  I  am  so  proud  of  the  heroism  of  the  German  nation,  I  am 
nevertheless  ashamed  to  think  how  often  the  world  looked  upon  the 
great  spiritual  victories  of  the  Fatherland  with  scorn  and  indifference, 


40O  Klaus  Groth^s  Quickborn         [ch.  xvn 

and  now  is  on  her  knees  because  we  have  learnt  to  aim  our  bullets 
with  accuracy  and  skill.  However,  I  trust  that  the  wild  beast  will  soon 
retire,  and  that  the  spirit  in  Germany  will  attain  the  upper  hand.  At 
all  events,  Nemesis  has  arisen  with  all  grandeur,  and  to  have  lived  to 
see  the  fall  of  Imperialism  is  a  comfort  to  me.  I  was  somewhat 
entangled  in  controversy  which  was  more  of  an  ethical  than  political 
nature.  My  adversary  was  Gladstone,  but  we  have  parted  friends. 
The  feeling  in  England  is  not  good,  for  many  reasons  ;  but  it  seems 
to  me  that  the  German  feeling  towards  England  is  still  more  childish. 
Till  Germany  and  England  recognize  that  they  are  sister-nations, 
there  will  be  no  calm  in  Europe.  We  all  must  help  to  that  as  far  as 
we  can.  I  have  constructed  the  new  volume  of  my  Chips  with  that 
thought  underlying  it.  .  .  .  Renan  is  in  Paris,  Mohl  told  me,  who  is  in 
London.  London  is  crowded  with  Frenchmen,  which  creates  much 
sympathy  with  France,  especially  in  Society.  Here  in  Oxford  every- 
thing is  quiet  and  calm,  and  I  am  decorating  the  Christmas  tree  for  my 
four  children.  My  work  proceeds  slowly,  for  there  is  hardly  any  time 
for  anything  but  for  the  reading  of  newspapers.  And  what  are  you 
doing  ?  Pattison  is  well,  always  the  same. — Always  in  old  friendship, 
yours.' 

To  Professor  Klaus  Groth. 

Translation.  Oxford,  December  22,  1870. 

'  Your  Quickborn,  received  to-day,  reminds  me  of  my  letter-debts, 
which  I  would  gladly  have  paid  long  ago,  but  one  lives  in  such 
a  tumult,  one  can  neither  read  nor  write,  from  the  quantities  to  read  in 
the  papers.  So,  first  of  all,  my  thanks  for  this  new  sign  of  life  and 
affection.  I  shall  make  my  way  through  it,  as  it  is  now  vacation. 
I  hope  you  have  received  the  third  volume  of  my  Chips,  which  now 
and  again  will  remind  you  of  me.  I  have  read  your  dedication  to 
the  Crown  Prince  with  delight,  and  what  you  write  of  Bismarck  is 
cheering  and  encouraging.  Yes,  the  times  are  great,  but  I  wish  the 
deluge  of  blood  were  over,  or  the  animal  in  man  will  become  all- 
powerful,  and  we  shall  never  come  to  our  senses.  However  fine  and 
elevating  may  be  the  heroic  courage  of  the  German  nation,  killing 
does  not  belong  to  the  fine  and  free  arts.  God  grant  an  honourable 
and  lasting  peace  may  reward  the  countless  sacrifices  made  by  the 
nation.  For  a  time  I  felt  alarmed  for  Kiel  and  its  inhabitants.  Your 
letter,  which  I  translated  at  once  and  sent  to  the  Times,  was  never 
published.  The  English  like  deeds  and  stories  of  horror,  and  their 
taste  is  for  highly-spiced  and  peppered  articles  !  I  hope  you  need  not 
report  the  same  of  Holstein.     I  have  had  to  fight  a  good  deal  in  the 


1870]  Delegate  of  University  Press  401 

English  papers.  I  hope  that  is  now  over.  I  hope  you  and  yours  are 
well,  and  that  the  clouds  over  your  happiness  are  passing  away :  it 
grieves  me  to  think  that  the  sunshine  is  not  so  bright  there  as  two 
years  ago.  But  all  that  belongs  to  the  small  evils  of  life,  and  one 
learns,  with  such  terrible  evils  all  round  one,  to  bear  the  little  ones 
more  easily.  Shall  we  meet  this  year  ?  I  hope  so,  but  one  dare  make 
no  plans.  On  the  whole,  it  goes  well  with  us ;  the  children  are  well. 
I  am  at  times  plagued  with  colds,  as  lately  when  Stockhausen  was  in 
Oxford,  and  sang  beautifully,  and  I  had  to  stay  in  bed  I  I  saw  him 
the  next  morning  :  he  looked  well,  and  was  in  splendid  voice.  To-day 
some  venison  and  Marzipan  arrived  here,  doubtless  from  Forsteck. 
Has  your  wife  received  the  new  edition  of  Deutsche  Liebe?  Now 
farewell,  and  may  our  paths  meet  in  1871/ 

In  November  of  this  year  Max  Muller  had  been  elected 
a  Delegate  of  the  University  Press.  In  July,  1883,  he  was 
made  a  Perpetual  Delegate.  He  resigned  in  1896,  finding 
that  he  could  no  longer  spare  the  time  from  his  private  work 
and  ever-increasing  correspondence ;  partly  also  from  a  growing 
feeling  of  the  great  responsibility  resting  on  the  Delegates  in 
conducting  such  an  important  business,  a  responsibility  which 
he  felt  he  was  not  strong  enough  or  young  enough  to  face  any 
longer. 

To  Matthew  Arnold,  Esq. 

Oxford,  December  27,  1870. 

'  My  dear  Arnold, — I  wanted  to  read  your  book  before  writing  to 
thank  you  for  it,  and  having  read  it,  I  can  thank  you  all  the  more 
honestly.  It  requires  much  courage  to  write  about  religious  questions, 
because  almost  every  word  you  touch  is  oily  and  befingered,  and  it  is 
difficult  to  handle  them  without  besmutting  one's  hands.  But  it  is  all 
the  more  necessary  to  rescue  the  old  words,  to  dust  them,  and  rub 
them  clean,  and  then  show  them  to  the  world  in  their  original  purity 
and  splendour,  as  you  have  done.  Your  justification  of  St.  Paul 
is  most  successful,  and  I  expect  it  will  tell  more  than  many  learned 
controversies.  You  know  that  the  inevitable  decay  of  words  forms 
part  of  the  science  of  language,  and  therefore  your  chapter  on  the 
vicissitudes  of  the  Pauline  phraseology  interests  me  all  the  more.  It 
is  but  a  chapter  of  modern  mythology,  but  a  very  important  one. 
I  send  you  by  book  post  a  copy  of  some  introductory  lectures  of  mine, 
on  the  Science  of  Religion.  I  have  only  had  sixteen  copies  struck  off, 
and  I  send  one  to  you,  because  if  you  look  at  them,  you  will  see  at 
I  D  d 


402  Etymological  Meaning  of  Words 

once  what  my  object  was  in  delivering  them.  It  will  take  several 
years  before  I  publish  what  I  want  to  say  on  the  whole  subject,  but 
in  the  meantime  I  wanted  you  to  know  that  we  are  working  in  the 
same  mine,  I  on  a  very  low  level  as  yet,  you  on  a  high  level,  but  on 
the  whole  with  the  same  purpose.  There  was  one  expression  in  your 
book  with  which  I  could  not  agree.  The  etymology  of  words  is  not 
a  merely  fanciful  argument ;  the  etymological  meaning,  if  accurately 
elaborated,  is  a  most  important  historical  element.  There  was  a  time 
when  the  etymological  meaning  of  a  word  represented  what  really  was 
to  the  early  framers  of  language  the  most  striking  feature  of  an  object, 
or  the  most  important  characteristic  of  a  new  conception.  To  put  an 
etymology  in  the  place  of  a  definition,  is  no  doubt  foolish,  but  in  the 
history  of  thought  etymology  holds  a  most  important  place.  Plato's 
chaff  is  only  directed  against  those  who  would  use  etymology  instead 
of  a  definition ;  that  there  could  be  a  historical  element  in  etymology 
was  beyond  Plato's  horizon.  At  the  same  time  I  do  not  defend  R.'s 
etymologies.  I  send  you  the  new  edition  of  Deutsche  Liebe,  because 
the  translation  of  your  poem  strikes  me  as  really  successful,  I  was 
glad  to  hear  that  you  feel  more  kindly  towards  Bunsen;  Froude 
wrote  to  me  to  tell  me  the  same.     Yours  very  truly.' 


CHAPTER  XVIII 
1871 

King  of  Burma.  Correspondence  with  Abeken  and  Gladstone.  Taine's 
Lectures.  Peace  Festival.  Letter  from  Crown  Prince.  Death  of 
father-in-law.  Ems.  Interviews  with  Emperor  and  Crown  Prince. 
Dr.  Stainer.     New  edition  of  Lectures  on  Lajiguage. 

The  year  opened  gloomily  for  France  and  Germany,  and 
even  for  many  in  England,  who  were  watching  the  great 
contest  with  beating  hearts.  Max  Miiller  found  little  rest, 
and  the  correspondence  with  Mr.  Gladstone  and  Dr.  Abeken 
at  Versailles  was  actively  carried  on.  January  found  him 
preparing  a  second  edition  of  Volume  III  of  C-^z/^j-,  of  which 
the  first  edition  of  3,000  copies  was  nearly  sold  out. 

Max  MUller  received  about  this  time  a  Burmese  letter  from 
the  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs  at  Mandalay,  conveying  the 
thanks  of  Mindoon  Min,  the  enlightened  King  of  Burma,  for 
his  translation  of  the  Dhammapada,  and  expressing  his  great 
pleasure  in  hearing  of  the  desire  of  the  learned  Professors  of 
Europe  and  America  to  know  more  about  the  doctrines 
of  Buddha,  and  ending  with  a  promise  to  print  the  three 
'  Beedaghats  ^ '  in  Pali,  and  send  copies  for  distribution  to  the 
English  Commissioner.  If  this  work  was  ever  begun,  it  was 
doubtless  stopped  by  the  accession  to  the  throne  of  the  savage 
Thebaw,  and  the  subsequent  conquest  and  annexation  of 
Burma  by  the  English.  It  was  reserved  for  King  Chula- 
langkorn,  the  present  enlightened  King  of  Siam,  to  print 
the  whole  Tripitaka. 

To  Sir  Charles  Murray  (Minister  at  Lisbon). 

Parks  End,  Oxyorh,  Ja?iuary,  1871. 
'  IMy  dear  Sir, — I   should  have  answered  your  letter  before,  but 
Christmas  brings  many  duties  and  distractions  to  a  man  with  a  family 
^  Pitakas,  the  sacred  canon  of  Buddhism. 
D  d  2 


404  Metaphor  [ch.  xvm 

of  young  children,  who  at  the  same  time  enjoys  the  privilege  of 
Christmas  dinners  in  College,  and  has  to  perform  important  duties  at 
College  meetings.  The  Warden,  to  whom  I  mentioned  your  letter,  told 
me  he  would  write  to  you  and  send  me  his  letter,  but  he  has  not  done  so. 
I  believe  his  chief  object  was  to  remind  you  of  your  portrait  for  our  hall. 

'Now  with  regard  to  "metaphor" :  that  seems  to  me  an  inexhaustible 
subject,  and  one  that  can  be  approached  from  many  points.  No 
single  writer  could  treat  it  with  anything  like  completeness,  and  every 
contribution,  however  special,  would  be  useful.  The  array  of  lan- 
guages which  you  can  either  command  or  call  to  your  assistance  is 
ample  for  making  a  successful  attack,  and  I  should  think  that  the 
library  of  the  Academy  at  Lisbon  would  give  you  the  opportunity  for 
verifying  any  statements  for  which  you  do  not  like  to  trust  to  your 
memory.  A  book  on  metaphor,  even  in  English  alone,  could  be 
made  not  only  very  instructive,  as  revealing  the  secret  working  of  the 
national  mind,  but  very  amusing,  particularly  if  the  languages  of  the 
people  and  their  slang  expressions  are  taken  into  account — a  stunner, 
a  fizzer,  a  brick,  &c.  I  have  myself  treated  the  subject  of  metaphor 
in  its  most  general  aspects  in  the  eighth  lecture  of  my  second  series, 
and  as  you  may  not  have  that  volume  by  you,  I  send  you  a  copy,  the 
Foreign  Office  having  kindly  relaxed  the  extreme  rigour  of  their 
recent  rule  against  sending  anything  in  the  Ambassador's  bag.  How 
such  a  treatise  on  metaphor  should  be  arranged  is  more  than  I  could 
venture  to  suggest.  If  it  was  arranged  according  to  the  principal 
subjects  from  which  metaphors  are  borrowed,  it  would  become  interest- 
ing as  a  study  of  national  character,  for  "  out  of  the  abundance  of  the 
heart  the  mouth  speaketh."  But  any  collection  carefully  made,  with 
reference  to  authorities,  so  that  it  might  be  used  and  quoted  by  sub- 
sequent writers,  would  certainly  be  well  received. 

*If  at  any  time  my  services  can  be  of  any  use  to  you  in  your 
literary  researches,  please  to  command  them  at  all  times  in  the  name 
of  the  Mallard  \  Yours  faithfully, 

'  Max  MUller.' 
To  Dr.  Abeken. 

Translation.  Oxford,  Parks  'Y.^ti,  January  3,  187 1. 

*  Dear  Friend, — Many  thanks  for  your  last  letter.  I  greatly  value 
your  full  answers  to  my  letters,  when  your  whole  time  and  strength 
belongs  to  the  sacred  cause  of  the  Fatherland,  when  your  heart,  your 
head,  and  your  hands  are  sure  to  find  litde  time  and  rest.  If  I  could 
only  do  more  here !  The  desire  to  do  so  is  not  wanting.  I  have  again 
had  an  interesting  correspondence  with  Gladstone.     I  sent  him  the 

*  The  All  Souls  crest.  Sir  C.  Murray  had  been  a  Fellow  of  the  College. 


1871]         Work  for  Sick  and  Wounded  405 

pamphlet  by  Seidewitz  (1867),  Prussia  s  Rights  wilh  regard  to 
Luxemburg,  and  as  he  wrote  to  me  that  the  last  Luxemburg 
telegrams  had  made  him  less  hopeful  about  a  better  understanding, 
I  communicated  to  him  in  English  form  your  opinions  with  regard  to 
Luxemburg.  His  answer  of  December  29  was  good.  He  knew  of 
no  answer  then  to  Lord  Granville's  letter,  which  had  been  sent  via 
Berlin,  but  he  admitted  that  there  is  no  doubt  that  military  urgency 
might  justify,  in  given  circumstances,  a  Power  actually  at  war  in 
taking  into  its  own  hands  provisionally  the  settlement  of  certain  ques- 
tions, which  could  only  be  finally  disposed  of  by  a  joint  authority. 
The  Whigs  are  very  angry  at  Lord  Stanley's  famous  interpretation  of 
the  Luxemburg  affair.  .  .  . 

'  It  seems  to  me  it  is  necessary  to  think  of  the  future  even  more 
than  of  the  present,  and  I  confess  that  all  my  hopes  of  a  great  future 
for  Europe  are  based  on  the  alliance  of  the  two  great  Teutonic  sister- 
nations  on  the  Continent  and  in  the  isles.  Everything  else  seems  artificial 
and  only  temporary ;  this  alone  is  organic  and  lasting.  But  it  is 
indeed  a  hard  task.  In  England  the  war  has  now  become  a  party 
question  :  the  Tories  will  make  it  a  reason  for  their  attack  on  the 
Government.  That  is  good  on  the  whole;  it  will  lead  to  a  com- 
bination of  Tories  and  Radicals,  and  so  the  great  Liberal  party — the 
support  of  the  Government — will  be  forced  to  take  up  a  firm  position 
with  regard  to  foreign  policy.  Even  a  change  of  Government,  though 
not  probable  at  present,  would  not  do  any  harm,  for  it  would  con- 
centrate English  power  and  English  opinion.  It  would  be  wiser  if 
Germany  did  not  underestimate  England's  military  and  naval  power, 
and  thus  weaken  the  desire  for  an  English  alliance.  England's  fleet 
is  stronger  than  ever,  her  people  are  strong  and  patriotic,  her  credit  is 
the  best  in  the  world.  (That  makes  me  think  the  German  loan  in 
England  ought  to  have  been  introduced  differently — a  better  god- 
mother, and  a  fatter  or  finer  child !) 

'My  wife  sends  kindest  regards.  She  is  German  through  and 
through,  and  she  and  my  three  girls,  the  youngest  only  six  years 
old,  work  indefatigably  for  the  wounded.  Henry  Acland  is  doubtful 
about  the  German  cause,  but  he  was  much  pleased  with  your  thought 
about  him,  and  he  reciprocates  your  kind  messages. 

'  I  consider  Count  Bismarck's  message  to  me  the  greatest  reward 
for  the  little  I  have  been  able  to  do.' 

To  Professor  Bernays. 
Translation.  Parks  Y.^Ti,  January  5,  1871. 

'  I  should  have  answered  your  last  letter  before  this,  if  I  had  not 
waited  to  send  you  a  copy  of  the  Letters  on  the  War,  which  arrived 


4o6  Bismarck's  Thanks  to  M.  M.     [ch.  xvm 

to-day  at  last,  and  was  sent  off  at  once.  You  will  see  in  them  the 
character  of  the  controversy  between  me  and  Gladstone,  even  without 
having  the  letters  written  by  "  Scrutator  "  at  hand.  I  am  quite  convinced 
that  Gladstone's  accomplice  has  muddled  a  good  deal,  for  Gladstone, 
in  spite  of  all  his  weaknesses,  is  after  all  a  very  fine  fellow.  One 
does  not  become  Prime  Minister  of  England  without  having  a  very 
strong  back.  His  sympathies,  alas  !  are  altogether  Norman,  not  Saxon, 
but  his  feeling  for  what  is  right  is  stronger  than  all  his  other  feelings. 
It  is  not  true  to  say  that  he  could  have  prevented  the  war,  for,  in  spite 
of  his  great  majority,  he  would  have  become  impossible  for  his  office, 
had  he  threatened  France,  or  tried  to  interfere  in  the  struggle  between 
France  and  Germany.  Now  matters  stand  very  differently  in  England. 
The  war  has  become  a  party  question :  the  Tories,  with  the  extreme 
Liberals,  will  attack  the  Ministry  on  the  basis  of  foreign  policy.  This 
will  force  the  powerful  Liberal  party  to  a  decided  and  recognized 
policy,  and  that  is  best  for  us.  The  German  feeling  towards  England 
is  incomprehensible  to  me,  and  the  Government  does  not  in  the  least 
encourage  it.  The  war-power  of  England  is  greater  than  it  has  ever 
been — the  fleet  is  ready  to  strike,  the  whole  nation  is  patriotic,  and 
the  wealth  is  colossal.  It  is  worth  while  to  have  such  an  ally,  and 
Germany,  conscious  of  her  own  greatness,  ought  to  speak  as  peer  to 
peer,  not  as  a  hysterical  housewife  to  a  housemaid.  Well,  we  will 
hope  for  the  best. 

'  Just  think,  I  have  received  the  warmest  thanks  from  Bismarck  from 
Versailles ! ' 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  January  7,  1871. 

'  I  have  sent  you  a  little  book  with  my  letters  on  the  war.  I  lately 
received  from  Versailles,  through  Abeken,  most  grateful  thanks  from 
Bismarck.  I  will  copy  the  letter  for  you :  "  First,  my  thanks  for  what 
you  have  done  and  are  doing  for  Germany,  for  our  holy  cause !  This 
expression  of  gratitude  is  not  from  me  alone.  I  write  in  the  name  of 
Count  Bismarck,  who  spoke  to  me  only  yesterday  with  a  full  and 
thankful  recognition  of  your  great  and  influential  activity  during  this 
time,  which  he  has  heard  of  through  the  newspapers.  He  is  rejoiced 
to  have  such  an  ally."     What  can  one  desire  more  ? ' 

To  THE  Same. 
Translation.  January  15,  187 1. 

'  The  news  of  John's  ^  death  was  a  great  shock :  what  misery  for 
his  poor  mother.  .  .  .  The  whole  land  must  be  full  of  mourning — even 

^  His  cousin,  John  von  Basedow,  shot  hy  franc-tireurs. 


1871]  Gasparin  s  Pamphlet  407 

here  one  cannot  enjoy  life,  when  one  reads  every  day  of  these  battles, 
and  one  sees  no  hope  of  peace.  Here  in  England  sympathies  are 
much  divided ;  pity  is  naturally  on  the  side  of  France,  and  Bismarck's 
policy  has  alienated  many  people  in  England.  But,  on  the  whole,  all 
goes  well.  The  screams  in  the  papers  signify  little  :  much  of  it  comes 
from  French  refugees,  who  swarm  in  London.  The  better  classes  are 
inclined  to  Germany,  but  not  to  Bismarck !  I  am  not  an  admirer  of 
his,  highly  as  I  prize  the  work  he  has  done  for  Germany,  and  truly 
as  I  recognize  that  the  whole  aim  of  his  life  has  been  the  welfare  of 
his  Fatherland.  Such  work  cannot  always  be  carried  out  with  perfectly 
clean  hands.  On  the  other  hand,  I  cannot  agree  with  the  German 
abuse  of  the  French  nation.  The  French  as  a  nation  fight  bravely, 
and  show  that  they  are  by  no  means  so  depraved  and  perishing  as  the 
writers  in  the  German  papers  think.  At  all  events  I  hate  such  hector- 
ing, as  if  the  Germans  were  the  general  guardians  of  morality,  and 
privileged  possessors  of  all  virtues.  If  this  war  goes  on  long,  all 
Europe  will  be  a  desert,  and  one  must  be  ashamed  of  mankind.  The 
wild  beasts  behave  better.' 

To  THE  Right  Hon.  W.  E.  Gladstone. 

January  29. 

* ...  As  long  as  one  reads  the  pages  of  Comte  de  Gasparin's 
pamphlet,  one  seems  to  live  in  a  pure  and  bracing  atmosphere,  one 
begins  to  breathe  freely,  one's  heart  expands,  everything  around  seems 
bright  and  full  of  hope.  But  we  cannot  live  on  mountain-tops,  we 
must  live  and  work  in  the  low  cloudy  valleys,  and  when  one  is  brought 
again  face  to  face  with  real  life  and  real  men,  the  heart  fails  and  all 
hopes  vanish.  I  knew  there  were  such  men  in  France  as  the  writer 
of  this  pamphlet.  There  is  the  true  and  noble  ring  of  the  old  French 
mettle  in  all  his  words  and  all  his  thoughts.  If  a  country  can  still 
produce  such  men,  it  need  not  despair  about  its  fate.  I  feel  quite 
ashamed  when  I  see  German  writers  speak  of  the  whole  of  France  as 
one  vast  Babylon,  implying  at  the  same  time  that  Heaven  has  granted 
to  us  the  exclusive  privilege  of  all  virtue  and  godliness.  The  only 
pity  is  that  in  France  the  good  men  withdraw  from  the  front  of 
political  life  ;  Gambetta  rules,  while  Gasparin  retires  to  Switzerland. 

'  Count  Gasparin's  scheme  seems  to  me  quite  perfect.  It  gives  in 
reality  far  more  to  Germany  than  she  will  get  by  annexing  Alsace  and 
Lorraine.     It  would  be  a  blessing  to  Germany,  to  France,  to  Europe. 

'  But  can  it  be  ?  First  of  all,  there  is  a  large  and  at  present  very 
powerful  party  in  Germany,  which  is  no  longer  accessible  to  any 
arguments.  We  must  take  men  as  they  are,  and  we  must  take  nations 
as  they  are ;  and  a  nation  flushed  with  victory  and  crushed  by  grief  is 


4o8  Goldwin  Smith  on  the  War     [ch.  xvm 

not  like  a  nation  in  its  right  mind.  It  is  with  nations  as  with  indi- 
viduals. How  often  do  we  see  a  friend  rushing  into  misery,  whom  we 
might  save  if  we  could  hold  him  by  the  arm,  or  make  him  listen  to 
reason.  That  fight  against  the  irrational  and  unconquerable  powers 
of  life  is  the  most  distressing;  yet  I  do  not  say  that  reason  should  not 
fight  against  unreason  :  I  only  fear  that  in  this  case  the  fight  is  hopeless 
from  the  beginning. 

'  Suppose  Germany  and  France  placed  their  fate  in  the  hands  of 
Count  Gasparin,  what  could  he  do?  Could  he  persuade  the  Great 
Powers  to  guarantee  the  neutrality  of  Alsace  ?  Such  a  guarantee 
implies  a  readiness  to  go  to  war  for  the  sake  of  others.  If  it  does  not 
mean  that,  it  means  nothing.  Does  that  readiness  exist  in  England  ? 
Is  there  any  party  in  England  strong  enough  to  carry  such  a  measure, 
and  to  commit  the  country  to  such  contingencies  ?  Depend  upon  it, 
Germany  would  demand  very  stringent  guarantees,  for  Lord  Stanley's 
words  after  the  conclusion  of  the  treaty  for  the  neutrality  of  Luxem- 
burg have  been  a  terrible  lesson.  I  should  consider  England  capable 
of  the  most  generous  and  heroic  eflforts,  but  from  what  I  see  of  the 
temper  of  the  people,  and  the  strange  attraction  between  the  most 
opposite  political  centres,  I  have  grave  doubts  as  to  the  possibility  of 
such  a  guarantee  receiving  the  approval  of  Parliament. 

'  Then  comes  the  question  about  Russia,  and  whatever  the  personal 
character  of  the  present  Czar  may  be,  no  Pvussian  statesman  would 
help  to  heal  that  sore  to  which  he  trusts  as  the  best  security  for  the 
success  of  the  Russian  policy  of  the  future. 

'Count  Gasparin's  pamphlet  has  no  doubt  been  sent  to  Count 
Bismarck.  If  not,  I  should  gladly  send  it  through  Dr.  Abeken.  It  is 
a  masterpiece  in  every  sense. 

*If  Alsace  is  too  small  by  itself,  why  not  make  it  a  Canton  of 
Switzerland  ?  It  would  thus  join  an  established  political  system,  and 
enjoy  the  traditional  prestige  of  Swiss  neutrality.    But  I  have  no  hope.' 

The  growth  of  feeling  in  England  against  Germany  and 
for  France,  was  often  a  sore  trial  to  Max  Miiller,  but  he  was 
refreshed  from  time  to  time  by  sympathetic  letters  from  many 
English  friends,  and  especially  from  Mr.  Goldwin  Smith,  at 
that  time  living  at  Ithaca  in  the  United  States,  who  took 
a  wide,  unprejudiced,  historical  view  of  the  whole  question. 
He  was  always  for  the  annexation  of  Alsace  and  Lorraine, 
'  provided  a  good  natural  frontier  could  be  formed,'  and  con- 
sidered the  bombardment  of  Paris  'a  disagreeable  necessity' ; 
whilst  he  asked,  in  a  letter  to  Max  Miiller,  '  what  demon  had 


1871]  Feeling  about  Strassburg  409 

entered  into  his  countrymen,  that  when  they  are  delivered  by 
a  wonderful  display  of  German  heroism,  and  at  vast  expense 
of  German  blood,  from  the  peril  which  has  always  been 
hanging  over  them,  .  .  .  they,  instead  of  blessing,  curse  their 
deliverers  ? ' 

To  THE  Right  Hon.  W.  E.  Gladstone. 

Parks  End,  February  2. 
'  Before  thanking  you  for  your  letter,  I  wrote  to  Mr.  Delane  to  ask 
him  whether  he  would  allow  me  to  write  a  review  of  Count  Gasparin's 
pamphlet,  and  thus  bring  his  ideas  before  the  English  public.  I  have 
his  reply  to-day,  and  he  simply  declines.  He  evidently  considers  the 
matter  as  settled.  I  have  sent  the  pamphlet  to  Dr.  Abeken.  Un- 
fortunately there  were  some  remarks  in  it  which  are  sure  to  offend 
Count  Bismarck,  particularly  where  he  tells  him  that  by  his  decision  about 
Alsace  he  has  to  prove  whether  he  possesses  mere  hahilete  or  political 
genius.  However,  the  real  difficulty  is  that  even  Count  Bismarck  is 
not  strong  enough,  supposing  he  was  influenced  by  the  future  rather 
than  by  the  present,  to  oppose  the  military  party,  and  I  believe  the 
feeling  in  Germany  is  so  strong  that  for  any  statesman  now  to  give  up 
Strassburg  would  be  simply  to  abdicate.  There  is  a  poetry  about 
Strassburg  which  is  stronger  than  all  prose.  Nations  have  their  rough- 
hewn  destinies  to  fulfil;  at  present  I  see  no  help.  I  just  see  the 
morning  papers  :  I  do  not  believe  in  the  conditions  of  peace ;  it 
would  be  a  challenge  to  Nemesis,  and  people  in  Germany  have  not 
read  history  to  no  purpose.  But  it  is  hard  to  mediate  between  intoxi- 
cation and  madness.' 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  February  7. 

'  The  feeling  in  England  is  less  excited.  They  must  yield  to  the 
inevitable.  So  I  have  not  packed  up,  but  have  had  to  let  people  know 
I  could  live  in  Germany  as  well  as,  if  not  better  than,  here  !  I  have 
not  anything  to  complain  of,  and  continue  to  have  most  interesting 
letters  from  Gladstone,  the  Prime  Minister.  He  is  a  very  clever  and 
honourable  man,  and  would  willingly  do  his  best,  but  he  has  a  difficult 
position.' 

The  following  letter  is  given  by  permission,  as  showing  the 
feeling  of  an  unbiassed  historian  on  the  recent  events : — 

SOMERLEAZE,    WeLLS,    SOMERSET, 

February  19,   1871. 
'My  DEAR  MtJLLER, — I  have  got  a  wild  scheme  in  my  head,  in 
which  you  may  possibly  be  able  to  help  me.     It  seems  pretty  certain 


4T0  Freeman  on  the  War  [ch.  xvm 

that  the  German  troops  are  to  march  into  Paris.  Now  that  is  a 
thing  which  does  not  happen  much  above  once  in  a  thousand  years, 
and  a  thing  for  which  I  have  been  earnestly  longing  ever  since  976. 
For  the  first  time  in  my  life,  I  wish  to  see  a  military  spectacle. 
I  have  said  ever  since  1851,  that,  if  L.  N.  Buonaparte  was  to  be 
guillotined,  and  they  would  only  send  me  word,  I  would  come  and 
see  the  show,  in  whatever  part  of  the  world  I  might  be.  And  this 
show  will  be  quite  as  satisfactory  as  the  other.  But  is  it  possible  ? 
Is  it  safe  ?  I  do  not  doubt  that  you  have  means  of  finding  out ; 
you  doubtless  know  some  of  the  swells  at  Versailles  or  somewhere. 
If  you  could  give  me  a  lift,  I  should  be  deeply  obliged.  If  I  could 
get  to  see  the  Emperor's  triumph  without  jeopardizing  mine  own 
self,  I  should  greatly  enjoy  it,  and  I  might  make  something  of  it  for 
the  public  advantage.  If  I  did  go,  I  should  hke  to  get  Bryce,  Pindar, 
or  somebody  to  come  with  me. 

'  I  hope  you  have  by  this  time  seen  both  my  Pall  Mall  letters.  To 
my  utter  amazement,  the  Tivies  has  gone  and  reprinted  the  second  of 
them.  That  paper  has  hitherto  made  it  a  fixed  rule  never  to  mention 
me  or  any  writing  of  mine,  or  to  let  my  name  appear,  except  at  the 
Mid-Somerset  election,  when  they  could  not  well  help  it.  What 
does  this  mean  ? 

'  I  am  sending  for  the  Academy,  as  I  see  you  have  been  writing  in  it. 
Do  you  altogether  forbid  me  to  say  "  Kikero  "  ? 

*  Yours  very  truly,  Edward  A.  Freeman.' 

To  Dr.  Abeken. 

Translation.  Parks  End,  February  20,  187 1. 

'  Dear  Friend, — I  enclose  the  letter  of  a  friend  of  Germany,  Mr. 
Freeman.  I  do  not  know  if  his  name  is  familiar  to  you.  He  is  one 
of  the  best  historians  and  public  men  in  England — a  man  like 
Treitschke,  indefatigable  with  his  pen,  and  always  to  the  point  and 
incisive.  He  has  been  faithful  to  our  cause  to  the  end,  from  solid 
true  conviction.  His  letter  will  show  you  his  desire,  and  I  thought 
it  worth  while  to  send  it  just  as  it  is.  You  know  the  English  too 
well  to  think  that  a  man  like  Mr.  Freeman  would  keep  anything  in 
the  background.  He  is  one  who  has  belonged  to  us  from  a  deep 
conviction ;  he  keeps  himself,  however,  quite  independent,  and  the  only 
thing  it  is  possible  to  do  for  him  is  a  kindness  hke  the  one  he  asks 
for.  We  need  all  the  help  in  England  which  we  can  procure  by 
honest  means.  I  often  ponder  now  over  the  change  of  affairs  at  the 
death  of  Peter  III,  and  I  still  hope  that  we  may  win  the  battle  of 
Burkersdorf,  though  it  be  only  on  the  diplomatic  battle-field,  but  may 
we  win  it  before  it   is  too  late.     Do  not  underestimate  England : 


1871]     Jewish  Thought  in  Greek  Mythology       411 

she  has  only  twenty  million  inhabitants — but  they  are  EngHshmen, 
and  they  come  from  Schleswig-Holstein.' 

The  answer  to  Mr.  Freeman's  request  was  as  follows : — 

March  lo,  1871. 

*  My  dear  Freeman, — I  had  a  letter  from  my  friend  at  Versailles : 
he  says  it  was  impossible  to  write,  for  nothing  was  settled  from  hour  to 
hour  about  the  entry,  in  fact  there  has  been  no  entree  trioviphale.  It 
is  curious  that,  in  spite  of  all  provocation,  my  friend — and  he  reflects 
Bismarck,  I  believe,  most  faithfully — clings  to  the  idea  of  a  friendship 
between  England  and  Germany  as  the  only  safety  for  the  future. 
Have  you  seen  "Scrutator's"  book?  I  have  not,  but  I  heard  from 
a  friend  this  morning  that  it  is  simply  libellous,  and  that  legal  action 
should  be  taken.  If  so,  I  am  certain  that  Gladstone  had  nothing  to 
do  with  it,  but  that  it  is ,  pur  et  simple! 

The  following  letter  shows  that,  amidst  all  the  excitement 
of  the  times,  Max  MUlIer  did  not  allow  his  work  to  flag  : — 

To  THE  Right  Hon.  W.  E.  Gladstone. 

Parks  End,  February  21,  1871. 

*  You  will  think  me  very  unreasonable,  I  am  afraid,  if  just  now 
I  trouble  you  with  a  question  about  Homeric  Mythology  and  Religion, 
I  should  not  venture  to  do  so,  did  I  not  think  that  you  or  your  son 
could  answer  my  inquiry  by  a  simple  Yes  or  No.  The  fact  is,  I  am 
preparing  a  new  edition  of  my  Lectures  on  the  Science  of  Language, 
and  as  they  are  to  be  stereotyped,  I  have  to  revise  them  carefully 
once  more.  When  I  came  to  the  passage  in  my  Second  Series 
where  I  had  tried  in  a  few  lines  to  explain  your  view  of  the  origin  of 
Greek  Mythology,  I  did  not  know  what  to  do.  From  reading  your 
book  I  certainly  thought  that  you  admitted  an  early  stratum  of  Jewish 
thought,  on  which,  by  metamorphic  and  other  processes,  the  religion 
and  mythology  of  Homer  were  built  up.  In  a  letter  which  you  did 
me  the  honour  to  address  to  me,  you  proposed  a  different  theory, 
or  at  least  you  gave  me  a  new  insight  into  your  views  on  the  subject. 
You  seem  to  admit  there  an  independent  origin  for  the  religious 
and  mythological  opinions  of  the  Greeks  and  the  Jews,  and  to  be 
satisfied  with  the  admission  of  a  later  contact  betv/een  Aryan  and 
Semitic  ideas.  Under  these  circumstances  I  thought  the  best  plan 
would  be,  if  you  allowed  me,  to  print  in  a  note  some  extracts  from 
your  letter,  and  I  therefore  send  you  the  original,  that  you  may  look 
at  it  once  more,  and  tell  me  whether  you  object  to  my  proposal.  In 
either   case,  whether  you  say  Yes   or  No,   I  must  request   you  to 


412  Abeken's  Views  of  England     [ch.  xvm 

return  me  the  letter,  for  I  hope  my  children  will  hereafter  value  it  as 
much  as  myself 

'  PS. — I  sent  Count  Gasparin's  pamphlet  to  Dr.  Abeken,  but  I  have 
not  heard  from  him  lately.  I  am  almost  afraid  my  last  letters,  which 
I  sent  through  the  English  Post  Office,  and  not  as  before  through  the 
Prussian  courier,  may  not  have  reached  him.  I  feel  as  strongly  as  ever 
that  Count  Gasparin's  proposal  is  the  right  one,  but  I  cannot  believe 
that  at  present  it  is  possible.  Though  I  am  an  extreme  Radical  in 
University  politics,  I  was  glad  that  Professor  Fawcett's  amendment 
was  rejected  ;  it  would  have  weakened  our  position  in  the  conflict 
which  is  coming.  But  I  feel  convinced  that  the  sooner  the  last  trace 
of  protection  is  removed  from  the  study  of  Theology  at  Oxford  the 
better.  At  All  Souls  our  Fellowship  Examination  is  entirely  in 
Modern  History  and  Law,  and  no  clergyman  ought  to  have  any 
chance  of  being  elected ;  yet  out  of  fifteen  fellows  elected  under  the 
new  Statute,  four  are  clerical.     They  won  in  a  fair  and  open  field. 

'M.M.' 
From  Dr.  Abeken. 

Translation.  February  21,  1871. 

'  It  is  a  decisive  week  on  which  we  have  entered.  The  armistice 
ends  with  the  end  of  the  week,  unless  there  is  a  guarantee  for  peace. 
It  would  be  a  terrible  misfortune  if  war  had  to  begin  again;  the 
indignation  of  our  army  would  be  greater  than  ever.  At  this  moment 
Thiers  is  sitting  with  Prince  Bismarck  for  their  first  exchange  of 
views  in  the  same  salon  in  which,  at  the  beginning  of  November,  he 
was  discussing  an  armistice.  He  might  then  have  had  just  the  same 
conditions  as  now,  and  what  must  he  feel  when  he  thinks  what  his 
country  might  have  been  spared,  had  he  or  his  colleagues  then 
listened  to  reason  !  We  too  should  have  been  spared  much,  if  false- 
hood and  vanity  had  then  been  less  powerful  in  France.  People  tell 
us  to  be  moderate ;  they  forget  what  moderation  is  required  if,  after 
our  new  efforts  and  sacrifices,  we  make  no  harder  conditions  than  we 
made  in  November.  You  say,  "  Make  peace  with  France  and  make 
peace  with  England."  No  one  can  long  for  it  more  truly  than  we. 
Every  alliance  is  repulsive  to  us  except  friendship  with  England. 
But  the  tone  of  the  debates  in  Parliament,  nay,  even  the  tone  of  the 
Queen's  Speech,  which  tries  to  deal  equal  measure  to  both  sides,  and 
for  that  very  reason  deals  unequal  measure,  cannot  advance  peace 
and  friendship.  What  might  England  have  done,  what  misery  might 
England  have  prevented,  if,  at  the  beginning  of  the  war,  it  had 
possessed  the  moral  courage  to  call  Good  good.  Wrong  wrong, 
Right  right.  Crime  criminal !  It  has  turned  out  well  for  us  that 
England  did  not  act,  now  that  the  world  has  witnessed  this  new  act 


1871]  Letters  on  the  War  413 

in  the  solemn  drama  of  history.  The  French  sentiments  of  the 
people  of  Alsace  and  Lorraine  prove  to  me  all  the  more  strongly  that 
we  are  in  duty  bound  to  bring  back  this  German  race  to  the  German 
Empire.  We  have  to  cure  them  of  a  fearful  disease,  that  future 
generations,  though  blushing  at  the  disgrace  of  their  forefathers,  may 
grow  up  to  a  healthy  life.  It  is  inconceivable  how,  while  German 
language  and  German  morals  remained  unchanged,  the  love  for  the 
old  German  Fatherland  has  become  almost  extinct.  Thmk  of  the 
Protestants  of  Alsace,  of  the  Evangelical  clergy  of  Alsace  !  How  can 
they  be  so  blind  as  not  to  see  that  the  fate  of  the  Evangelical  Church 
in  Alsace  depends  on  their  union  with  Germany,  while  union  with 
France  implies  its  certain  extinction?  The  Roman  Catholics  in 
Germany  are  not  so  blind ;  and  their  leaders,  whose  home  is  not  in 
Germany,  but  at  Rome,  do  all  they  can  to  prevent  the  union  of 
Alsace  with  Protestant  Germany.' 

To  Dr.  Abeken. 

Translation.  Parks  End,  February  24,  187 1. 

*  Dear  Friend, — I  received  your  letter  this  morning,  and  I  am  indeed 
glad  to  hear  that  the  Crown  Prince  remembers  me  so  kindly.  I  wrote 
to  him  at  once,  and  enclose  the  letter,  asking  you  to  look  through  it 
and  hand  it  to  the  Crown  Prince  with  a  copy  of  the  Letters  on  the 
War.  I  send  the  book  by  post,  just  as  it  is;  there  was  no  time 
to  have  it  bound.  I  have  also  written  to  Gladstone,  after  having 
received  your  letter :  alas  I  the  Protestant  argument  has  no  effect 
on  him.  Lord  Shaftesbury  is  the  man  for  that;  he  has  already 
done  something  in  the  matter,  but  his  views  are  very  narrow.  Public 
opinion  is  getting  more  moderate  in  England.  The  only  thing  now 
is  to  wait — perhaps  our  enemies  may  do  good  service  to  us. 

'  I  sent  you  a  pamphlet  of  Count  Gasparin.  Gladstone  is  delighted 
with  it,  as  you  may  have  heard  ;  the  spirit  of  it  is  good.  I  could  not 
help  telling  Gladstone  that  Russia  would  never  think  of  helping  to 
heal  the  wound  :  many  plans  for  the  future  are  built  on  the  reopening 
of  this  wound. 

'  With  regard  to  Freeman,  do  what  you  can ;  ...  he  has  a  powerful, 
indefatigable  pen,  and  is  German  through  and  through.  Could  you 
not  persuade  old  Carlyle  to  write  or  to  say  something  very  amiable  ? ' 

To  THE  Right  Hon.  W.  E.  Gladstone. 

Parks  End,  February  27,  1871. 
'  My  dear  Mr.  Gladstone, — I  received  your  letter  this  morning, 
and  I  look  forward  with  great  interest  to  the  short  Memorandum  to 
which  you  refer.     I  believe  there  is  no  scholar  occupied  with  the 


414  Views  on  the  Peace  [ch.  xvm 

study  of  the  growth  and  spreading  of  religious  ideas,  who  has  not  had 
to  modify  some  of  his  own  opinions  on  the  subject  during  the  last 
ten  years.  The  evidence  has  become  so  much  larger  and  richer  and 
deeper,  that  we  are  forced,  whether  we  like  it  or  not,  to  assume  a  new 
standpoint  in  order  to  command  the  whole  field  that  is  open  before 
us.  I  sent  you  the  extract  from  Abeken's  letter  as  it  stood,  but 
I  marked  it  private,  private  as  it  were,  even  to  you,  intended  for  the 
dispassionate  spectator  of  the  grand  drama  of  history,  not  for  the 
Prime  Minister  of  England.  Otherwise  I  could  not  have  left  what 
Abeken  said  about  Moral  Courage  without  incurring  the  charge  of 
impertinence.  I  have  told  him  what  I  think  on  the  subject,  and  that  it 
is  easy  to  be  wise  post  factum.  With  the  same  intention,  I  sent  you  his 
frank  confession  about  the  state  of  feeling  in  Alsace  and  Lorraine. 
I  admit  it  was  a  surprise  to  me,  and  I  could  quote  statements  from 
recent  travellers  in  those  provinces  that  would  lead  to  different  con- 
clusions. But  before  all  things  it  is  right  that  the  truth  should  be 
known,  and  I  wanted  you  in  particular  to  know  it.  Lord  Granville 
possesses,  no  doubt,  information  on  the  subject  of  public  feeling 
in  Alsace  and  Lorraine  from  independent  sources,  and  he  would  not 
quote  Abeken  against  Abeken,  in  discussing  the  dangers  which  this 
Peace  may  bring  on  Europe.  The  difficulties  are  doubtless  very 
great,  yet  blood,  language,  and  religion  are  three  powerful  allies  in 
the  struggle  which  will  now  begin.     Yours  sincerely.' 

To  THE  Same.  February  28. 

'Dear  Mr.  Gladstone, — Accept  my  best  thanks  for  the  Memo- 
randum, of  which  you  sent  me  a  copy.  I  should  be  very  happy  to 
discuss  some  points  with  you  in  more  peaceful  times ;  this  Peace  is 
no  peace.  Yet  do  not  judge  the  statesmen  of  Germany  too  harshly. 
After  the  sad  experience  which  they  have  had  of  the  French,  they 
cannot  bring  themselves  to  believe  that  a  people  who  could  not 
forgive  Sadowa,  would  ever  forget  Sedan.  It  is  their  duty  to  think, 
first  of  all,  of  the  safety  of  the  country  committed  to  their  care.  They 
are  convinced  that  war  will  begin  again  whatever  they  do,  or  at  all 
events  they  think  that  the  only  chance  of  peace  is  the  hopelessness 
of  a  new  attack  on  the  part  of  France. 

'  As  you  told  me  in  your  letter  that  a  new  Bill  on  Clerical  Fellowships 
would  soon  be  presented  to  Parliament,  I  have  taken  the  liberty  to 
send  you  a  few  remarks  on  the  subject  of  Fellowships  in  general.  I 
have  watched  their  working  now  for  more  than  twenty-two  years,  being 
in  fact  one  of  the  oldest  residents  at  Oxford,  and  I  confess  I  should 
like  to  see  these  magnificent  resources  of  the  University  more  usefully 
applied  than  they  are  at  present.      My  remarks  on  Fellowships  in 


1871]  M.  Renan — M.   Taine  415 

general  I  should  be  quite  prepared  to  send  to  the  T'mes,  if  you  thought 
it  could  be  of  any  use.' 

To  M.  Renan. 

Oxford,  March  7,  1871. 

'  I  was  so  pleased  to  hear  that  you  and  Madame  Renan  had  not 
suffered  during  the  last  months,  and  that  you  are  well  enough  to 
resume  your  work.  Let  us  forget,  or  let  us  at  least  be  silent  on  the 
past ;  it  has  been  too  horrible.  I  know  you  are  as  strongly  French  as 
I  am  German,  but  that  does  not  prevent  both  of  us,  I  think,  from 
feeling  deeply  the  shame  and  degradation  which  that  war  has  brought 
on  the  race  to  which  we  belong  as  men.  We  feel  ashamed  if  we  are 
told  that  our  ancestors,  our  most  distant  ancestors,  were  simious; 
is  there  one  race  of  animals  so  savage,  so  brutal,  as  man  can  be  ?  nor 
does  there  seem  to  be  any  hope  of  progress  or  improvemicnt  with 
regard  to  our  ideas  respecting  war.  We  all  share  the  guilt  of  it,  we 
are  all  ready  to  take  part  in  it,  and  we  are  actually  proud  of  our 
efficiency  in  manslaughter.  I  know  of  one  redeeming  feature  only  in 
war :  it  shows  that  there  are  some  things  for  which  men  are  ready  to 
die ;  that  there  is  in  man  the  gift  of  martyrdom,  which  I  suppose  the 
brutes  do  not  possess ;  but,  apart  from  that,  we  must  all  hide  our  faces 
in  shame  and  grief.  No  doubt  the  best  you  and  Madame  Renan  can 
do,  is  to  go  away  for  a  time  so  as  to  have  complete  change.  In  a  few 
weeks  more  England  will  be  lovely  in  the  warmth  and  colours  of 
spring.  We  shall  certainly  be  at  Oxford  till  June,  and  my  wife  asks 
me  to  tell  you  and  Madame  Renan  that  she  hopes  you  will  come  and 
stay  with  us  at  Oxford.  There  are  two  rooms  at  your  disposal,  you 
would  find  plenty  of  work  at  the  Bodleian  Library,  and  nothing  could 
give  her  and  me  greater  pleasure  than  to  have  you  quietly  staying 
here  as  long  as  you  are  able.  If  you  would  only  let  us  know  a  few 
days  before  when  we  may  expect  you,  you  will  find  everything  ready 
for  you.  I  had  a  letter  from  M.  Taine  to-day ;  I  hope  the  University 
will  invite  him  to  give  us  a  course  of  lectures.  I  did  not  venture  to 
propose  you,  for,  though  we  are  advancing,  we  advance  slowly.  He 
would  lecture  in  French  on  some  period  of  French  Literature.  It  is 
not  settled  yet,  but  I  hope  it  will  succeed.' 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  March  ro. 

'  One  begins  to  live  quietly  again,  now  that  peace  is  made  :  it  was 
a  fearful  time,  and  one  keeps  thinking,  who  knows  when  it  may  begin 
again  ?  The  joy  in  Germany  must  be  immense.  The  Crown  Prince 
sent  me  word  I  ought,  as  an  old  friend,  to  have  sent  him  a  copy 
of  my  Letters  on  the  War.  I  have  done  so  now,  and  I  wrote  a  beautiful 
letter  too ! ' 


4i6  Lecture  on  Mythology  [ch.  xvm 

On  March  31  Max  Miiller  delivered  an  evening  lecture  at 
the  Royal  Institution  on  Mythology,  which  was,  as  usual, 
largely  attended.  It  was  some  years  before  this  that  his 
friend  Lord  Strangford  wrote :  '  Here  (in  England)  there  is 
no  school  of  Philology,  and  I  do  not  quite  hold  Max  Miiller 
guiltless  for  not  having  founded  one,  instead  of  going  off  into 
Comparative  Mythology.' 

As  the  Professorship  of  Modern  European  Languages  had 
been  abolished  when  Max  Miiller  accepted  the  new  Chair  of 
Comparative  Philology,  it  was  resolved  from  time  to  time 
to  invite  celebrated  foreigners  to  lecture  on  some  foreign 
language  or  literature,  and  this  year  the  Curators  were 
anxious  to  secure  the  services  of  M.  Taine.  The  following 
letter  gives  an  account  of  the  scheme,  with  some  hints  on 
lecturing : — 

To  M.  Taine. 

Oxford,  March  17,  1871. 

'  I  hasten  to  answer  your  kind  letter  as  far  as  I  can.  First,  as  to 
the  time.  The  fact  is  that  our  Summer  Term  is  over  the  first  week 
of  June,  and  very  little  work  is  done  during  the  last  week.  Therefore 
if  you  could  begin  before  Whit-Sunday,  you  would  probably  have 
a  better  audience.  Your  course  of  lectures  is  the  first  beginning 
of  a  new  experiment,  and  everything  will  depend  on  your  success. 
Oxford  is  an  extremely  difficult  place  to  lecture  in,  because  all 
audiences  are  very  mixed.  You  have  young  students,  you  have 
fellows  and  tutors,  you  have  Professors,  and  for  your  lectures  ladies 
also,  I  think.  It  is  difficult  to  hit  where  there  are  so  many  targets. 
I  do  not  expect  that  you  will  have  many  young  students,  and  you  may 
therefore  aim  a  little  higher.  I  should  lecture  as  if  I  were  addressing 
a  highly  educated  lady,  not  taking  much  for  granted,  making  every- 
thing clear  by  a  full  statement  of  facts,  but  then  drawing  out  the  very 
best  lessons  that  the  facts  will  yield.  For  that  purpose  your  philo- 
sophers and  moralists  would  be  more  useful,  perhaps,  than  your 
dramatists,  but  I  dare  say  you  are  right  in  selecting  the  latter.  My 
only  fear  is  that  the  classical  dramatic  writers  are  a  little  too  well 
known,  and  that  they  may  not  prove  sufficiently  attractive.  A  picture 
of  the  thoughts  and  manners  of  the  times  in  which  they  lived  would 
remedy  that  defect,  and  you  would  know  better  than  anybody  else 
how  to  place  before  us  the  political  and  intellectual  stage  on  which 
Racine  and  Moli^re  were  themselves  the  actors.  Lastly,  as  to  the 
language:   it  has  been  decided,  not  without  some  opposition,  that 


iSyi]  M.  Taine's  Lectures  417 

the  lectures  should  be  given  in  French.  But,  of  course,  many  of  your 
hearers  would  have  difficulty  in  following,  and  therefore  a  slow  and 
very  distinct  delivery  would  be  a  matter  of  great  consequence.  The 
lectures  are  open  to  every  member  of  the  University,  and  the 
invitation  to  lecture  comes  to  you  from  the  Vice-Chancellor,  in  the 
name  of  the  University.  The  lectures  are  delivered  at  the  Taylor 
Institution,  because  the  funds  for  paying  the  Lecturer  come  out  of 
Sir  Robert  Taylor's  bequest.  It  is  not  an  easy  task  which  you  are 
undertaking,  but  I  feel  very  sanguine  as  to  its  success.  If  you  want 
any  further  information  I  shall  be  most  happy  to  give  it.' 

M.  Taine  accepted  the  invitation,  and  arrived  in  Oxford 
soon  after  the  above  letter  was  written. 

Though  M.  Taine  was  not  actually  the  guest  of  the  Max 
Miillers,  residing  in  their  house,  he  was  constantly  with  them, 
and,  after  he  had  received  the  degree  of  Honorary  D.C.L., 
they  gave  a  very  large  party,  at  which  they  gathered  together 
all  the  leading  spirits  in  Oxford  to  meet  the  distinguished 
foreigner,  who  charmed  everybody  by  his  easy  and  agreeable 
conversation.  The  next  morning  the  appalling  news  of  some 
of  the  worst  deeds  of  the  Commune  was  in  the  papers,  and 
the  brilliant  Frenchman  was  an  altered  being;  he  was 
wounded  to  the  heart  by  the  savage  acts  of  his  countrymen, 
and  seemed  as  if  unable  to  look  any  one  in  the  face.  Happily 
his  lectures  were  already  finished,  and  he  left  immediately, 
deeply  commiserated  by  Max  Muller,  to  whom  he  acknow- 
ledged that  it  was  far  worse  than  the  humiliation  inflicted  by 
the  war  with  Germany. 

To  Rev.  G.  Cox. 

'  I  looked  at  Gladstone's  book  Homeric  Synchrofti'sm — it  is  very 
disappointing.  So  great  a  man,  so  imperfect  a  scholar  !  He  has  no 
idea  how  shaky  the  ground  is  on  which  he  takes  his  stand.  The 
reading  of  those  ethnic  names  in  the  hieroglyphic  inscriptions  varies 
with  every  year  and  with  every  scholar.  I  do  not  blame  them :  their 
studies  are  and  must  be  tentative,  and  they  are  working  in  the  right 
direction.  But  the  use  which  Gladstone  makes  of  their  labours  is  to 
me  really  painful,  all  the  more  so  because  it  is  cleverly  done,  and 
I  believe  bona  fide.' 

During   the    month   of  April    Max    MUller    accepted   the 
invitation  of  the  committee  who  were  arranging  the  German 
I  E  e 


4i8  German  Peace  Festival  [ch.  xvm 

Peace  Festival  in  London,  to  deliver  the  address  on  that 
occasion.  The  Festival  took  place  on  May  i,  and  was  a 
brilliant  success.  The  music,  the  artistic  tableaux  vivants,  the 
expression  of  deep  gratitude,  of  exultant  patriotism,  tempered 
by  the  thought  of  all  that  the  victory  had  cost  the  Father- 
land, can  never  be  forgotten  by  any  of  those  present.  Max 
Muller's  speech  throughout  struck  the  right  note,  and  he 
could  feel  from  the  first  how  he  carried  his  audience  with 
him.  The  translation,  which  is  given  in  the  Appendix,  had 
the  benefit  of  being  corrected  by  him. 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  Oxford,  May  3. 

'  My  speech  will  be  printed,  and  I  will  send  you  a  copy.  It  has 
been  much  discussed  in  the  English  papers.  It  was  not  an  easy  task. 
The  audience  was  a  very  mixed  one.  The  Ambassador  was  there, 
and  the  republicans,  &c.  Yes,  it  went  off  very  well,  and  I  am  glad 
I  undertook  it.  The  next  day  Lord  Granville,  the  Minister  for 
Foreign  Affairs,  asked  me  to  dinner.  To-day  I  received  a  most  kind 
letter  from  the  Crown  Prince,  written  by  himself.  ...  It  was  very  good 
of  him,  for  doubtless  he  has  many  letters  to  write.' 

By  gracious  permission  of  His  Majesty  the  German 
Emperor  the  letter  from  the  Crown  Prince  is  inserted  here : — 

Berlin,  i.  Mai  1871. 

'  Ich  habe  mit  aufrichtigem  Danke  und  ganz  besonderem  Interesse 
Ihre  Letters  on  the  War  entgegengenommen,  welche  Sie  die  Freund- 
lichkeit  hatten,  mir  zu  iibersenden. 

'  Mit  der  einmiitigen  Hingebung  unseres  Volkes  wahrend  der 
grossen  Zeit,  die  wir  durchkampft,  steht  in  schonem  Einklang  die 
patriotische  Haltung,  welche  unsere  deutschen  Briider,  oft  unter  den 
schwierigsten  Verhaltnissen  und  mit  Opfern  aller  Art,  bewahrt,  und 
durch  die  sie  sich  fiir  immer  einen  Anspruch  auf  die  Dankbarkeit  des 
Vaterlandes  erworben  haben. 

'  Dass  die  Erfahrungen,  welche  die  Deutschen  in  England  wahrend 
unseres  ruhmvollen  Krieges  gemacht,  nicht  immer  erfreulich  waren, 
ist  mir  freilich  bekannt.  Griinde  der  verschiedensten  Art  kommen 
zusammen,  um  eine  Verstimmung  zu  erzeugen,  die  hiiben  und  driiben 
von  alien  einsichtigen  und  patriotischen  Mannern  gleich  schmerzlich 
empfunden  ist. 

'  Meine  feste  und  zuversichtliche  Hoffnung  bleibt  es  aber,  dass 
dieselbe  bald  jenem  herzlichen  Einvernehmen  wieder  Platz  machen 


1871]  Letter  from  the  Crown  Prince  419 

wird,  welches  die  Natur  unserer  gegenseitigen  Beziehungen  und 
Interessen  verlangt.  Dieses  Ziel  wollen  wir  verfolgen,  unbeirrt  durch 
Aufregungen  und  Eindriicke  des  Augenblicks,  iiberzeugt,  dass  es  fiir 
das  Gedeihen  beider  Lander  ebenso  heilsam  wie  fiir  den  Frieden 
Europas  unerlasslich  ist. 

'  Sie  haben  Ihrerseits  niemals  aufgehort,  in  diesem  Geiste  thatig  zu 
sein,  und   es   ist   mir   deshalb   Bediirfniss,    Ihnen   meine    dankbare 
Anerkennung  fiir  Ihr  erfolgreiclies  Wirken  hierdurch  auszusprechen. 
'  Ihr  wohlgeneigter  Friedrich  Wilhelm,  Kronprinz/ 

Translation.  Berlin,  May  i,  187 1. 

*  I  have  received  with  much  interest  and  sincere  thanks  your  Letters 
on  the  War,  which  you  so  kindly  sent  to  me.  The  courageous  devotion 
of  our  people  during  all  the  great  time  of  the  war  is  in  beautiful 
harmony  with  the  patriotic  feeling  which  our  German  brethren  every- 
where have  shown,  often  under  the  most  difficult  circumstances,  and 
which  they  have  proved  by  sacrifices  of  all  kinds,  thus  securing  for 
themselves  for  ever  the  gratitude  of  the  Fatherland.  I  know  also,  only 
too  well,  that  the  experiences  of  the  Germans  in  England  during  our 
glorious  war  were  not  always  happy  ones.  Reasons  of  all  kinds 
combined  to  produce  a  discord  which  makes  itself  felt  as  painfully 
here  as  in  England,  by  all  really  discerning  and  patriotic  men. 

*  My  firm  and  confident  hope,  however,  remains,  that  this  discord 
will  soon  give  way  again  to  the  hearty  understanding  which  is  the 
natural  expression  of  our  mutual  relations  and  interests.  Let  us 
struggle  towards  this  goal,  unhindered  by  the  excitements  and  im- 
pressions of  the  moment,  convinced  that  this  common  understanding  is 
as  necessary  for  the  development  of  both  countries,  as  it  is  indispensable 
for  the  peace  of  Europe. 

'  You,  for  your  part,  have  never  ceased  to  act  in  this  spirit,  and 
I  therefore  feel  impelled  to  give  expression  to  my  grateful  recognition 
of  your  successful  efforts.  Your  well-wisher, 

'  Frederick  William,  Crown  Prince.' 

The  end  of  May^  Max  writes  to  his  mother :  '  The  scenes 
in  Paris  are  awful,  and  one  thinks  what  these  furies  would 
have  done  in  Germany  if  they  had  got  there.' 

During  the  latter  part  of  the  war  Max  Muller  had  carried 
on  an  interesting  correspondence  with  the  venerable  diplo- 
matist Lord  Stratford  de  Redclifife,  whose  sympathies  were 
entirely  German.  It  has  not  been  possible  to  recover  Max 
Muller's  letters.  Lord  Stratford  sent  him  a  poem  at  the 
close  of  the  war  in  praise  of  Germany,  which  was  published 

E  e  2 


420  Death  of  Father -in-Law — Ems      [ch.  xvm 

in  Germany  in  a  collection  of  poems  on  the  war,  and  had 
a  large  circulation. 

Only  a  month  after  the  Peace  Festival  Max  MUller  lost 
his  father-in-lawj  after  a  very  short  illness.  As  he  had  already 
settled  to  visit  Ems  again  this  summer  for  the  waters,  he 
resolved  to  start  as  soon  as  he  could,  and  take  his  wife  for 
a  change,  and  his  little  boy  with  him.  They  joined  his  mother 
at  Chemnitz,  from  which  place  he  wrote  to  Dr.  Abeken, 
telling  him  of  his  plans,  and  adding,  'From  year  to  year  we 
seem  to  visit  the  dead  more  than  the  living,  and  the  old 
happy,  beautiful  times  of  meeting  do  not  return.'  Shortly 
before  leaving  England  Max  Miiller  had  received  a  visit 
from  a  German,  consulting  him  on  the  advisability  of  starting 
a  general  subscription  among  Germans  living  out  of  Germany 
for  a  monument  in  commemoration  of  the  war.  Max  explains 
his  views  in  the  following  letter.  We  know  how  thoroughly  they 
were  realized  by  the  great  Germania  on  the  banks  of  the  Rhine. 

To  Professor  Bernays. 
Translation.  Oxford,  Jiine  12. 

'  I  write  by  return  ;  Mr.  Lang  called  with  a  verbal  recommendation 
from  Count  Bernstorfif.  I  liked  the  idea,  but  I  told  him  at  once  that 
the  impulse  must  come  from  Germany.  He  told  me  a  little  while  ago 
that  all  went  well  in  Germany :  a  million  has  been  promised  in 
Mayence  alone.  His  plan  has  the  fullest  approval  from  the  highest 
classes.  I  have  not  written  to  him,  but  to  Dr.  Heine,  who  sent  me 
a  description  of  the  monument  in  question  ;  I  wrote  some  encouraging 
words  to  him.     Let  the  man  work  ! 

'  A  monument  only  in  Berlin  is  one-sided.  I  should  like  to  see  a 
German  monument  on  the  banks  of  the  German  river,  protected  by 
a  German  fortress ;  and  he  who  does  not  understand  the  "  German 
Michael  * "  can  hold  to  the  archangel  instead.  So  you  see,  I  think : 
Let  it  grow — should  it  prove  to  have  no  substantial  foundation  it  will 
fade  of  itself.' 

During  the  stay  at  Ems  the  Emperor  came  there  to  drink 
the  waters,  and  Max  MUller  had  the  honour  of  dining  with 
his  Imperial  Majesty,  whom  he  had  last  seen  in  1849  at 
Bunsen's  house  in  London,  a  refugee  from  the  revolution  in 
Berlin.  The  Emperor  was  most  gracious  and  cordial,  and 
thanked  Max  for  his  letters  to  the  Times.  But  it  was  the 
^  Nickname  for  the  German  soldier. 


1871]  The  Old  Emperor  421 

meeting  again  with  the  Crown  Prince — '  Unser  Fritz,'  as  the 
troops  called  him — which  gave  him  the  most  unfeigned 
pleasure,  and  he  has  described  in  Atild  Lang  Syne  the 
affectionate  welcome  accorded  him  on  the  occasion,  to  the 
surprise  of  the  great  officers  and  officials  present.  Abeken, 
too,  was  at  Ems,  and  the  friends  met  for  the  last  time. 
The  troops  were  returning  from  France,  and  many  a 
regiment  turned  up  the  Lahn  valley  to  greet  their  Emperor 
and  Prince.  On  these  occasions  the  town  supplied  refresh- 
ments, whilst  the  visitors  subscribed  for  cigars  and  waited  on 
the  returning  heroes. 

Max  Miiller  and  his  wife  were  among  the  few  admitted  to 
the  railway  station  to  see  the  Crown  Prince  off  for  Munich, 
where  he  was  to  hold  a  great  review  of  the  South  German 
troops.  The  following  note  to  Dr.  Abeken  alludes  to  the 
dinner  with  the  Emperor : — 

Translation. 

'  Before  I  leave  Ems  I  must  thank  you  most  heartily  once  more. 
I  know  it  is  not  easy  to  jump  over  the  magic  ring  which  encircles 
crowned  heads  everywhere,  but  with  your  support  it  all  went  capitally. 
It  will  always  be  for  me  a  "  historical  moment."  I  wish  the  Emperor 
could  read  my  speech  at  the  London  Peace  Festival,  so  that  he  should 
know  how  highly  I  value  the  honour  which  he  has  bestowed 
upon  me.' 

Contemporary  Letter. 

'Monaco,'  'Ems,  July  20,  187 1. 

'  I  know  you  will  be  interested  in  hearing  that  Max  dined  with  the 
Emperor  on  Monday,  at  4.30.  Max  and  the  poet  Von  Redwitz  were 
the  only  civiUans  present,  and  IMax  the  only  man  without  any 
decoration  or  order  !  They  were  a  party  of  eighteen.  The  Emperor 
began  by  saying  to  Max  :  "  I  know  of  your  great  fame  as  an  Oriental 
scholar  :  what  made  you  take  to  that  line  of  study  ?  "  Max  told  him 
he  first  heard  of  Sanskrit  as  a  boy  from  the  Duchess  of  Dessau,  the 
Emperor's  cousin ;  and  they  talked  about  her,  and  then  of  his  life  in 
England.  Everything  was  so  simple,  and  yet,  as  they  sat  at  table, 
Max  said,  as  he  listened  to  the  kindly,  simple  words  of  the  Kaiser,  he 
felt,  "  Here  is  a  man  who  hereafter  will  hold  a  place  second  only  in 
German  history  to  Charlemagne."  After  dinner  the  Emperor  talked 
to  him  again,  about  Bunsen.  IMax  called  him  "  a  true  German 
Ambassador."    "  But  not  very  practical,"  rejoined  the  Kaiser.    "  No," 


422  Interview  with  the  Crown  Prince  [ch.  xvm 

said  Max,  "  but  prophetic."    "  Yes,"  said  the  Kaiser,  in  the  most  hearty 
way,  "  if  he  had  Hved,  how  he  would  have  rejoiced  now,  how  happy  he 
would  have  been  ! "     Tuesday  evening  came  the  Crown  Prince.     We 
saw  him  arrive,  looking  hardly  older  than  eight  years  ago ;  but  his 
countenance,  always  so  good,  had  gained  depth  and  experience,  and 
he  was,  indeed,  as  our  friends  the  Bradleys  said,  "  a  noble  fellow,  the 
very  type  of  a  hero."     He  sent  for  Max  early  yesterday,  and  he  had 
an  hour's  intensely  interesting  talk  with  him.     When  Max  got  there 
he  was  told  to  wait,  as  some  one  was  with  the  Prince,  but  he  had 
hardly  sat  down  in  the  ante-room,  when  the  door  was  thrown  open, 
and  in  came  the  Prince,  both  hands  stretched  out :  "But,  Maximilianus, 
why  do  you  wait  here  .^   I  have  no  secrets  that  you   cannot  hear  1 
Now  sit  down,  put  down  your  hat.      We  asked  for  you  everywhere 
in  England  and  could  not  see  you ;  and  now  I  find  you  here  in 
Ems,  and   I    may  take  your  greetings   to    my  wife,   may  I  not  ? " 
Then  they  plunged  into  the  war,  and  the  Prince  openly  said  how  he 
had  hated  it ;  and  when  Max  said  something  about  all  he  had  done, 
he  said :  "  Oh,  no  compliments,  please ;  I  only  did  my  duty."  Then 
he  discussed  the  union  of  North  and  South  Germany,  and  how  to 
unite  Catholics  and  Protestants ;  and  said  he  feared  they  were  not 
ready  yet  for  a  new  Reformation  in  Bavaria :  "  It  wants  more  than 
a  mere  dogma  to  effect  that,  it  must  spring  from  the  hearts  of  the 
people,"  and  he  added  with  deep  feeling,  "  and  have  we  Protestants  of 
the  North  so  much  to  offer  them :  have  we  advanced  in  religion  the 
last  300  years?"     He  talked  of  his  very  hearty  reception  everywhere 
in  England,  and  spoke  of  various  people  there  with  an  insight  into 
their  characters  and  opinions  that  was  remarkable.     "  We  dined  at 
Gladstone's,  and "  (with  a  knowing  laugh)  "  we  talked  a  great  deal 
about  Art  and  Literature!'     He  then  told  Max  how  deeply  grateful  he 
felt  for  the  efforts  he  had  made  to  keep  up  a  union  in  feeling  between 
Germany  and  England,  and  added:  "You  must  forgive  my  not  thanking 
you  directly  for  your  letters  on  the  war ;  and  when  I  did  write,  I  had 
not  time  to  say  half  I  wished,  I  have  so  much  to  do."     He  ended  by 
hoping  Max  would  return  home  in  time  for  both  him  and  the  Princess 
to  see  him,  and  added  :  "  It  is  twenty  years  since  we  first  met."     He 
left  at  three  o'clock  yesterday  afternoon.    We  went  to  see  him  off,  and 
he  sent  for  us,  coming  almost  to  the  door  of  his  room  to  meet  me, 
and  he  shook  hands  in  the  most  hearty  way,  and  as  I  rose  from  my 
curtsy,  he  said,  looking  at  Boy,  "  But  what  then  is  that?"     Max  said 
he  was  the  youngest  German  sailor,  and  the  Prince    shook   hands 
with  the  small  thing ;  and  then  talked  to  me  of  our  visit  to  Potsdam, 
and  of  Oxford,  and  told  me  he  had  my  photograph.     He  talked  to  us 
two  till  the  train  was  ready,  when  he  again  shook  hands  with  us  both. 


iSyi]  Str  J.  Stainer's  'Harmony '  423 

and  went  off.  I  heard  Max,  as  he  left,  say  in  German :  "  Splendid, 
noble  fellow  " ;  and  so  he  is,  indeed.  He  is  far  handsomer  as  a  man 
of  forty,  and,  as  I  said  before,  there  is  an  earnestness,  depth,  and 
grandeur  in  his  face,  whilst  it  has  lost  none  of  its  bright,  genial 
expression.  He  is  one's  ideal  of  a  really  noble  man.  The  night  he 
arrived  here,  one  of  the  hills  was  illuminated  in  his  honour.  It  was 
a  most  fairy-like  scene.  At  a  rocket  signal  every  point  in  the  high 
hill  burst  out  in  bright  sheets  of  Bengal  fire,  red,  white,  and  green, 
so  that  every  bush  and  twig  were  visible  from  the  base  to  the  summit, 
and  the  figures  of  the  men  feeding  the  lights  looked  like  busy  gnomes 
who  had  created  the  magical  scene.' 

Whilst  at  Ems  Max  Mliller  received  a  note  from  Dr., 
afterwards  Sir  John,  Stainer,  and  later  Professor  of  Music 
at  Oxford,  wishing  to  dedicate  his  work  on  Harmony  to  him. 
The  following  letters  are  interesting  as  showing  Max  Miiller's 
continued  love  of  music,  though  he  had  almost  ceased  to 
perform  himself,  and  only  took  up  his  playing  again  later 
to  accompany  his  children  in  their  singing : — 

To  Dr.  Stainer. 

Ems,  July  2. 

'  I  hardly  know  what  to  say,  and  whether  I  ought  to  accept  the 
dedication  of  your  work  on  Harmo7iy.  I  always  feel  like  a  traitor 
among  my  musical  friends,  and  quite  unworthy  of  any  honourable 
mention.  However,  if  you  think  otherwise,  I  can  only  say  that  I 
shall  consider  it  a  great,  though  most  undeserved,  honour  to  have  my 
name  connected  with  your  work,  and  thus  to  keep  a  place  in  the 
musical  annals  of  Oxford.  Some  of  my  happiest  recollections  date 
from  the  years  which  I  spent  in  the  musical  atmosphere  of  Leipzig, 
when  Mendelssohn  was  there  in  the  full  vigour  and  enjoyment  of  his 
genius,  and  these  recollections  have  often  been  revived  at  Oxford 
when  listening  to  your  masterly  playing  in  Magdalen  Chapel.' 

The  dedication  is  as  follows :  — 

TO    PROFESSOR    MAX    MttLLER 
WHO,    THOUGH    UNABLE    TO    DEVOTE    HIMSELF 

TO    THE    ART    OF    MUSIC 

OWING    TO    THE    CLAIMS    MADE    ON    HIS    TIME 

BY    OTHER    FIELDS    OF    LABOUR 

FORGETS    NOT    TO    ENCOURAGE    BY    HIS    SYMPATHY    AND    KINDNESS 

THOSE    WHO    ARE    PRESSING    FORWARD    IN    ITS    PATHS. 


424       Lectures  on  Language  stereotyped     [ch.  xvm 

To  THE  Same. 

October  6. 

'  On  my  return  to  Oxford  I  found  your  book  on  my  table,  and 
I  must  thank  you  once  more  for  your  great  kindness.  I  feel  ashamed 
and  almost  saddened  when  I  read  your  dedication.  There  was  a  time 
when  I  thought  I  should  devote  the  whole  of  my  life  to  music,  and 
a  very  happy  time  it  was. 

'  But  new  interests  carried  me  away  in  quite  a  different  direction, 
and  though  I  tried  for  a  time  to  keep  up  my  music,  I  soon  found  out 
that  music  was  not  a  thing  to  play  with,  and  that  one  should  make  up 
one's  mind  to  be  either  its  priest  and  minister,  or  a  silent  worshipper. 

'  There  is  a  story  of  a  young  clergyman  exclaiming,  "  What  is  the 
use  of  the  laity  ?  "  I  am  glad  you  do  not  share  that  feeling  with 
regard  to  music,  but  consider  mere  listeners  like  myself  (and  par- 
ticularly silent  listeners)  an  essential  element  of  the  musical  community.' 

On  his  return  to  Oxford  Max  MUlIer  settled  down  to 
work,  finishing  the  new  edition  of  his  Lectures  on  Language^ 
which  were  now  stereotyped,  and  getting  on  with  the  fifth 
volume  of  the  Rig-veda.  His  wife  was  away  from  home  for 
some  time,  the  mother-aunt  being  very  ill,  and  requiring  some 
one  constantly  with  her. 

To  HIS  Wife. 

Oxford,  September  17,  1871. 

'  Sharing  the  happiness  of  other  people,  entering  into  their  feelings, 
living  life  over  once  more  in  them  and  with  them,  that  is  all  that 
remains  to  old  people.  I  suppose  it  was  meant  to  be  so,  the  principal 
object  of  life  being  the  overcoming  of  self  in  every  sense  of  the  word. 

'  In  fact,  as  one  gets  older  death  seems  hardly  to  make  so  wide 
a  gulf :  a  few  years  more  or  less,  that  is  all.  Meantime,  we  know  in 
whose  hands  we  all  are,  that  life  is  very  beautiful ;  but  death  has  its 
beauty  too.' 

In  the  November  of  this  year  Max  Miiller  had  the  grati- 
fication of  hearing  from  India  that  his  Satiskrit  Grammar^  of 
which  the  second  edition  had  appeared  in  1870,  was  extensively 
used  there.  A  friend  wrote  from  Benares,  '  Your  Grammar 
seems  now  very  near  perfection.  Your  Hitopadesa  (the  first 
of  the  handbooks  for  the  study  of  Sanskrit)  is  used  in  the 
English  department  of  our  College,  and  is  valued  by  the  boys, 
but  not  much  bought — they  are  too  poor.' 


1871]  Shakespeare' s  Sonnets  425 

To  F.  Palgrave,  Esq. 

Parks  End,  December  26,  1871. 
'  My  DEAR  Palgrave, — As  a  Christmas  treat  I  have  been  reading 
Shakespeare's  Sonnets — as  marvellous  as  ever,  but  even  more  difficult ! 
Now  can  you  tell  me  (p.  81  of  your  edition),  how  do  you  construe 
"  Will  bestow  it  "  ?  Is  it  will  enrich  it,  endow  it,  viz.  my  wit  ?  Why 
did  you  leave  out  the  sonnet — 

"  A  woman's  face  with  nature's  own  hand  painted "  ? 

How  do  you  construe  p.  76 — 

"I  will  not  praise  that  purpose  not  to  sell"? 

These  are  only  a  few  queries,  and  they  refer  to  points  where  I  believe 
I  am  simply  stupid ;  as  to  other  matters,  one  might  go  on  asking  for 
ever.  On  the  whole  I  like  Massey — he  leaves  me  freest.  Best  wishes 
to  you  and  yours.' 


CHAPTER  XIX 
1872 

Memorial  to  Bishop  Patteson.  Offer  of  Professorship  at  Strassburg. 
Rig-veda,  Vol.  V.  Death  of  sister-in-law.  Strassburg.  Baden. 
Munich.  Life  of  Stockmar.  Switzerland.  Dr.  Stanley  Select 
Preacher,     Freiligrath's  poem. 

From  the  moment  that  it  was  settled  that  the  University 
of  Strassburg  should  be  reorganized  under  German  auspices, 
Baron  Roggenbach,  who  was  entrusted  with  the  arrangements, 
endeavoured  to  attract  to  it  many  of  the  leading  German 
Professors.  The  Baron  had  discussed  the  subject  with  Max 
Miiller  on  his  return  from  Ems  in  187 1,  and  through  the  winter 
the  thought  of  possibly  settling  in  Strassburg  as  Sanskrit  Pro- 
fessor was  constantly  before  him.  Max  determined  to  come 
to  no  decision  before  trying  how  life  in  Germany  really  suited 
him,  and  therefore  only  undertook  to  give  a  course  of  lectures 
at  Strassburg  in  the  summer  se7nester  of  187a. 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  January  i,  1872. 

'  My  dear  good  Mother, — The  first  letter  of  the  new  year  must 
be  for  you,  and  may  God  make  it  a  pleasant  year  to  you — as  pleasant 
as  it  can  be  at  your  age.  I  hope  we  shall  have  a  happy  meeting  this 
year.  I  have  not  yet  made  any  plans  for  the  summer,  though  I 
have  an  idea,  if  I  am  well  and  strong  enough,  of  giving  a  course  of 
lectures  at  Strassburg.  I  have  had  a  very  cordial  invitation  to  do  so, 
but  I  have  not  yet  accepted,  for  it  will  give  me  a  good  deal  of  work, 
and  too  much  work  does  not  pay.  It  is  possible  the  opening  of  the 
University  may  be  postponed  till  the  autumn,  and  at  that  time  I  could 
not  leave  Oxford.  Well,  that  is  just  an  idea  for  the  new  year.  At 
all  events  I  intend  to  make  an  early  start  from  here,  and  settle  some- 
where for  the  summer  in  Germany  with  all  my  belongings.  It  is  not 
good  for  the  children  to  travel  about,  and  is  also  too  expensive. 


1872]  Wobiirn  Abbey 


427 


Where  do  you  think  we  had  best  go  ?  We  had  a  quiet  Christmas. 
The  Meyers  sent  us  venison  and  a  Marzipan,  and  Triibner  sent  a 
Stolle,  so  that  we  had  some  German  Christmas  things.  Have  I  told 
you  that  Klaus  Groth  is  coming  in  the  spring  to  Oxford  to  give  three 
lectures  before  the  University  on  German  literature?  He  gets  £50, 
and  he  and  his  wife  will  slay  with  us.  I  am  going  this  week  for 
a  couple  of  days  to  Woburn  Abbey,  the  Duke  of  Bedford's.' 

From  Woburn  Abbey  he  wrote  to  his  wife : — 

January  4. 

*  Here  I  am  in  the  grand  old  place.  I  had  a  pleasant  drive  from 
the  station,  some  seven  miles — beautiful  sunshine,  and  the  Park  looked 
as  green  as  in  summer.  Mr.  Hastings  Russell  and  his  son  received 
rae  very  kindly.  We  walked  about,  saw  the  Park  and  the  Sculpture 
Gallery  and  the  Chinese  Dairy,  &c.  What  an  extraordinary  nest  for 
one  human  bird  to  build  himself  for  his  passage  through  life  !  When 
Bunsen  was  here  he  told  the  late  Duke,  after  admiring  everything  in 
the  way  in  which  he  could  admire,  that  he  was  truly  thankful  he  was 
not  Duke  of  Bedford.  Mr.  Russell  seemed  quite  to  understand  what 
he  meant.  I  try  to  keep  up  my  reputation  as  a  historian,  but  it 
requires  great  presence  of  mind  when  you  are  told  of  every  picture  : 
That  was  the  famous  Lord  A.,  that  was  his  beautiful  daughter-in-law, 
the  Duchess  of  B.,  and  so  it  goes  on — enough  to  pluck  a  first-class 
man.  My  great  difficulty  is  to  find  my  room  ^  I  wander  and  wander, 
till  at  last  some  kind  person  takes  me  in  tow.  Plowever,  here  I  am, 
landed  safe  in  my  room,  and  when  the  dinner  bell  rings  I  hope  they 
will  send  for  me ! ' 

In  February  Max  Miiller  wrote  a  letter  to  the  Times 
advocating  a  memorial  to  his  friend  Bishop  Patteson,  whose 
murder  in  one  of  the  Melanesian  Islands  had  been  mentioned 
this  year  in  the  Queen's  Speech.  He  received  letters  of 
thanks  from  many  members  of  the  Bishop's  family.  'To 
have  known  such  a  man,'  says  Max  Miiller,  '  is  one  of  life's 
greatest  blessings.  In  his  life  of  purity,  unselfishness,  and 
devotion  to  man  and  faith  in  a  higher  world,  those  who  have 
eyes  to  see  may  read  the  best,  the  most  real  Imitatio  Christi. 
In  his  death,  following  so  closely  on  his  prayer  for  forgiveness 
for  his  enemies — "  for  they  know  not  what  they  do  " — we  have 
witnessed  once  more  a  truly  Christ-like  death.'      From  this 

^  Max  Miiller  had  not  the  least  bump  of  locality. 


428  Offer's  from  Strassburg  [ch.  xix 

time  onwards  Max  Muller  felt  an  interest  in  the  Melanesian 

Mission  above  any  other. 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  March  3,  1872. 

*  I  should  have  written  sooner,  but  I  have  had  so  much  corre- 
spondence lately  about  Strassburg  that  I  had  time  for  nothing  else. 
They  have  made  me  all  sorts  of  offers,  but  I  have  come  to  no  decision, 
though  I  am  often  drawn  towards  returning  to  Germany,  The 
Government  offers  me  4,000  thalers  a  year  (£600),  and  will  keep  the 
Professorship  open  for  me  till  Easter,  1873.  I  have  hit  on  this  plan: 
I  will  leave  this  early  in  May  and  give  a  course  of  lectures  in  Strass- 
burg, during  the  Summer  Term,  on  "  The  Results  of  Comparative 
Philology."  This  binds  me  in  no  way,  and  I  can  form  an  idea  as  to 
whether  I  am  suited  for  the  work  of  a  German  Professor  or  not. 
Roggenbach  writes  I  could  live  near  Baden-Baden  and  go  in  by  train 
on  lecture  days.  G.  and  the  children  will  not  come  till  the  end  of 
June,  so  as  not  to  interrupt  the  children's  classes.  The  lectures  end 
early  in  August,  and  I  can  then  make  further  plans ;  so  as  soon  as 
you  feel  up  to  it  you  can  come  to  Strassburg  and  keep  house  for  me. 
In  the  winter  I  shall  in  any  case  return  to  Oxford,  whatever  I  may 
ultimately  decide  on  doing.  You  can  fancy  how  all  this  has  occupied 
me.  I  think  with  an  income  of  10,000  thalers,  of  which  we  need  not 
lay  by  anything,  we  could  lead  a  far  pleasanter  life  than  we  can  in 
England.  Naturally,  the  children  are  my  chief  thought,  and  whether 
their  future  would  be  more  successful  in  Germany  than  here.  But  all 
depends  on  whether  I  feel  I  can  be  of  use,  and  I  can  fairly  judge  that 
after  a  term.  The  weather  is  so  mild  that  the  crocuses  and  violets 
are  in  flower  in  the  garden.' 

Hardly  had  this  letter  been  sent  off  than  Max  Muller  was 
taken  seriously  ill,  and  for  some  days  typhoid  fever  was  feared. 
The  attack  resolved  itself  into  violent  neuralgia  in  the  head, 
and  he  was  for  many  days  in  bed,  unable  to  move.  At  the 
end  of  the  time  he  wrote  the  following  letter  to  his  mother. 
After  giving  an  account  of  his  illness^  he  continues — 

Translation. 

'  Then  came  the  death  of  Goldstiicker  ^,  which  I  felt  very  much — 
we  had  worked  together  so  long.  So  one  goes  after  the  other,  and 
one  becomes  more  and  more  lonely.  He  really  caused  his  own  death  : 
would  see  no  doctor,  though  begged  to  do  so,  and  died  from  the  results 
of  a  cold.     I  was  better  off,  for  I  had  no  want  of  careful  nursing.    So 

^  Whom  he  knew  in  Paris  and  London. 


1872]  French  Attacks  on  M.  M.  429 

in  Way  I  really  am  going  to  Strassburg.  The  money  they  offer  is 
a  good  deal  for  Germany.  They  tell  me  it  is  the  highest  salary  ever 
offered  to  a  Professor.  As  I  do  not  know  the  life  at  all,  it  is  pleasant 
to  be  able  to  try  it  before  deciding.' 

No  sooner  had  the  German  papers  announced  that  '  Pro- 
fessor Max  MUller  will  kindly  give  a  course  of  lectures  during 
the  Summer  Term,'  than  various  attacks,  some  in  anger,  some 
in   ridicule,  began   to  appear   in   the  French   papers.     '  We 
suppose  some  advances  were  made  to  M.  Max  Miiller,  but 
it  would  have  been  too  great  a  condescension  on  his  part,  too 
heroic  a  sacrifice,  to  exchange  the  fat  {sic)  endowments  of 
Oxford  for  (from  the  English  point  of  view)  a  very  modest 
Stipendium,'     '  It  will  be  a  great  honour  for  the  Prussians  of 
Strassburg,  and  it  is  only  bare  politeness  on  their  part  to 
announce  that  M.  Max  Miiller  will  kindly  give  a  course  of 
lectures.'     '  Many  people  in  France  will  be  astonished  that 
M.  Max  Miiller,  a  Foreign  Member  of  our  Institute  and  pupil 
of  Burnouf,  should  hasten,  at  the  first  moment,  to  deliver 
German  lectures  on  a  soil  that  we  can  never  cease  to  consider 
French ! '     '  M.  Max  Miiller  would  have  done  well  if  out  of 
regard  to  France,  where  he  has  many  friends  and  admirers, 
he  had  waited  till  the  second  term,  and  not  associated  him- 
self with  the   inauguration   of  this   University.'     The   same 
paper,  in  mentioning  Deutsche  Liebe  as  published  anonymously, 
says  '  the  author  perhaps  shrank  from  putting  his   name  to 
a  novelette,  or  probably  was   afraid  of  arousing  feelings  of 
retrospective  jealousy  in  the  wife  he  had  married  in  England.' 
Deiitsche  Liebe  came  out  in  1857,  two  and  a  half  years  before 
he    married.      Finally,   the    article    declares    that    M.    Max 
Miiller  is  determined  to  aid  in  the  Germanizing  of  Alsace  by 
the  lectures  he  has  kindly  consented  to  give  at  the  German 
University.'     So  sensitive  did  the  French  continue,  that  it 
was  only  in  the  late  autumn  of  1H81  that  Max  Miiller,  who 
was  elected  in  1869,  ventured  to  take  his  seat  at  the  French 
Institute  and  make  his  address  of  admission,  which  was  con- 
stantly interrupted  in  the  beginning  by  the  younger  members 
with  disagreeable  and  sneering  remarks,  till  his  friends  suc- 
ceeded at  last  in  enforcing  silence. 


430  Fifth  Volume  of  Rtg-veda  [ch.  xix 

To  Dr.  Kielhorn. 

Translation.  Parks  End,  April  6,  1872. 

'I  did  indeed  hope  that  you  would  make  your  return  journey 
via  England,  and  that  I  should  be  enabled  to  congratulate  you  and 
your  future  wife  in  person.  So  I  must  do  it  now  at  least  by  letter 
and  in  a  great  hurry.  May  you  be  as  happy  as  you  deserve  to  be, 
and  may  the  Indian  years  of  exile  be  followed  by  a  happy  return  to 
the  German  home.  Write  to  me  soon,  when  you  have  arrived  in 
Bombay  or  Poonah.  I  have  been  ill  over  a  month ;  however,  I  am 
better  now,  and  Volume  V  of  the  Rig-veda  is  completed,  with  the 
exception  of  the  last  four  pages.  I  must  send  it  to  you  to  India,  also 
a  little  keepsake  from  me  for  your  wedding,  which  I  hoped  to  have 
given  you  in  person. 

'  I  have  felt  Goldstiicker's  death  much ;  I  had  known  him  for  such 
a  long  time,  and  small  literary  differences  disappear  entirely  when  we 
stand  at  the  grave  of  a  dear  old  friend.  I  hope  to  acquire  his  library 
for  Strassburg.     Your  old  countryman,  '  M.  M.' 

The  fifth  volume  of  his  great  work  was  now  ready.  The 
difficulties  of  restoring  a  correct  text  of  Sayana's  Commen- 
tary increased  with  each  volume.  The  MSS.  were  more  and 
more  faulty,  probably  because  the  last  part  had  been  less 
studied  and  used,  and  therefore  the  MSS.  were  not  corrected 
and  kept  up  with  the  necessary  care.  No  pains  had  been 
spared  in  scouring  all  India,  even  the  Southern  Provinces,  for 
MSS.,  but  in  vain.  Max  MUller  says  in  his  preface  to 
Volume  V : — 

'  There  is  not  one  doubtful  or  difficult  passage  in  the  whole  of  this 
work  where  I  have  not  myself  carefully  weighed  the  evidence  of  the 
MSS. ;  not  one  where  I  have  not  myself  verified  the  exact  readings 
of  the  MSS.,  even  in  those  portions  which  were  copied  and  collated 
for  me  by  others,  except  where  the  originals  were  out  of  my  reach. 
I  ibelieve  I  have  acknowledged,  without  stint,  whatever  assistance 
I  have  received  from  other  scholars  during  the  progress  of  my  work. 
They  themselves  have  assured  me  that  I  had  said  more  than  they 
deserved  or  expected.  But,  as  it  has  been  broadly  hinted  that  for 
certain  portions  of  Sayana's  Commentary  I  had  parted  with  my  editorial 
responsibility,  I  take  this  opportunity  of  stating,  once  for  all,  that  there 
is  no  page,  no  line,  no  word,  no  letter,  no  accent,  in  the  whole  of  the 
Commentary  for  which  I  am  not  personally  responsible.  Nothing 
was  ordered  for  press  that  I  had  not  myself  carefully  examined  and 


1872]  Klaus  Groth  431 

revised,  and  though  for  certain  portions  of  my  edition,  as  I  stated  in 
the  preface  to  each  volume,  I  was  relieved  of  much  preliminary 
labour,  the  decision  in  all  critical  passages,  whether  for  good  or  evil, 
always  rested  with  me.' 

In  this  volume  is  published  the  first  part  of  the  Index 
Verborum,  which  was  made  before  Max  Miiller  began  the 
publication  of  the  Rig-veda  and  Sayana's  Commentary,  and  it 
was  by  its  help  only  he  was  able  to  make  his  way  through  the 
difficulties  of  Sayana.  Professor  Benfey,  of  Gottingen,  the 
veteran  Sanskrit  scholar,  on  seeing  a  few  proof-sheets  of  this 
Index,  wrote :  '  I  see  what  extraordinary  assistance  the  publica- 
tion of  this  Index  Verborum  will  afford  to  Vedic  studies. 
It  will  hardly  be  possible  to  render  you  sufficient  thanks  for 
it.  I  in  particular  expect  to  derive  the  greatest  help  from  it 
for  my  Vedic  Grammar/ 

To  Canon,  now  Dean,  Farrar. 

Parks  End,  Api-il  14,  1S72. 
'  I  quite  know  what  it  is  to  be  overworked,  and  how  new  thoughts 
take  possession  of  one's  brain,  and  make  us  for  a  time  forget  every- 
thing else.  You  must  suffer  more  than  I  do  in  that  respect,  though 
I  assure  you  just  now,  with  three  books  printing  in  English,  and 
proof-sheets  of  a  French  and  of  a  German  translation,  and  lectures 
every  day,  I  sometimes  feel  quite  bewildered.  I  shall  value  the 
dedication  of  your  Lectures  ^  very  much,  and  it  is  very  kind  of  you 
to  have  thought  of  it.  Do  not  suppose  that  I  am  unable  to  value 
researches  which  lead  to  conclusions  different  from  my  own.  I  know 
it  is  my  own  fault  if  you  think  so,  for  I  feel  so  conscious  that  I  cannot 
express  a  difference  of  opinion  without  giving  offence,  that  I  have 

given  up  all  criticizing.     Were  I  to  criticize  's  book  he  would 

never  forgive  me,  so  I  leave  it  alone.  There  are  people  who  can 
criticize  without  offending,  but  I  know  I  cannot — why  I  cannot  tell. 
Whenever  you  print  your  Lectures  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  receive  the 
proof-sheets  if  you  like ;  but,  without  having  seen  it,  I  shall  always 
consider  it  an  honour  to  have  my  name  connected  with  any  one 
of  your  publications.' 

In  April  the  Platt-Deutsch  poet  Klaus  Groth  and  his  wife, 
with  whom  the  Max  MUllers  had  formed  an  intimate  friend- 
ship in  1 869  in  Kiel,  paid  a  visit  to  Oxford,  where  he  delivered 

^  Lectures  on  the  Families  of  Speech. 


432  Death  of  Sister-m-Law  [ck.  xix 

three  lectures  before  the  University  in  German  on  Platt- 
Deutsch  and  its  close  affinity  with  English.  The  genial 
poet  and  his  charming  wife  stayed  with  the  Max  Mullers, 
and  the  visit  was  keenly  enjoyed  by  both  hosts  and  guests. 
It  was  the  last  time  they  were  to  meet.  Frau  Klaus  Groth 
died  a  few  years  later,  and  after  her  death  the  poet  remained 
quietly  at  Kiel  till  his  death.  During  their  visit  Max  Muller's 
sister-in-law,  his  wife's  only  sister,  to  whom  Max  Muller  was 
warmly  attached,  was  taken  alarmingly  ill,  and  though  there 
was  a  short  rally,  it  was  but  delusive,  and  she  died  May  12, 
leaving  six  young  children. 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Trajislation.  May  12,  1872. 

'My  dear  good  Mother, — I  have  just  had  a  telegram  from  G. 
that  her  sister  died  to-day  at  two.  She  had  been  ill  for  some  time. 
I  am  going  to  London,  where  G.  is,  by  the  next  train.  One  of 
the  boys  is  here  and  I  must  take  him  to  London.  It  is  a  terrible 
sorrow.' 

To  the  Same. 

Translation.  Bonn,  May  19. 

*  Only  a  line  to  tell  you  where  I  am.  On  Saturday  at  noon  was  the 
funeral,  in  the  same  church  at  Bray  where  they  were  married.  It 
was  a  most  affecting  scene.  That  night  I  started  by  Dover  and 
Calais  for  Bonn.  To-morrow  Roggenbach  will  meet  me  here. 
Wednesday  I  must  give  my  first  lecture.' 

His  wife  remained  in  England  till  Max  Miiller  had  found 
a  place  for  her,  the  children,  and  his  mother.  A  very  few 
days  showed  him  that  Strassburg  was  impossible  for  his 
family  :  no  houses  were  to  be  had,  and  he  began  looking  for 
one  in  the  neighbourhood.  On  his  way  to  Strassburg  he  had 
been  threatened  with  a  terrible  misfortune.  On  arriving  at 
Bonn  the  large  portmanteau  containing  all  his  notes  and  manu- 
script books,  representing  the  labour  of  his  life,  was  missing. 
It  had  been  registered  and  plombe  for  Bonn  in  London, 
together  with  a  smaller  one  containing  clothes.  All  inquiries 
at  first  seemed  in  vain.  The  Crown  Prince  heard  of  the 
disaster,  and  caused  a  message  to  be  sent  to  all  principal 
stations  (railways  in  Germany  are  all  Government  possessions) 
that  the  portmanteau  must  be  found.     The  right  effect  was 


1872]  Life  in  Strassburg  433 

produced  after  a  time,  and  the  portmanteau  with  its  contents 
untouched  was  returned  from  somewhere  near  Hamburg  ;  but 
no  explanation  was  ever  given.  Max  Muller  was  nearly  ill 
with  anxiety,  for  the  loss  would  have  been  irreparable,  and 
really  have  wrecked  his  life,  as  far  as  his  work  was  concerned  ; 
but  he  never  told  either  his  wife  or  mother  at  the  time  all  he 
was  going  through. 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translatmi.  Strassburg,  May  22. 

'  Yes !  really  in  Strassburg — raining,  as  everywhere.  I  have  found 
a  lodging,  but  a  very  small  one — two  rooms  and  a  very  small  bed- 
room. The  want  of  rooms  is  terrible.  Write  and  say  how  you  are, 
and  whether  and  when  you  can  come.  It  can  be  done,  but  I  cannot 
promise  you  much  enjoyment  till  we  have  a  house  in  the  country.' 

Max  Muller  soon  found  that  the  life  in  Strassburg  would 
not  do,  even  for  his  mother  alone,  and  postponed  her  arrival. 
His  time  at  Strassburg  was  a  thorough  success,  in  spite  of  the 
discomforts.  He  found  that  he  could  lecture  in  German 
without  any  of  the  physical  fatigue  that  his  English  lectures 
always  gave  him.  He  had  fifty  hearers,  the  largest  class  of 
all,  and  gave  private  Sanskrit  lessons  as  well.  But  what  he 
most  enjoyed  was  the  constant  intercourse  with  men,  each  of 
whom  was  a  distinguished  representative  of  his  own  particular 
line  of  studies.  As  there  were  no  arrangements  for  food  in 
their  various  lodgings  they  formed  a  sort  of  club  at  an  hotel, 
and  met  every  day  for  early  dinner  and  supper.  Max  Muller 
made  many  acquaintances  with  the  rising  scholars  in  Germany 
who  had  gathered  at  Strassburg,  as  the  French  papers  said, 
'  to  Germanize  the  French  inhabitants.'  On  June  i  he  writes 
to  his  wife  : — 

*No  rooms  fit  for  mother;  every  one  is  complaining.  We  are 
mostly  "grass  widowers"  or  bachelors  and  don't  mind.  There  are 
no  servants.  The  lectures  in  themselves  are  a  great  pleasure  to  me, 
and  I  see  they  are  liked,  but  they  take  a  great  deal  of  time.  I  have  to 
lecture  six  times  a  week,  and  one  is  not  accustomed  to  that  in  Oxford, 
where  I  only  give  twenty-four  lectures  in  the  whole  year !' 

Max  Muller's  inaugural  lecture,  '  On  the  Results  of  Com- 
parative Philology,'  has  been  translated  and  printed  in  Chips, 
I  F  f 


434  Dinner  with  German  Empress     [ch.  xix 

Volume  IV.    It  was  published  by  request  as  soon  as  delivered, 
and  widely  circulated  in  Germany. 

To  Professor  Bernays. 

Translation.  Strassburg,  4  Regenbogengasse, 

May  31,  1872. 

'  My  dear  Friend, — I  should  have  written  before,  but  I  had  to  wait 
a  little  to  see  how  matters  arranged  themselves.  Up  to  the  present 
time  I  like  it  very  much,  and  I  find  it  much  easier  and  much  less 
of  a  strain  to  speak  German  than  English.  I  have  about  forty  to 
fifty  hearers  for  Comparative  Philology,  and  ten  to  twelve  for  Sanskrit 
Grammar.  Whether  this  will  continue  I  do  not  know.  What  is 
wanting  here  is  a  guiding  spirit.  We  seem  to  be  like  a  carriage 
without  a  driver — it  can't  go  on  like  this  very  long.  There  is  an 
immense  deal  still  to  arrange,  two  Roggenbachs  are  hardly  sufficient 
for  all  there  is  to  do.  Lodgings  are  like  lake-dwellings  {Pfahlhauten). 
I  cannot  find  a  house  for  my  family,  but  I  feel  quite  well  notwithstand- 
ing. Yes,  after  four  sleepless  nights,  my  portmanteau  arrived.  It 
caused  me  real  suffering.    My  box  of  books  is  still  on  the  road.' 

To  HIS  Wife. 

Strassburg,  ^««^  4,  1872. 

'  Why  is  there  so  much  suffering  in  this  world  ?  I  cannot  think  it 
improves  us  much,  and  yet  it  must  have  its  purpose.  All  these  are 
questions  far  too  high  for  us — we  are  like  children,  and  more  than 
children  when  we  come  to  think  of  them.  All  we  know  is  that  when 
we  catch  a  glimpse  of  God's  handiwork,  either  in  the  natural  or  moral 
world,  it  is  so  wonderfully  perfect,  so  beyond  all  our  measures,  that 
we  feel  safe,  as  in  a  good  ship,  however  rough  the  sea  may  be. 
Whatever  we  may  believe  or  hope,  or  wish  for,  will  be  far  exceeded 
by  that  higher  Will  and  Wisdom  which  supports  all,  even  us  litde 
souls.' 

Strassburg, y««^  6,  1872. 

'  My  work  here  answers  well,  and  the  young  men  seem  to  like  it. 
To  me  it  is  no  effort,  and  quite  a  new  sensation.  I  had  no  idea  that 
the  effort  of  lecturing  in  English  was  so  great.  What  takes  up  my 
time  here  is  preparing  the  Lectures,  particularly  as  I  have  few  books, 
and  have  to  hunt  up  things  wherever  I  can  find  them.' 

On  June  12  Max  Muller  was  commanded  to  Baden-Baden 
to  dine  with  the  German  Empress.  He  had  first  seen  the 
Empress  some  years  before  at  Coblentz,  and  always  con- 
sidered her  to  be  one  of  the  best  educated  women  he  knew. 


1872]  Baden-Baden  435 

He  thus  describes  the  scene  to  his  wife  : — 

'  I  was  really  overwhelmed  with  kindness.  First  the  Empress  made 
me  a  speech  in  the  presence  of  the  whole  Court,  thanking  me  for  all 
I  had  done  for  Germany  in  England,  and  which  she  said  had  had 
more  influence  than  I  knew.  Then  she  thanked  me  for  the  sacrifice 
I  had  made  in  giving  up  my  summer  vacation  and  rest  for  the  new 
University  of  Strassburg,  and  hoped  my  example  would  lead  others  to 
do  the  same.  Lastly,  she  said  she  knew  from  her  last  stay  in  England 
what  people  felt  there  at  the  thought  of  my  going  away.  In  fact 
I  was  quite  overpowered.  At  dinner  I  sat  opposite  to  her,  and  she 
talked  to  me  a  great  deal;  and  after  dinner,  when  all  were  going 
away,  she  called  me  to  her,  made  me  sit  down,  gave  me  her  hand, 
and  again  thanked  me  most  heartily.  I  stayed  half  an  hour,  and 
we  talked  of  many  things.  It  was  very  interesting  to  see  and  speak 
with  the  first  German  Empress  thus  face  to  face.' 

To  Herr  George  von  Bunsen. 

Strassburg,  ^«w  17,  1872. 
'  I  am  still  quite  alone  here,  but  my  wife  and  children  come  from 
England,  and  my  mother  from  Chemnitz  in  about  a  week.  I  have 
taken  a  house  in  Baden-Baden ;  I  shall  lecture  here  from  Tuesday  to 
Friday,  and  Friday  to  Tuesday  Hve  in  Baden-Baden.  The  lectures 
are  a  delight  to  me.  It  is  a  real  pleasure  to  speak  without  any  effort. 
I  cannot  think  of  future  plans.  For  one  thing  Strassburg  is  not  what 
it  should  be.  We  want  not  only  one,  but  four  Roggenbachs  (one  for 
each  Faculty,  and  one  for  the  University)  if  we  are  to  create  some- 
thing new  and  great.' 

To  Professor  Bernays. 
Translation.  Strassburg,  4  Regenbogengasse, 

July  4,  1872. 

'  My  dear  Friend, — It  is  beautiful  here,  but  it  is  impossible  to  get 
to  know  about  anything,  so  I  come  to  you.  I  have  found  a  quotation 
assigned  to  Aristotle  to  the  following  effect :  "  God,  who  is  One, 
receives  from  us  names  according  to  the  various  visions  which  we 
come  to  see."  Can  you  verify  this  quotation  for  me,  and  may  it  be 
assigned  to  Aristotle  ?     Ever  faithfully  yours.' 

The  end  of  June  Max  Miiller's  v^ife  and  children  arrived 
at  Baden-Baden,  and  were  joined  the  next  week  by  his  old 
mother.  A  pleasant  summer  was  spent  in  the  pretty  villa 
he  had  secured  there  in  the  Lichtcnthaler-Allee  on  the  out- 

F  fa 


436  Festivities  at  Munich  [ch.  xix 

skirts  of  the  town,  and  when  the  lectures  were  over  at 
Strassburg,  constant  excursions  were  made  by  the  whole 
party  to  all  the  beautiful  places  in  the  neighbourhood.  His 
kind  old  friend  Baroness  Bunsen  and  two  of  her  daughters 
were  living  at  Carlsruhe,  and  several  visits  were  paid  them 
there.  The  end  of  July,  Max  Miiller  attended  the  fourth 
centenary  of  the  University  at  Munich  as  delegate  from 
Oxford.  On  the  day  of  his  arrival,  after  a  long  night's 
journey  from  Baden,  he  found  the  place  already  crowded  ; 
more  than  3,000  guests  had  arrived. 

To  HIS  Wife, 

Munich,  August  i. 

'  It  is  hard  work  here,  but  I  get  through  it  very  well.  Yesterday 
was  the  reception  of  all  the  deputies.  I  had  to  speak  for  England, 
Holland,  and  Sweden.  It  went  off  very  well.  In  the  evening  I  saw 
Lohengrin,  but  after  two  acts  the  music  was  too  much  for  me,  and 
I  went  home.  I  had  telegraphed  for  my  silk  gown,  hood,  and  cap, 
and  they  have  arrived;  so  to-day,  in  the  public  procession,  Oxford 
will  be  grandly  represented.  After  the  procession  there  will  be 
speeches,  dinner,  &c.' 

August  2. 

'  The  amount  of  festivities  one  has  to  go  through  is  great,  but  I  am 
still  afloat.  I  suppose  you  see  the  accounts  in  the  newspapers.  During 
the  procession  yesterday,  my  gown,  hood,  and  cap  were  much  admired. 
We  dined  in  the  Odeon,  about  400  people.  DoUinger  presided ;  on 
his  right  and  left  the  two  Bavarian  Princes,  then  the  Prime  Minister, 
and  then  I.  I  was  surrounded  with  stars ;  I  believe  I  was  the  only 
man  of  the  400  who  had  not  some  little  star  or  ribbon.  Last  night  it 
poured,  so  I  went  home ;  I  don't  know  whether  there  was  a  torchlight 
procession.     To-day  again  festivities  from  morning  till  evening.' 

The  festivities  ended  with  a  great  Commcrs,  or  evening 
gathering,  of  all  the  students  in  one  of  the  Beer  Gardens,  at 
which  the  Bavarian  Princes  were  present,  and  to  which  all 
the  delegates,  professors,  &c.,  were  invited.  The  total  number 
of  guests  was  3,377.  Dr.  Bollinger  was  then  Rector  Magnificus. 
At  the  opening  ceremony,  as  it  was  impossible  that  all  the 
delegates  should  deliver  congratulatory  speeches,  the  as- 
sembled delegates  elected  Professor  von  Sybel  to  speak  for 
the  German,  and  Max  MUller  for  the  foreign  Universities. 
In  his  speech  Max  Miiller  reminded  his  hearers  that  when 


1872]  Life  of  Stockmar  437 

he  was  a  German  student  it  was  highly  criminal  to  believe 
in  a  United  German  Empire ;  that  day  he  stood  before  them 
having  just  finished  a  course  of  lectures  at  Strassburg,  the  first 
University  of  the  United  German  Empire. 

In  his  reply  Dr.  Dollinger  complimented  Max  MUller  as 
nobly  representing  the  bond  which  united  the  Munich 
University  with  the  Universities  of  the  whole  Teutonic 
race. 

'  By  education  and  culture,  as  by  birth,  you  belong  to  Germany  .  .  . 
the  splendid  task  has  fallen  to  you — and  I  believe  it  is  the  first  instance 
in  the  history  of  England — of  acting  as  interpreter  of  German  science 
...  in  that  University  in  which  the  flower  of  the  English  nation 
receives  its  education.  We  look  up  to  Oxford  as  an  elder  sister,  for 
she  existed  centuries  before  us,  and  has  had  a  glorious  history,  such  as 
no  German  University  has  had,  and  our  wishes  are  that  Oxford  may 
for  ever  remain  what  she  has  been  for  centuries,  both  to  England  and 
the  world.' 

To  Dr.  Moritz  CARRikRE  ^ 

Translation.  Baden-Baden,  Schillerstrasse, 

August  4,  1872. 

'My  dear  Friend, — I  have  returned  well  satisfied,  but  also  very 
tired,  to  Baden-Baden  this  morning.  Many  thanks  for  all  your  kind- 
ness, and  for  the  great  pleasure  which  you  procured  for  me.  I  had  till 
now  no  idea  of  such  a  festival,  and  I  must  send  a  short  description  of 
it  to  Oxford,  to  the  Vice-Chancellor.  My  words  about  Oxford  are 
easily  reported,  but  not  the  words  of  warm  sympathy  which  Dollinger 
uttered  in  his  reply.  Do  you  think  that  they  could  be  found  in  print 
anywhere  ?  I  have  the  gist  of  his  speech  clear  in  my  mind,  but  the 
ipsissima  verba  would  of  course  produce  a  far  greater  impression  in 
Oxford,  and  coming  from  Dollinger  they  are  of  historical  value,  and 
deserve  more  than  an  ephemeral  existence.  .  .  .  My  kind  regards  to 
Baron  von  Liebig.     Ever  yours.' 

Early  in  this  year  Max  Miiller  had  made  arrangements 
with  Messrs.  Longmans  to  publish  a  translation  of  the  Life 
of  Baron  Stockmar,  the  intimate  friend  of  King  Leopold, 
the  Queen  of  England,  and  Prince  Albert.  It  was  written 
by  Stockmar's  son,  and  threw  a  new  light  on  many  things 
connected  especially  with  the  life  of  King  Leopold — his  first 
marriage,  the  death  of  Princess  Charlotte,  the  offer  of  the 

^  Philosophical  writer  and  poet— a  friend  from  Berlin  University  days. 


438  Gift  to  Strassburg  from  Oxford     [ch.  xix 

Greek  throne,  and  the  final  election  to  Belgium.  Max 
Muller's  old  friend  Morier  had  been  asked  to  find  a  translator. 
The  book  appeared  in  the  autumn,  and  a  large  edition  was 
sold.  It  had,  of  course,  the  advantage  throughout  of  Max 
Muller's  careful  superintendence. 

To  R.  B.  D.  Morier,  Esq.  (Minister  at  Munich). 

Baden-Baden,  August  12,  1872. 
'  My  dear  Morier, — I  was  very  sorry  when  I  was  at  Munich  that 
you  were  not  there.  Everything  else  was  quite  perfect,  but  it  took  me 
nearly  a  week  to  recover  from  the  feast,  both  material  and  intellectual. 
There  were  many  inquiries  for  you;  I  hope  you  are  better  by  this 
time.  There  is  nothing  so  good  after  a  bout  of  gout  as  Baden-Baden ; 
the  neighbourhood  here  is  most  charming,  a  real  Paradise.  Now 
I  want  to  know  when  we  may  have  the  introduction  to  Siockmar,  We 
are  getting  on  well  with  the  translation,  and  Longman  wants  to  begin 
printing  as  soon  as  possible.  Abeken's  death  is  a  great  loss.  He 
was  a  faithful  friend,  the  only  respectable  element  in  the  Pool  of 
Varzin.' 

To  Herr  George  von  Bunsen 
(who  was  coming  to  the  Black  Forest). 

Baden,  August  21. 
'  This  is  delightful — at  present  we  are  still  tied  to  this  place.  We 
intended  going  to  Switzerland,  but  our  governess  has  fallen  ill  in 
Hanover,  and  so  my  wife  cannot  leave  the  children.  So  I  hope  we 
shall  be  able  to  see  much  of  you.  It  is  so  beautiful  here,  and  we  three 
generations,  grandmother,  mother,  and  children,  enjoy  our  time  here 
much.  .  .  .  Shall  we  meet  at  Gernsbach  on  Friday  ? ' 

Early  in  September  Max  Miiller  presented  to  the  Uni- 
versity of  Strassburg  a  magnificent  gift  from  the  University  of 
Oxford,  650  volumes  of  the  publications  of  the  Clarendon 
Press,  uniformly  bound  in  calf,  every  volume  containing  the 

inscription — 

presented  to 

the  library  of  the  university  of  strassburg 

by  the  university  of  oxford, 

1872. 

The  books  were  all  ranged  in  order  in  one  of  the  halls,  where 
a  large  company  gathered  to  hear  Max  Muller's  address,  in 
which  he  gave  a  sketch  of  the  constitution  of  the  University 


1872]  Princess  Alice  439 

of  Oxford^  so  totally  unlike  all  foreign  Universities,  and  of 
its  principal  institutions,  buildings,  &c.  Later  in  the  month 
Max  Muller  and  his  wife  made  a  short  excursion  in  Switzerland, 
visiting  the  Bernese  Oberland  for  the  first  time.  During  the 
stay  at  Baden  Princess  Hohenlohe,  half-sister  of  our  Queen, 
died,  and  Princess  Alice  (Princess  Louis  of  Hesse)  came  to 
Baden  to  attend  the  funeral  ceremonies.  Max  Muller  had 
more  than  one  long  interview  with  the  Princess.  He  was 
much  struck  by  the  depth  and  earnestness  of  her  mind, 
and  her  great  dignity  coupled  with  a  remarkable  charm 
of  manner.  On  his  return  to  England  the  Princess  sent 
Max  Muller  the  last  work  by  Strauss,  Der  alte  imd  der 
neue  Glaubc,  as  *  Her  Royal  Highness  was  persuaded  that, 
quite  apart  from  the  question  of  argument  with  its  contents, 
either  in  whole  or  in  part,  he  would  read  the  work  with 
great  interest.' 

To  HIS  Wife. 

Oxford,  November  4. 

'  I  had  a  letter  from  Strassburg.  There  are  more  than  400  students, 
eighty  more  in  the  philosophical  faculty.  I  do  not  know  how  it  is, 
but  I  cannot  bring  myself  to  write  yet.  I  wait  for  some  hint,  for 
something  to  happen,  which  will  show  me  what  I  ought  to  do.  I 
have  always  found  a  finger-post  on  my  way  through  the  world ; 
I  cannot  find  one  just  now.' 

To  THE  Dean  of  Westminster. 

November  17,  1872. 
'  My  dear  Stanley, — What  I  meant  was  that  kings,  like  Ministers, 
like  members  of  Parliament,  Hke  judges,  et  hoc  genus  ovine,  are  men, 
and  it  is  foolish  to  frame  theories  according  to  which  they  are  supposed 
to  be  anything  else.  We  do  not  want  friendless  or  heartless  sovereigns, 
and  in  a  constitutional  State  the  responsibility  of  the  Ministers  ought 
to  cover,  not  only  the  sovereign  in  the  abstract,  but  the  sovereign  as 
he  is,  surrounded  by  wife,  children,  friends,  &c.  After  all,  the  sovereign 
cannot  act  except  through  responsible  Ministers,  and  would  at  every 
crisis  have  to  choose  between  his  Ministers  and  his  friends.  The 
absurdity  of  certain  constitutional  theories  reached  its  acme  when 
people  complained  that  Prince  Albert  acted  as  the  friend  and  adviser 
of  the  Queen.  Stockmar  is  very  strong  on  that  point  in  his  Me'moires, 
and  I  confess  his  remarks  seem  to  me  full  of  political  wisdom. 
I  should  not  at  all  be  surprised  if  the  book  caused  a  commotion. 


440  Dean  Stanley  as  Select  Preacher     [ch.  xix 

'  We  shall  meet  at  dinner  on  Saturday  at  Balliol — to  meet  Baron 
Rothschild. 

'  I  have  been  reading  Strauss's  last  book,  and  I  should  like  to  know 
what  you  think  of  it.  I  suppose  it  was  sent  to  you  as  it  was  sent 
to  me. 

'  Stochmar  will  not  be  out  before  the  30th,  but  I  hope  to  give  you 
a  copy  next  Saturday.' 

To  THE  Right  Hon.  W.  E.  Gladstone. 

Parks  End,  November  23,  1872. 
'  I  have  asked  my  publisher  to  send  you  one  of  the  early  copies  of 
Baron  Stockmar's  Mimoires.  I  feel  certain  you  will  find  the  book 
interesting,  and  I  only  hope  you  may  not  think  the  English  too 
German.  Though  the  two  languages  are  so  closely  related,  one 
hardly  ever  finds  a  word  in  English  that  will  completely  render  the 
purport  of  a  German  word.  Those  words  which  are  etymologically 
and  historically  the  same  in  German  and  English  are  the  most 
treacherous,  for  they  never  mean  exactly  the  same  in  the  two  languages. 
One  learns  here,  too,  the  old  lesson  that  those  who  differ  little  are  far 
more  apt  to  misunderstand  each  other  than  those  who  differ  toto  coelo. 
I  have  tried  in  my  preface  to  smooth  certain  susceptibilities,  which  no 
doubt  are  perfectly  justified,  but  which  I  should  regret  to  see  discussed 
in  public  any  more  than  has  been  done  already.' 

It  will  perhaps  be  remembered  that  Dean  Stanley  was  this 
year  nominated  by  Council  as  one  of  the  Select  Preachers. 
A  most  determined  opposition  was  started  by  Mr. — afterwards 
Dean — Burgon  and  Dean  Goulburn,  aided  by  Mr.  Golightly, 
the  champion  of  the  Evangelical  party  in  Oxford.  The 
following  letter  alludes  to  this : — 

Parks  End,  Oxford,  December  8,  1872. 

'  My  dear  Stanley, — We  may  win,  and  that  is  good — we  may  be 
beaten,  and  perhaps  that  may  be  better,  in  order  to  open  people's  eyes 
to  the  intolerable  intolerance  to  which  Oxford  has  to  submit.  Convo- 
catio  delenda  est  ought  henceforth  to  be  the  watchword  of  all  friends  of 
the  University. 

'  For  the  present  we  mean  to  act.  Edwin  Palmer  is  very  angry ; 
Gathorne  Hardy  and  Mowbray  disapprove ;  Pusey  and  Liddon 
abstain.  Bernard  attended  our  meeting.  Prince  Leopold  is  quite 
irate !  The  great  question  is,  can  the  London  lawyers  come  down  to 
vote  ?  Ever  yours  full  of  hope,  but  very  savage, 

'  Max  MtfLLER.' 


1872]  Joyful  Birthdays  441 

The  London  lawyers,  headed  by  the  venerable  Sir  Stephen 
Lushington,  came  down  in  numbers  to  vote.  Max  M tiller, 
who  had  delivered  a  lecture  at  Liverpool  the  night  before, 
returned  to  record  his  vote,  much  to  the  dismay  of  the  friends 
at  whose  house  he  was  staying,  and  who  were  having  a  large 
evening  party  in  his  honour.  Broad  Street  was  nearly  filled 
when  the  Balliol  M.A.'s  turned  out  to  support  one  of  the 
most  illustrious  and  well-loved  of  their  scholars :  the  great 
public  schools  sent  up  their  masters,  and  the  victory  was 
a  very  complete  one.  As  the  numbers  were  read  out 
Mr.  Burgon  and  Dean  Goulburn  were  seen  to  wring  each 
other's  hands  in  the  area,  as  if  to  say  '  better  luck  next  time.' 
When  Dean  Stanley  preached  his  first  sermon,  and  stood 
again  in  the  University  pulpit  after  nine  years,  St.  Mary's 
was  densely  crowded,  every  inch  of  standing  room  being 
filled. 

The  following  letter  to  his  mother  gives  a  glimpse  of  Max 
Miiller  with  his  children.  The  birthdays  of  the  father  and 
mother  were  joyfully  observed,  and  as  the  children  grew 
older  they  always  had  some  little  surprise  ready  for  the  day, 
besides  their  long-prepared  presents. 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  December  12. 

'  I  wish  you  had  been  here,  and  especially  in  the  evening,  when  the 
children  acted  for  us  very  prettily.  One  thing  was  really  very  good. 
You  should  have  seen  Ada  as  Spring,  when  she  recited  Die  Herzen 
auf,  die  Fe?tsier  atif.  She  did  it  with  such  spirit  as  quite  surprised  me. 
The  whole  poem  prestissimo,  and  really  so  well  done,  it  could  not  have 
been  better,  and  she  had  arranged  and  thought  it  out  quite  alone. 
Then  they  came  in  dressed  up  with  wigs  and  coloured  eyebrows, 
Beatrice  as  a  Marquise,  Wilhelm  as  Schneewittchen,  so  that  one  could 
not  recognize  them.  They  sang  several  songs  in  English  and  German 
— in  fact  the  whole  was  a  great  success.' 

To  THE  Right  Hon.  W.  E.  Gladstone. 

December  23,  1872. 
'  I  have  just  been  reading  your  speech  at  Liverpool.     There  are 
some  notes  in  it  which  delighted  my  German  heart,  though  I  am  afraid 
that  much  of  what  you  say  of  the  simplicity  of  German  life  and  love 


442  Strauss  [ch.  xix 

of  knowledge  for  knowledge's  sake  applies  to  the  past  rather  than  to 
the  present.  The  dangers  of  success  and  prosperity  are  clearly  dis- 
cernible there,  particularly  in  the  large  towns,  and  the  two  most  im- 
portant elements  in  the  political  life  of  the  nation,  the  Schoolmasters 
and  the  Civil  Servants  (the  much-abused  but  in  Germany  invaluable 
Bureaucracy),  find  it  almost  impossible  to  hold  their  own,  and  to 
command  the  respect  which  was  formerly  paid  to  them.  I  read  with 
deep  interest  what  you  said  about  Strauss's  new  book.  Not  quite  a 
fortnight  ago  I  had  wrestled  with  Strauss  before  a  Liverpool  audience, 
though  I  did  not  mention  his  name.  The  book  in  itself  seems  to 
me  slight,  but  it  acquires  great  importance  as  being  the  last  confession 
of  a  man  such  as  Strauss.  The  only  strong  position  in  his  book 
is  Darwinism,  or  Revolutionism,  which  counts  as  many  believers  in 
England  as  in  Germany,  if  not  more.  The  problems  started  by 
Darwin,  H.  Spencer,  Haeckel,  &c.,  are  matters  of  life  and  death,  and 
they  must  become  the  battlefield  for  the  next  philosophical  campaign. 
I  confess  I  have  no  reply  to  some  of  their  arguments,  and  I  should 
have  liked  very  much  to  hear  from  you  with  what  weapons  you 
think  that  the  victorious  progress  of  their  philosophy  is  to  be  stopped. 
It  is  impossible  to  decline  battle,  though  no  doubt  it  is  fraught  with 
dangers,  nor  do  I  see  a  chance  of  victory  unless  many  positions  which 
have  become  untenable  are  freely  surrendered.  I  am  preparing  some 
lectures  on  the  subject  for  the  Royal  Institution  in  March,  but  I  feel 
far  from  confident.  I  am  afraid  I  shall  not  be  able  to  avail  myself  of 
your  kind  invitation  to  Hawarden  Castle ;  I  have  been  a  martyr  to 
toothache  lately,  and  there  is  such  an  accumulation  of  work  that  I 
shall  want  all  my  time  when  I  am  able  to  work.  Allow  me  to  send 
you  two  lectures  of  mine  on  German  and  English  University  life. 
'  With  the  best  wishes  of  the  season.' 

At  the  close  of  this  year  there  was  great  suffering  in 
North  Germany  owing  to  a  terrible  storm  in  the  Baltic. 
The  sea  rose  to  a  fearful  height  and  devastated  miles  of 
coast,  causing  great  loss  of  life  and  property,  especially  in 
the  island  of  RUgen.  The  poet  Freiligrath  wrote  a  beautiful 
poem,  which  he  called  'Wilhelm  Mliller,  a  Spirit  Voice,'  in 
which  he  represented  Wilhelm  Miiller,  some  of  whose  best 
poems  had  been  written  from  Riigen,  as  calling  on  his 
countrymen  to  aid  the  sufferers.  The  poet's  son  saw  the 
poem  in  a  paper,  and  it  elicited  not  only  substantial  help, 
but  the  following  letter  to  the  author. 


1872]  The  Poet  Freiligrath  443 

To  Herr  Ferdinand  Freiligrath. 

Translation.  Parks  End,  Oxford,  December  25,  1872. 

'  Dear  Sir, — I  have  only  lately  seen  your  beautiful  poem  in  the 
Augsburger  Zeiiung  of  December  8,  and  therefore  my  thanks  come 
very  late.  But  I  must  give  utterance  to  what  I,  as  the  son  of  Wilhelm 
IMiiller,  felt  in  reading  your  poem,  and  I  thank  you  from  my  heart 
that  you  have  put  in  the  mouth  of  a  poet,  now  half-forgotten  by  the 
largest  portion  of  the  German  public,  words  which  most  poets  would 
have  kept  as  their  own  utterance.  This  has  given  great  delight  not 
only  to  his  son,  but  to  his  widow,  who  is  still  living,  and  they  both 
send  you  their  thanks.  May  the  recollection  of  the  too  early  departed 
poet,  and  the  love  of  the  German  people  for  the  living  poet,  bring  a 
rich  response  to  your  appeal.  Fate  has  hitherto  kept  us  from  meeting 
in  England,  and  it  is  therefore  all  the  greater  satisfaction  to  me  to 
shake  you  by  the  hand,  if  only  in  spirit.     With  true  respect, 

'  Your  more  than  thirty  years'  admirer, 

'  Max  MtjLLER.' 

On  December  30  Max  Muller  writes  to  his  mother : — 
Translation. 

'  Stockmar's  Ztyh  came  out  on  November  30  and  seems  very  much 
liked,  and  is  selling  well.  The  first  week  1,900  of  the  3,000  copies 
were  sold,  and  500  in  America.  We  sent  one  to  the  Queen.  Prince 
Leopold  complimented  G.  very  prettily  on  her  knowledge  of  German. 
He  is  here  as  an  undergraduate,  and  came  here  one  day  to  five  o'clock 
tea.     He  does  not  dine  out.     He  is  so  simple  and  unaffected.' 

Another  large  edition  of  the  Lectures  on  Langtiage  (the 
seventh)  was  published  this  year. 


CHAPTER   XX 

1873-1874 

German  University  finances.  Strassburg  Professorship  declined.  Schlie- 
inann.  Lectures  on  Darwin's  Philosophy  of  Language.  Emerson. 
Veddahs.  Cromer.  Lecture  in  Westminster  Abbey.  Order  pour  le 
Merita.  Member  of  Hungarian  Academy.  Prince  and  Princess  of 
Roumania.  Oriental  Congress.  Last  volume  of  Rig-veda.  American 
attack  on  Max  Miiller. 

The  New  Year  found  Max  Miiller  quietly  at  Oxford, 
working  at  the  last  volume  of  the  Veda,  and  at  his  Lectures 
on  Religion,  given  in  1870,  but  never  published,  and  preparing 
a  short  course  of  lectures  for  the  British  Institution  on 
Language  as  the  barrier  between  man  and  beast,  which 
he  called  '  On  Darwin's  Philosophy  of  Langiiage^  This  was 
Prince  Leopold's  first  year  at  Oxford  as  an  undergraduate. 
Max  Miiller  saw  him  constantly,  and  ever  afterwards  recalled 
their  intercourse  with  genuine  interest  and  affection,  and  he 
always  hoped  that  the  Prince  might  do  much  for  his  country 
as  an  enlightened  patron  of  literature  and  art. 

The  following  letter  to  Dr.  Althaus  refers  to  the  dedication 
to  Max  Miiller  of  Bulwer's  Coming  Race.  The  work  was 
published  anonymously,  and  it  was  only  in  the  obituary 
notice  in  the  Times  that  the   secret   of  its  authorship  was 

disclosed. 

OxFO^T),  January  1,  1873. 
'  Many  thanks  for  Bulwer.     Only  think,  I  never  knew  him,  never 
even  saw  him,  and  learnt  first  after  his  death,  who  had  written  The 
Coming  Race.     One  ought  not  to  be  proud  of  anything,  but  I  was 
very  much  delighted.' 

To  R.  B.  D.  MoRiER,  Esq. 

0\70'KD,  January  1,  1873. 
'  My  dear  old  Fellow, — Best  wishes  for  the  New  Year.     I  don't 
know  whether  you  see  many  Enghsh  papers ;  old  Stockmar  has  been 


1873]  Dean  Farrar's  Families  of  Speech       445 

reviewed  in  most  of  them,  and  it  is  very  interesting  to  see  how 
Johannes  Bos  has  looked  at  him  from  different  points.  There  was 
one  review  in  the  Morning  Post  more  or  less  official,  or  Palmer- 
stonian.  It  might  be  a  good  subject  for  an  article  in  the  Atigsburger, 
or  some  other  Zeitung,  to  show  how  the  book  has  been  received  and 
partly  digested  in  England.  I  have  had  several  private  letters  which 
show  that  the  book  has  told  in  various  ways.  I  hope  you  observed 
Gladstone's  civilities  in  his  last  Glasgow  speech  (before  he  came  to 
Strauss).  Do  you  know  of  anybody  who  could  write  such  an  ardcle  ? 
Young  Stockmar  is  not  the  man  to  do  it ;  he  is  evidently  put  out  by 
the  critics,  as  if  it  was  worth  while  writing  a  book  to  which  every- 
body is  to  say  Amen.    Ever  yours.' 

To  Canon,  now  Dean,  Farrar. 

January  6,  1873. 
'  Allow  me  to  thank  you  at  once  for  the  copy  of  your  Lectures  on 
the  Families  of  Speech,  and  for  your  very  kind  dedication.  You 
say  much  more  than  I  deserve,  and  all  I  can  do  is  to  do  my  best 
to  deserve  some  part  of  your  good  opinion,  by  what  I  still  hope  to  do 
for  the  Science  of  Language.  At  present  my  hands  and  my  thoughts 
are  full  of  other  work.  I  am  writing  lectures  on  the  "  Science  of 
Religion,"  and  to  know  what  to  say  and  what  not  to  say  in  four 
introductory  lectures  is  no  easy  matter.  In  fact,  I  should  gladly 
retire  from  my  task,  if  I  could,  for  I  hardly  feel  up  to  work,  and 
I  am  not  satisfied  with  what  I  have  written.  As  soon  as  I  see 
a  little  daylight,  and  find  leisure  for  other  work,  I  shall  read  your 
lectures,  and  after  I  have  done  so  I  hope  to  write  to  you  again,  or, 
still  better,  have  a  talk  with  you  on  points  on  which  we  differ,  and 
on  points  on  which  we  agree.  In  the  meantime  accept  my  hearty 
thanks.' 

Mr.  Gladstone  had  addressed  some  inquiries  to  Max  Miiller 
on  the  constitution  of  German  Universities,  to  which  the 
following  letter  gives  an  answer ; — 

Parks  End,  January  12,  1873. 
'  I  have  no  book  at  hand  where  I  could  find  the  exact  sum  allowed 
to  each  University  by  Government,  but  such  books  exist,  and  I  have 
asked  George  Bunsen  at  BerHn  to  send  me  something  like  a  Blue 
Book  on  the  subject.  The  Universities  derive  their  Avhole  income 
from  Government.  Even  in  cases  where  there  are  ancient  founda- 
tions still  preserved,  the  funds  or  the  land  must  be  administered 
under  the  cognizance  of  Government,  generally  by  a  Government 


446  German   Universities  [ch.  xx 

Commissioner.  The  only  other  source  of  income  consists  in  the 
fees  paid  by  the  students.  These  in  the  case  of  the  principal 
Professors,  who  lecture  on  Anatomy,  Church  History,  or  such  like 
indispensable  subjects,  are  considerable.  Savigny,  being  Professor 
of  Law  at  Berlin,  decHned  the  Ministry  of  Justice,  unless  his  income 
as  Minister  could  be  raised  to  what  his  income  was  as  Professor. 
A  class  of  400  students  would  yield  a  Professor  during  the  two 
semesters  1,600  louis  d'or,  and  some  of  the  Professors  in  my  time 
used  to  give  two  courses  of  lectures  in  each  semester.  The  highest 
salary  now  paid  to  a  Professor  is  only  4,000  thalers,  or  £600,  yet 
even  that  is  more  than  the  average  income  of  a  Professor  at  Oxford, 
with  the  exception  of  the  Theological  Chairs.  Considering  the 
general  income  of  the  country,  the  sum  expended  by  Government 
on  the  Universities  is  high.  The  number  of  Universities  is  large, 
each  independent  Prince  wished  to  have  a  University,  and  I  believe 
they  will  be  kept  up  even  now,  for  they  have  proved  useful  centres  of 
intellectual  life  in  every  part  of  Germany.  The  difficulty  to  which 
you  allude  of  teachers  examining  their  own  pupils  is  little  felt.  The 
Professor,  lecturing  to  a  large  class,  does  not  know  many  of  the 
students  personally.  The  examination  is  always  conducted  by  a  Com- 
mission consisting  of  five  or  six  Professors.  Besides,  the  University 
degree  does  not  confer  any  tangible  rights.  In  order  to  become 
a  lawyer,  a  clergyman,  a  physician,  a  schoolmaster,  every  candidate 
has  to  pass  the  Government  Examination,  and  with  these  the  Pro- 
fessors, qua  Professors,  have  nothing  to  do.  It  was  to  me  a  matter 
of  great  interest  to  compare  the  working  of  a  German  University, 
such  as  Strassburg,  with  what  I  knew  of  Oxford.  Each  country,  no 
doubt,  fashions  its  own  Universities,  and  makes  them  to  supply  the 
real  wants  of  the  people.  Yet  there  is  much  to  be  learnt  from 
a  comparison  of  the  two  systems.  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  undergo 
a  cross-examination  when  you  are  in  London  again.  I  beHeve  the 
time  will  come  when  something  will  have  to  be  done,  not  only  for 
Ireland,  but  for  England  too.  Oxford  wants  new  life.  Both  teach- 
ing and  learning  seem  to  me  to  be  regarded  as  a  burden,  which 
ought  not  to  be.  I  send  you  a  few  papers  which  may  partly  answer 
your  purpose.  In  the  little  calendar  you  will  find  the  statistics  of 
the  German  Universities,  as  far  as  their  teaching  staff  and  the 
number  of  students  are  concerned.  In  the  plan  of  the  lectures  you 
see  what  is  done  even  by  so  small  a  University  as  Strassburg.  You 
can  see  how  almost  every  Professor  has  a  laboratory,  seminary, 
hospital,  or  institution,  supported  by  assistants,  where  he  works  with 
his  pupils  apart  from  his  lectures.  These  institutions  are  the  real 
secret   of  the   success   achieved   by   the   German   Universities.      In 


1873]  Strassburg  Plan  abandoned  447 

several  cases  the  students  who  are  admitted  to  them  receive,  while 
they  are  at  work,  an  exhibition  or  fellowship.  Anyhow,  these 
institutions  are  the  real  workshop  where  the  tradition  is  handed 
down  from  generation  to  generation.  The  Colleges  with  their 
fellowships  might  be  made  to  answer  some  such  purpose.  There 
are  many  Professors  in  Germany  who  would  have  spoken  like 
Dollinger  on  Materialism.  What  I  like  in  the  German  Universities  is 
the  frankness  with  which  everybody  states  the  convictions  at  which  he 
has  arrived.  Strauss's  book  has  been  very  severely  treated  in  Germany. 
Yet  there  is  a  crisis  going  on  there  as  in  England ;  something  is 
dying,  whether  we  like  it  or  not.  To  my  mind  JNIansel's  Banipton 
Lectures  and  the  reception  they  met  with  were  a  sign  of  the  times. 
They  seemed  to  me  far  more  irreligious  than  Herbert  Spencer. 
They  left  religion  as  a  mere  cry  of  despair.  Frederick  Maurice  saw 
the  tendency  of  that  school  of  thought  which  erects  an  insurmount- 
able barrier  between  the  finite  mind  and  the  infinite,  but  he  could 
not  make  himself  understood.  Mansel  and  Herbert  Spencer  seem  to 
me  at  the  present  moment  to  rule  at  Oxford  in  the  two  opposite 
camps,  and  I  do  not  wonder  that  they  produce  in  each  much  the 
same  results.  I  spent  some  interesting  hours  with  Dollinger  at 
IMunich.  He  is  a  man  of  great  courage  in  thought  and  word ;  but, 
though  he  is  a  strong  and  vigorous  old  man,  he  shrinks  from  action. 
He  is  Erasmus  over  again ;  a  rougher  nature  will  be  wanted  to  do 
the  rougher  work.' 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  Oxford,  Jajiuary  i8,   1873. 

'  Siockmar  is  selling  well.  The  Queen  has  thanked  me  in  the 
kindest  manner  for  the  preface.  Prince  Christian  wrote  at  the 
Queen's  desire,  and  she  expressed  herself  kindly  about  the  book 
altogether.  ...  I  had  almost  forgotten  the  Emperor  (Napoleon). 
Let  him  rest  in  peace.  One  must  not  judge  him,  but  few  men  have 
caused  so  much  misery  in  the  world  as  he.  He  was  always  liked  in 
England,  so  his  death  has  called  out  a  good  deal  of  sympathy.  The 
last  years  of  his  life  must  have  been  a  hard  penance.' 

To  THE  Same. 
Translation.  February  16. 

'  The  Strassburg  uncertainty  is  over.  I  wrote  them  word  that 
with  all  my  private  work  I  could  only  lecture  one  term  in  the 
year,  and  on  account  of  the  other  Professors  they  could  not 
arrange  that.  I  am  glad,  for  I  had  done  my  duty,  and  should  have 
had  to  make  a  great  pecuniary  sacrifice,  and  it  would  have  taken  up 


448     Prize  founded  at  Strasshurg  by  M.  M.  [ch.  xx 

too  much  of  my  time,  and  I  could  not  with  a  good  conscience  have 
undertaken  more  than  I  offered.  My  chief  thought  has  been  about 
the  children,  and  whether  it  would  not  be  better  for  them  to  be 
brought  up  in  Germany.  That  is  often  a  weight  on  me,  for  the 
arrangements  here  are  very  imperfect.  One  can  manage  for  the 
girls,  but  how  it  will  be  for  Wilhelm,  I  do  not  yet  see.  But  time 
will  show.  As  yet  he  learns  nothing,  but  is  healthy  and  merry. 
G.  is  not  very  unhappy  about  Strassburg.' 

To  Dean  Stanley. 

Oxford,  February  21,  1873. 
'  I  now  have  lectures  in  London  and  Birmingham.  As  soon  as  these 
are  over  the  printing  of  Volume  VI  [of  the  Rig-veda\  will  begin,  and 
then  I  shall  go  on  with  the  translation.  I  found  my  work  so  in 
arrears,  that  for  the  present,  at  least,  I  have  given  up  a  change  to 
Strassburg.  I  am  very  sorry,  for  the  life  in  Strassburg  was  like  a 
mental  sea-bath.     I  wrote  last  week  to  give  it  up.' 

To  HIS  Mother. 

Translation.  Oxford,  February  25. 

*  Yesterday  I  dined  with  Prince  Leopold,  and  he  said  the  Queen 
had  charged  him  to  tell  me  how  pleased  she  was  that  I  had  decided 
to  stay  in  England.  I  am  writing  to  Strassburg  to  found  a  Stipendium 
in  their  University  with  the  2,000  thalers  they  paid  me  last  year,  for 
the  study  of  the  Veda.  It  will  not  hurt  me,  and  I  am  glad  not  to  take 
any  money  from  them.  The  people  in  Strassburg  and  BerUn  have 
been  very  friendly  over  the  whole  matter ;  even  Bismarck  expressed 
his  sorrow  at  my  decision.' 

And  thus  the  uncertainty  about  Strassburg  which  had 
hung  over  the  family  for  above  a  year  came  to  an  end. 
The  Prize  founded  by  Max  Miiller,  and  which  bears  his 
name,  is  given  every  third  year  for  the  best  dissertation 
on  '  Vedic  Literature,'  and  may  be  competed  for  not  merely 
by  present  students  at  Strassburg,  but  by  those  who  have 
already  taken  their  degree,  provided  they  studied  for  at  least 
four  terms  at  that  University. 

It  was  in  this  year  that  Max  Miiller  made  the  acquaintance 
of  Dr.  Schliemann,  the  famous  excavator,  at  first  by  corre- 
spondence only.  From  the  first,  Max  Miiller  took  a  great 
interest  in  Dr.  Schliemann's  work  ;  the  disinterested  character 
of  the  discoverer  appealed  to  him,  though  he  often  found 


1873]  J^^^-  Schliemann  449 

himself  unable  to  follow  Dr.  Schliemann's  deductions,  and 
to  the  last  he  used  smilingly  to   say,  'He  destroyed  Troy 
for  the  last  time.'     In  1875  Dr.  Schliemann  paid  a  visit  to 
Oxford,  and  stayed  with  Max  Muller,  who  for  several  years 
was  instrumental  in  getting  Schliemann's  papers  and  articles 
inserted  in  the  leading  newspapers  and  periodicals.     When 
Dr.  Schliemann  exhibited  his  Trojan  treasures  at  the  South 
Kensington  Museum,  Max  Muller  spent  some  time  in  London 
helping  him  to  arrange  the  things — an  arduous  task,  for,  as  is 
well  known,  though  he  had  the  scent  of  a  truffle  dog  for  hidden 
treasures,  he  had  little  or  no  correct  archaeological  knowledge, 
and  Max  Muller  found  the  things  from  the  four  different  strata 
which  Schliemann  considered  he  had  discovered  at  Troy  in 
wild  confusion — though  he  maintained  they  were  all  carefully 
packed  in  different  cases.     One  day  when  Max  Muller  was 
busy  over  a  case  of  the  lowest  stratum,  he  found  a  piece  of 
pottery  from  the  highest.    *  Que  voulez-vousP'said  Schliemann, 
'  it  has  tumbled   down ! '     Not  long  after,  in  a  box  of  the 
highest  stratum  appeared  a  piece  of  the  rough  pottery  from 
the    lowest,     'Que    voulez-vous  ?'    said    the    imperturbable 
Doctor,  '  it  has  tumbled    up ! '     The   friends   met   again   at 
Maloja   in    1885,     Dr.    Schliemann    had    meantime    finished 
his  beautiful  house  in  Athens,  in  which  two  bedrooms  were 
called  after  Max  Muller,  and  many  were  the  pressing  invita- 
tions to  occupy  them  ;  but  when  Max  Muller  visited  Athens 
in  1893,  his   kind  friend  had  passed  away.     He  gave  Max 
Muller  a  good  many  things  from  Mycenae,  which  are  now 
in  the  Ashmolean  Museum,  and  also  a  tiny  bit  of  gold  from 
Agamemnon's  grave.     The  correspondence  is  of  too  technical 
a  character  to  be  given  here  ;  interesting  letters  from  Max 
Muller  on  Athene  Glaucopis  and  Hera  Boopis,  on  the  Hindu 
Svastika,   and   on   Jade  tools  are  inserted  in    Schliemann's 
Troja.     Dr,  Schliemann  also  gave  Max  Muller  the  valuable 
Tanagra   figures,   which   his    friends   will   remember   in   the 
drawing-room  at  7,  Norham  Gardens. 

Max  Muller's  American  friend  Mr.  Conway  was  at  this 
time  preparing  an  Anthology  culled  from  the  religious  books 
of  different  sects  and  beliefs.  Hence  the  following  letter.  In 
the  sentiments  of  the  latter  part  most  people  will  agree. 

I  Gg 


450  Lectures  on  Darwin  [ch.  xx 

To  MoNCURE  D.  Conway,  Esq. 

Parks  End,  March  13,  1873. 
'  I  can  see  no  objection  to  your  printing  a  number  of  verses  from 
the  Dhammapada,  but  as  the  book  is  not  my  own,  1  think  it  would  be 
better  if  you  communicated  with  the  publisher,  Mr.  Triibner.  As  to 
lectures,  I  am  at  present  so  overworked  that  I  ought  not  to  make  new 
engagements.  I  shall  have  to  give  three  lectures  at  the  Royal  Insti- 
tution, then  at  Birmingham,  and  I  have  my  Oxford  lectures  going  on 
at  the  same  time,  so  that  this  is  as  much  as  I  can  safely  do.  Lastly, 
a  Mythological  Society  sounds  a  somewhat  ominous  name ;  yet  I  quite 
agree  with  you  that  it  might  do  good.  However,  what  I  should  like 
to  see  would  be  a  concentration  of  the  different  Societies,  and  the 
constitution  of  a  London  Academy,  divided  into  Sections.  So  much 
work  and  money  are  now  frittered  away,  and  the  Transactions  and 
Journals  of  the  numerous  Societies  have  become  mere  burial-grounds ; 
for  who  can  even  cut  open  their  pages  ?  I  read  with  great  interest  the 
Index,  where  I  occasionally  see  your  name.  Does  that  paper  tell  in 
America  ?  and  what  is  or  are  the  really  powerful  organs  of  thought  in 
the  United  States.?' 

The  end  of  March  the  three  lectures  on  Mr.  Darv^rin's 
Philosophy  of  Language  were  given  at  the  Royal  Institution. 
They  were  printed  in  Frascrs  Magazine,  and  also  a  very 
few  copies  for  presentation,  but  were  never  republished  in 
a  collected  form. 

The  following  letter  alludes  to  the  completion  this  spring 
of  Mr.  Bellows'  excellent  pocket  French  Dictionary,  a  copy  of 
which  Max  Miiller  always  took  about  with  him,  and  he 
invariably  recommended  it  as  the  best  type  of  dictionary 
he  knew  in  any  language : — 

To  Mr.  Bellows. 

Parks  End,  April  2,  1873. 
'  My  dear  Friend, — Many  thanks  for  your  charming  Dictionary, 
which  I  found  here  on  my  return  from  London.  I  am  too  busy  just 
now  to  do  more  than  admire  it,  and  congratulate  you  on  its  successful 
termination.  I  know  no  other  pocket  Dictionary  that  could  compete 
with  it.  Your  discoveries  at  Gloucester  are  very  curious  [Roman  wall 
in  his  own  garden],  and  I  hope  I  shall  be  able  to  inspect  them  some 
day  or  other.  Just  now  I  am  lecturing  in  London  on  "  Language  as 
the  Barrier  between  Man  and  Beast,"  and  I  have  hardly  any  thought 
for  anything  else.     In  a  few  weeks  I  hope  I  shall  be  more  free  again.' 


t873]  Emerson 


451 


The  next  letter  refers  to  an  interesting  article  written  by 
Dr.  Althaus  in  one  of  the  magazines  on  '  The  Germans  in 
England,'     Max  Muller's  is  the  last  name  in  the  article. 

To  Dr.  Althaus. 
Translation.  Oxford,  April  13. 

'  My  dear  Doctor, — I  do  not  know  how  to  thank  you.  I  have 
just  read  your  essay,  and  indeed  I  feel  it  would  be  superhuman  if, 
after  reading  w-hat  you  say,  I  did  not  feel  as  in  a  sort  of  champagne 
mood.  I,  of  course,  know  best  how  much  too  much  you  have  said  of 
me,  but  even  reducing  it  by  half,  there  remains  so  much  appreciation 
which  I  highly  value.  I  have  spent  many  happy  and  beautiful  years 
in  England,  and  even  the  little  disappointments  do  not  disturb  me,  and 
they  cannot  blur  memory's  sunny  pictures.  The  only  things  I  long 
for  are  my  old  friends.  One  feels  more  and  more  alone  and  solitary, 
and  that  feeling  draws  me  so  often  towards  Germany  with  a  great 
longing.  I  do  not  know  whether  you  feel  the  same.  When  I  was 
young  I  did  not  know  what  Heimweh  meant ;  now  it  increases  with 
every  new  year.' 

It  was  after  the  lectures  in  London  that  Emerson,  who  was 
paying  his  third  and  last  visit  to  England,  came  to  Oxford  with 
his  daughter  as  Max  MUller's  honoured  guest.  Max  was  one 
of  Emerson's  ardent  admirers,  and  had  known  and  loved  his 
writings  from  his  earliest  days  in  England.  On  the  second 
day  of  Mr.  Emerson's  visit.  Prince  Leopold  lunched  at  '  Parks 
End '  to  meet  the  old  man.  It  was  a  brilliant  May  day,  and 
the  whole  party  sat  out  in  the  garden  after  luncheon,  and  the 
hours  slipped  past  in  pleasant  converse,  till  Prince  Leopold 
proposed  an  adjournment  to  his  house,  which  was  near  at 
hand,  for  five  o'clock  tea,  when  he  delighted  Mr.  Emerson 
by  showing  him  many  private  photographs  of  the  rooms 
at  Windsor,  Osborne,  and  Balmoral.  The  next  day,  after 
attending  Mr.  Ruskin's  lecture,  the  Max  MUllers  and 
Emersons  visited  him  in  his  rooms  at  Corpus,  where  the 
scene  recorded  in  Auld  Lang  Syne  took  place.  Mr.  Ruskin 
wrote  afterwards  to  Max  Muller  to  account  for  it,  by  saying, 
*  It  chanced  that  both  you  and  Mr.  Emerson  happened  to  say 
things  from  which  I  deeply  and  entirely  dissented,  and  which 
reduced  me  at  once  to  silence.' 

Gga 


452  Letter  from  Mr.  Darwin  [ch.  xx 

To  Charles  Darwin,  Esq. 

Parks  End,  Oxford,  Jwie  29,  1873. 
'  Sir, — In  taking  the  liberty  of  forwarding  to  you  a  copy  of  my 
Lectures,  I  feel  certain  that  you  will  accept  my  remarks  as  what  they 
were  intended  to  be — an  open  statement  of  the  difficulties  which 
a  student  of  language  feels  when  called  upon  to  explain  the  languages 
of  man,  such  as  he  finds  them,  as  the  possible  development  of  what 
has  been  called  the  language  of  animals.  The  interjectional  and 
mimetic  theories  of  the  origin  of  language  are  no  doubt  very  attractive 
and  plausible,  but  if  they  were  more  than  that,  one  at  least  of  the  great 
authorities  in  the  science  of  language — Humboldt,  Bopp,  Grimm, 
Burnouf,  Curtius,  Schleicher,  &c. — would  have  adopted  them.  How- 
ever, it  matters  very  little  who  is  right  and  who  is  wrong ;  but  it 
matters  a  great  deal  what  is  right  and  what  is  wrong,  and  as  an  honest, 
though  it  may  be  unsuccessful,  attempt  at  finding  out  what  is  true  with 
regard  to  the  conditions  under  which  human  language  is  possible, 
I  venture  to  send  you  my  three  Lectures,  trusting  that,  though  I  differ 
from  some  of  your  conclusions,  you  will  believe  me  to  be  one  of  your 
diligent  readers  and  sincere  admirers.' 

That  the  Lectures  did  not  alter  Mr.  Darwin's  cordial 
appreciation  of  Max  Miiller  is  shown  by  the  following 
charming  letter,  inserted  by  permission : — 

Down,  Beckenham,  Kent, _/?^/f  3,  1873. 
'Dear  Sir, — I  am  much  obliged  for  your  kind  note  and  present  of 
your  Lectures.  I  am  extremely  glad  to  have  received  them  from  you, 
and  I  had  intended  ordering  them.  I  feel  quite  sure  from  what  I  have 
read  in  your  works  that  you  would  never  say  anything  of  an  honest 
adversary  to  which  he  would  have  any  just  right  to  object ;  and  as  for 
myself,  you  have  often  spoken  highly  of  me,  perhaps  more  highly  than 
I  deserve. 

'  As  far  as  language  is  concerned,  I  am  not  worthy  to  be  your 
adversary,  as  I  know  extremely  little  about  it,  and  that  little  learnt 
from  very  few  books.  I  should  have  been  glad  to  have  avoided  the 
whole  subject,  but  was  compelled  to  take  it  up  as  well  as  I  could.  He 
who  is  fully  convinced,  as  I  am,  that  man  is  descended  from  some 
lower  animal,  is  almost  forced  to  believe  a  priori  that  articulate 
language  has  been  developed  from  inarticulate  cries  ;  and  he  is  there- 
fore hardly  a  fair  judge  of  the  arguments  opposed  to  this  belief. 

'  With  cordial  respect,  I  remain,  dear  Sir, 
'  Yours  very  faithfully, 

'Charles  Darwin.' 


T^iui.  j^i^-Oj.  ifi^  ^' 


1873]  Visit  to  Germany  453 

The  Lectures  were  answered  by  Mr,  Darwin's  son,  whose 
article  was  again  rephed  to  by  Max  M tiller  in  the  Contem- 
porary Review,  called,  '  My  reply  to  Mr.  Darwin,'  which  in 
its  turn  provoked  the  violent  attack  by  Professor  Whitney 
on  Max  Mliller  described  in  the  next  chapter. 

During  this  summer  Max  Mliller  sat  to  Mr.  Bruce  Joy  for 
a  medallion,  and  later  on  for  a  bust,  in  the  Jiabit  brode  of  the 
French  Institute,  the  clever  artist  being  his  guest  whilst  the 
work  was  carried  out.  Several  pleasant  and  refreshing  visits 
were  paid  to  the  Deanery,  Westminster,  which  Lady  Augusta 
Stanley  made  a  second  home  to  many  of  her  husband's  old 
Oxford  friends.  The  Max  Mullers  also  stayed  at  Sir  William 
Siemens',  for  the  Civil  Engineers'  soin^e  at  the  South  Ken- 
sington Museum,  an  evening  long  remembered  with  pleasure^ 
as  spent  almost  entirely  with  Charles  Kingsley  looking  at  the 
Vernon  collection  of  pictures,  which  at  that  time  still  hung 
there. 

In  July  Max  Mliller  went  to  Germany  to  bring  his  mother 
to  England.  She  had  been  far  from  well  for  some  months, 
and  he  found  her  at  first  unwilling  to  travel,  and  thus  was 
kept  longer  in  Germany  than  he  expected. 

To  HIS  Wife. 

July,  1873. 

'  If  we  do  a  thing  because  we  think  it  is  our  duty,  we  generally  fail  ; 
that  is  the  old  law  which  makes  slaves  of  us.  The  real  spring  of  our 
life  and  our  work  in  life  must  be  love — true,  deep  love — not  love  of 
this  or  that  person,  or  for  this  or  that  reason,  but  deep  human  love, 
devotion  of  soul  to  soul,  love  of  God  realized  where  alone  it  can  be,  in 
love  of  those  whom  He  loves.  Everything  else  is  weak,  and  passes 
away;  that  love  alone  supports  us,  makes  life  tolerable,  binds  the 
present  together  with  the  past  and  future,  and  is,  we  may  trust, 
imperishable.' 

Whilst  at  Chemnitz  with  his  mother,  Max  Muller  wrote  to 
tell  Professor  Benfey  that  his  Index  Verborum  of  the  Rig-veda 
was  printed.  He  had  prepared  it  himself  before  he  brought 
out  his  first  volume  of  the  Rig-veda  in  1849,  and  had  lately 
employed  a  young  German  to  arrange  the  Index  for  each  one 
of  the  six  volumes  as  a  whole.  It  is  still  of  great  practical 
value,  as,  the  references  being  to  hymns  and  verses  and  lines, 


454  Lectures  on  Science  of  Religion      [ch.  xx 

and  not  to  pages,  it  can  be  used  with  any  edition  of  the  Rig- 
I'eda.  He  also  mentions  that  a  new  edition  of  his  Hitopadcsa 
was  called  for,  and  of  his  Sanskrit  Grammar  in  English,  '  and 
yet,'  he  says,  '  I  have  my  hands  already  quite  full.' 

The  Lectures  on  the  Science  of  Religion,  given  in  1870,  had 
been  published  just  before  Max  Muller  went  to  Germany,  and 
were  dedicated  to  Emerson, '  in  memory  of  his  visit  to  Oxford, 
and  in  acknowledgement  of  constant  refreshment  of  head  and 
heart  derived  from  his  writings  during  the  last  twenty-five 
years.' 

The  volume  was  favourably  received,  and  called  out  less 
adverse  criticism  than  it  would  have  done  three  years  before. 

'  Professor  Max  Miiller/  says  one  reviewer,  '  properly  calls  the 
lectures  in  this  volume  "An  Introduction."  They  break  ground  in 
the  little-trodden  path  of  Comparative  Theology.  He  tells  us  he  is 
convinced  that  study  here  will  ultimately  produce  as  great  a  revolution 
in  our  ideas  of  man's  past  history,  and  in  the  relations  and  character 
of  the  various  religions  of  mankind,  as  study  of  natural  science  has 
produced  in  our  view  of  the  Creation.  Researches  in  the  sphere  of 
history,  with  the  help  of  Comparative  Mythology,  prove  that  there  are 
elements  in  human  nature  which  must  have  been  primal  and  original, 
which  could  never  have  been  developed,  which  must  have  been  im- 
planted from  the  beginning — wherever  we  place  that.  That  man,  as 
a  religious  being,  possesses  such  an  element  or  disposition,  we  conceive 
Mr.  Muller  himself  has  gone  far  to  prove.  And  the  more  we  find,  by 
comparison  of  the  rehgions  of  the  world,  the  distinctness  and  indestructi- 
bility, and  yet  the  essential  identity  of  this  element  under  all  varieties 
of  forms  of  development,  the  more  shall  we  be  compelled  to  accept 
the  fact  of  the  Divine  origin  of  mankind,  and,  even  amid  its  worst 
corruptions,  of  the  community  of  human  nature  with  the  Divine,  of  the 
finite  with  the  Infinite.' 

So  little  is  still  known  about  the  Veddahs,  that  the  follow- 
ing letter  to  Mr.  Hartshorne  may  be  of  interest : — 

Oxford, /«/)/  27,  1873. 
'  Dear  Sir, — I  have  just  returned  from  Germany,  and  I  am  afraid 
that  my  answer  to  your  letter  of  June  23  will  hardly  reach  you  in  time, 
before  you  start  again  on  a  new  visit  to  the  Veddahs.  So  much  has 
been  said  about  their  peculiarities  in  language,  thought,  and  manners, 
that  a  really  trustworthy  account  of  them  would  certainly  be  most 
valuable.     How  difficult  such  an  account  is  you  must  know  best  by 


1873]  The  Veddahs  455 

this  time.  In  looking  at  your  list  of  Veddah  words  I  was  struck  at 
once  by  their  Pali,  i.  e.  secondary  Sanskrit  character.  The  question 
therefore,  arises,  are  those  Pali  or  Sinhalese  words  later  importations, 
or  is  it  possible  to  distinguish  between  an  earlier  substratum  of  Veddah 
speech  and  these  clearly  Aryan  words }  Or,  does  the  Veddah  language 
take  its  place  simply  as  a  degraded  Sinhalese  dialect,  and  the  Veddah 
people  as  a  degraded  Sinhalese  race,  instead  of  being,  as  generally 
supposed,  a  remnant  of  a  primitive  and  savage  race  ?  This  question 
can  be  solved  scientifically  by  linguistic  evidence  only.  But  the  solu- 
tion is  most  difficult.  We  must  know  what  corruptions  are  possible 
between  Veddah  and  Sinhalese,  between  Sinhalese  and  Elu,  between 
Elu  and  Pali,  between  Pali  and  Sanskrit.  ...  I  have  marked  on  your 
list  of  Veddah  words  many  that  are  clearly  of  Sinhalese  kinship,  and 
these  are  words  which  constitute  the  most  necessary  portion  of  a 
language;  for  instance,  iht pronouns,  words  for  man,  cow,  flowers,  to 
cook,  to  go,  &c.  &c.  Here  and  there  I  see  a  trace  of  grammatical 
structure,  and  you  may  be  certain  that  there  is  as  much  grammar  in 
the  Veddah  language  as  in  English.  You  may  say,  that  would  not  be 
much,  but  it  presupposes  much.  No  doubt  it  would  be  difficult  to 
get  an  idea  of  English  grammar  from  a  Welsh  coal-miner,  and  your 
Veddahs  have  evidently  sunk  much  lower ;  but  with  great  perseverance 
something  of  the  grammatical  articulation  of  the  language  might  still 
be  discovered,  and  has  to  be  discovered,  before  we  can  say  anything 
about  their  origin.  1  never  believe  that  the  Veddah  language  has  no 
word  for  two.  There  may  be  Veddahs  who  do  not  count,  or  who,  as 
philosophers  would  say,  form  no  syntheses,  but  that  a  language  which 
has  a  word  for  I  and  thou,  for  eye  and  ear,  should  have  no  sign  for 
the  dual  concept,  I  shall  never  believe.  More  difficult  even  than  the 
grammar  is  the  religion  of  a  people  like  the  Veddahs.  One  occasionally 
sees  accounts  in  the  papers  of  a  witness  being  sworn  in  an  English 
Court  of  Law,  and  if  one  took  his  answers  about  the  Deity,  about  life 
and  death,  and  right  and  wrong,  as  materials  on  which  to  build  a  theory 
of  the  Christian  religion,  one  would  still  be  better  off,  I  suppose,  than 
with  the  best  of  the  Veddahs.  And  yet  these  people  have  a  religion, 
if  one  only  knows  how  to  disinter  it.  To  call  "  the  propitiadon  of  the 
spirits  of  deceased  ancestors"  the  most  original  form  of  religion  is 
utterly  wrong.  It  takes  thousands  of  years  before  we  arrive  at  such 
ideas.  The  idea  of  an  ancestor  involves  the  idea  of  relationship; 
a  belief  in  deceased,  but  not  yet  extinct,  ancestors  implies  the  germs 
of  a  belief  in  immortality.  The  idea  of  a  spirit,  or  of  spirits  of 
deceased  persons,  belongs  to  the  tertiary  age  of  thought,  and  as  to 
propitiation,  that  is  a  concept  not  yet  3,000  years  old.  The  time  has 
not  come  yet  for  a  chronology  of  religious  beliefs ;  what  we  want  are 


456  Cromer  [ch.  xx 

accurate  statements  of  all  manifestations  which  imply  a  conception  of 
anything  beyond  what  is  given  to  man  by  his  sensuous  experience. 
All  this  is  a  work  of  very  great  difficulty,  and  it  is  because  people  do 
not  see  the  difficulty,  that  we  get  so  much  material  which  is  amusing 
and  may  fill  volumes  about  Prehistoric  Culture,  and  yet  leaves  us 
exactly  where  we  were  before.  It  is  difficult  when  we  have  to  deal 
with  one  individual,  to  say  what  he  is  no  more,  and  what  he  is  jioi  yet ; 
to  say  the  same  of  a  family,  a  clan,  a  tribe,  a  people,  is  much  more 
difficult.  And  yet  this  is  what  we  want  to  know  about  the  Veddahs, 
whom  many  people  are  so  anxious  to  represent  as  monkeys  and  not 
yet  men,  but  who  may  be  monkeys  and  men  no  longer. 
'  Excuse  haste,  and  beheve  me, 

'  Yours  very  truly, 

'  F.  M.  M.' 

After  Max  Miiller's  return  to  England  with  his  mother,  the 
whole  family  went  to  Cromer,  which  proved  a  time  of  great 
interest  to  him,  as  bringing  him  into  closer  contact  with  many- 
members  of  the  Gurney  and  Buxton  families,  with  some  of 
whom  he  had  been  associated  years  before  through  the 
marriages  of  his  friends  Ernest  and  George  von  Bunsen.  On 
his  return  home  he  devoted  himself  to  work  on  the  sixth 
and  last  volume  of  the  Rig-veda.  He  had  during  this  year 
published  the  text  of  the  Rig-veda  in  two  small  octavo 
volumes,  according  to  the  Pada  and  Samhita  systems. 

But  his  mind  was  ere  long  turned  to  another  subject.  His 
friend  Dean  Stanley  had  asked  him  the  year  before  to  give 
the  evening  address  in  Westminster  Abbey  on  Christian 
Missions.  Max  Mliller  had  then  declined,  but  the  Dean 
again  urged  his  request  this  year.  It  was  a  bold  step  on 
the  Dean's  part,  who  had,  however,  ascertained  that  it  was 
perfectly  legal.  He  took  the  opinion  on  this  point  of  Lord 
Coleridge,  the  Lord  Chief  Justice  of  England,  who  replied, 
'  It  is  perfectly  legal,  but  whether  it  is  expedient!  '  I  did  not 
ask  your  opinion  on  that  point,'  rejoined  the  intrepid  little 
Dean.  It  needed  no  small  courage  in  Max  Miiller  to  accept ; 
but  having  ascertained  from  the  Dean  that  it  was  legal,  he 
now  no  longer  hesitated,  feeling  it  would  put  him  in  a  position 
to  say  things  that  had  long  weighed  on  him.  Having  once 
made  up  his  mind,  he  was  perfectly  unmoved  by  the  storm  it 
raised,  and  set  about  preparing  his  discourse  with  his  usual 


1873]  Lecture  in  Westminster  Abbey  457 

tranquil  self-possession  and  power  of  detaching  himself  from 
public  opinion. 

To  R.  B.  D.  MoRiER,  Esq. 

November  3. 

'  My  dear  Morier, — We  had  our  orgie  at  All  Souls  last  night,  and 
I  thought  of  you  when  I  was  presiding  as  Sub-Warden  (the  Warden 
being  ill),  supported  by  two  noble  lords.  Lord  Devon  and  Lord  Bathurst, 
and  proposing  the  different  healths  of  the  evening.  I  also  thought  of 
Bellum's  and  all  that.  Don't  you  think  it  is  time  for  me  to  leave, 
having  reached  this  exalted  pinnacle  ? ' 

On  December  2  the  Max  MUllers  went  to  the  Deanery  at 
Westminster,  and  the  next  day  the  Lay  Sermon  was  delivered. 
Charles  Kingsley,  Theodore  Walrond,  and  Sir  Charles 
Trevelyan  dined  and  attended  the  service.  It  was  very 
nervous  work,  both  for  the  lecturer  and  many  of  his  hearers, 
but  his  voice  was  clear  and  carried  far,  and  his  earnest, 
reverent  manner  impressed  the  vast  congregation  from  the 
first  moment.  To  one  who  for  long  years  had  wished  that 
he  could  have  an  opportunity  of  uttering  the  great  truths 
which  were  the  foundation  of  his  own  life,  other  than  that 
afforded  by  the  Royal  Institution,  it  was  a  unique  moment, 
and  a  glance  at  his  quiet,  self-possessed  face,  showed  that 
he  was  equal  to  the  great  task,  and  stilled  all  feeling  of 
anxiety. 

The  next  day  both  the  congratulations  and  vituperations 
began ;  the  latter  made  little  impression.  On  his  way  home 
Max  Muller  met  Dr.  Liddon,  who  wrung  his  hand,  saying, 
'  I  rejoice  from  my  heart  that  you  have  been  helping  us.' 
The  author  of  The  Childhood  of  Religion  wrote: — 

'  I  must  thank  you  for  your  noble  words  in  the  Abbey  last  week,  to 
which  it  was  my  delight  to  listen.  I  am  sure  they  will  do  great  good 
in  directing  attention  to  the  place  each  faith  has  had  in  the  order  of 
this  divinely-governed  world.' 

To  THE  Dean  of  Westminster. 

Parks  End,  Oxford,  December  11,  1873. 
'  My  dear  Stanley, — So  the  work  is  done.     I  hope  it  may  produce 
some  good  effect !     I  may  tell  you  now  that  I  never  felt  so  nervous  in 
my  life  before,  but  I  had  perfect  confidence  in  you,  that  you  would 


458  Strassbttrg  [ch.  xx 

not  have  asked  me  unless  you  felt  it  ought  to  be  done,  and  could  be 
done.  All  the  people  I  see  here  seem  to  acquiesce,  but  of  course 
I  have  no  opportunity  of  hearing  their  real  opinion.  Ruskin  was 
truly  pleased,  and  I  believe  would  like  to  lecture  himself.  I  wish  the 
University  Sermons  could  be  opened  to  laymen — there  seems  to  be  no 
reason  why  they  should  not.  Are  you  aware  that  in  the  Greek  Church 
it  is  by  no  means  unusual  for  laymen  to  occupy  the  pulpit  ?  I  read 
your  sermon  to-day — I  had  hardly  heard  it  in  the  Abbey,  I  felt  so 
excited.  I  like  it  very  much.  Did  you  see  the  new  ending  to  my 
lecture  ?  I  felt  there  was  something  wanting  to  make  the  ending  less 
abrupt,  and  as  I  am  not  likely  to  have  another  opportunity  soon, 
I  thought  I  might  as  well  say  all  I  had  to  say.     Ever  yours. 

'  I  am  truly  grateful  now  that  you  asked  me,  and  glad  that  I  did  it.' 

To  Professor  Klaus  Groth. 

Translation.  Oxford,  December  14,  1873. 

'  My  dear  Friend, — It  is  long  since  I  wrote.  You  have  no  idea 
how  my  time  goes,  and  the  letters  I  like  to  write  have  to  wait  for  those 
I  7nust  write.  I  have  written  to  Prince  Christian  about  the  Platt- 
Deutsch  Bible :  the  thing  can  be  done,  and  I  have  told  him  not  to 
consult  any  one  further,  but  to  leave  the  arrangements  entirely  to  you. 
One  could  begin  with  the  New  Testament — wait  how  that  succeeds, 
before  the  Old  Testament  is  undertaken.  Yes,  how  much  has 
happened  again  this  year,  and  how  litde  really  effected !  All  has  gone 
well  with  us.  I  am  often  frightened  at  our  happiness.  Wife  and 
children  well,  my  mother  on  a  visit  to  us  for  the  last  six  months,  also 
far  stronger  than  one  dare  expect.  I  certainly  was  laid  up  in  summer, 
but  am  now  quite  well.  I  have  said  farewell  to  Strassburg  with  a 
heavy  heart,  but  I  hope  wisely.  It  was  not  quite  what  I  expected. 
There  was  a  want  of  go,  of  iniuative.  My  idea  was  that  the  best 
powers  of  Germany  would  come  to  this  new  Byzantium  of  literature, 
the  Crown  Prince  at  their  head,  that  the  Alsatians  might  be  forced  to 
be  proud  of  their  country,  and  that  a  new  mental  capital  would  be 
founded  in  Strassburg,  as  a  make-weight  to  the  military  metropolis ; 
but  the  reality,  pleasant  as  it  was,  was  different.  Fritz  Kraus  ^  has 
thanked  vie  for  a  notice  you  wrote  on  his  Southampton  Sonnets. 
Greetings  to  all  our  Kiel  friends.  ...  I  hope  your  Christmas  will  be 
one  of  undisturbed  happiness.  Your  boys  must  be  growing  fast. 
Shall  we  soon  meet  ?     It  does  not  look  like  it.' 

^  A  young  Swiss,  who  made  an  excellent  translation  of  Shakespeare's 
Sonnets  into  German.  He  was  a  great  invalid,  and  died  of  decline  in 
18S1. 


1873]  Westminster  Lecture  459 

To  W.  LoNGiMAN,  Esq. 

Oxford^  December  15. 
'"Why  is  there  so  much  delay  about  bringing  out  the  Sermons?" 
the  Dean  writes  to  me  from  Windsor ;  but  it  is  not  my  fault.  I 
ordered  my  part  for  press  on  Wednesday.  I  look  forward  to  three 
months'  imprisonment  with  great  pleasure.  What  an  amount  of  work 
I  shall  be  able  to  get  through,  having  no  dinner-parties,  calls,  meetings, 
&c.,  to  interrupt  my  work  ! ' 

Some  of  the  papers  had  threatened  Max  Miiller  with 
imprisonment  for  brawling  in  church,  and  an  Oxford  trades- 
man who  had  heard  of  this  ran  out  of  his  shop  one  day  as  he 
was  passing,  and,  seizing  his  hand,  said,  '  Well,  sir,  when  they 
send  you  to  prison,  count  on  a  hot  dinner  from  my  table 
every  week.' 

To  Herr  George  von  Bunsen. 

December  21. 

' .  .  .  The  theological  wasps  buzz  around  my  ears.      It   was  an 

exertion  indeed,  but  it  was  worth  while^fa/  experi??ientum  in  corpora 

vili.     There  is  no  going  to  prison  just  yet,  however — Stanley  had 

a  legal  opinion  from  the  Lord  Chief  Justice  before  he  undertook  the 

matter.' 

Perhaps  the  attack  that  amused  Max  Miiller  most  was 
from  Mr.  Henry  Reeve,  the  editor  of  the  Edinburgh  Revieiv, 
who  was  presumably  ignorant  of  Lord  Coleridge's  legal 
opinion,  and  wrote,  'By  the  law  of  England,  as  I  read  it, 
an  unordained  person  who  preaches  or  lectures  in  a  church 
is  guilty  of  a  misdemeanour,  punishable  with  three  months' 
prison,  and  though  Westminster  Abbey  is  so  peculiar  that 
it  is  probable  the  law  could  not  reach  you,  I  shall  always 
deeply  regret  that  you  were  induced  ...  to  appear  there ! ' 

To  Herr  George  von  Bunsen. 

Translation.  Parks  End,  December  25,  1873. 

'  Many  thanks  for  your  letter,  and  for  all  the  interesting  enclosures 
from  friends.  I  have  been  very  busy  lately.  The  English  people 
have  so  much  time  for  writing  letters,  and  to  explain  oneself  to  three 
or  four  different  parties  is  no  easy  matter.  In  spite  of  all,  I  am  never- 
theless glad  to  have  followed  Stanley's  bidding. .  .  .  Yes,  indeed,  I 
thought  of  your  father  when  I  stood  in  Westminster  Abbey— how 
often  the  unlikely  becomes  reality!     I  send  you  my  lecture,  for  first 


460  Science  of  Religion  [ch.  xx 

I  had  to  omit  some  points  when  I  delivered  it,  and  secondly  the  Times 
omitted  some  things  in  reporting  it. 

'  We  have  had  such  a  happy  Christmas ;  everything  was  perfect — 
three  generations  together — but  such  happiness  fills  one  with  anxiety. 

'  Alas,  the  lectures  of  Pauli  ^  have  come  to  nothing ;  he  was  proposed 
primo  loco,  but  it  was  impossible  to  get  a  majority  in  his  favour. 
Then  we  succeeded  in  obtaining  the  votes  for  Goldwin  Smith,  who  is 
now  paying  a  visit  to  Oxford ;  he  however,  refused. 

'Yes,  indeed,  the  letter  from  Curtius  is  very  depressing — for  the 
future  still  more  than  for  the  present.  And  yet  it  seems  unavoidable 
in  Berlin !  It  is  impossible  to  perform  music  in  a  large  manufactory. 
Therefore,  I  dreamt  a  dream  of  Strassburg  as  a  new  capital  for  the 
new  German  spirit,  but  I  soon  became  aware  that  the  wings  were 
wanting,  and  that  they  were  satisfied  with  very  little. 

'  Mommsen  told  me  when  I  met  him  in  Munich  that  he  was  ready 
to  leave  Berlin  at  any  moment  on  his  own  account,  and  still  more  on 
that  of  his  children.  At  Leipzig  there  is  no  Court  and  all  that  belongs 
to  Court  life ;  the  merchant  class  in  Leipzig  is  rich  and  they  are 
patricians,  the  Professors  are  poor  but  highly  esteemed :  life  there  is 
very  agreeable.  I  often  feel  drawn  towards  Leipzig — it  might  become 
a  new  Weimar,  only  grander  and  of  greater  national  popularity.' 

On  the  last  day  of  the  year  Max  Muller's  old  friend, 
Professor  Gelzer,  the  author  of  several  theological  works 
in  German,  wrote  to  him  from  Basle : — 

Translation. 

'  My  son  gave  me  at  Christmas  the  first  part  of  your  Introduction  to 
the  Science  of  Religion.  I  began  to  read  it  the  next  evening,  and 
could  not  stop  till  I  had  finished  the  second  half  next  morning.  How 
I  am  longing  for  the  continuation !  No  work  for  a  long  time  has  so 
electrified  me,  and  edified  my  deepest  soul.  There  are  passages 
which  flashed  on  me  like  lightning,  for  they  found  an  echo  of  sympa- 
thetic agreement  in  my  thoughts.' 

The  work  of  the  year  1874  was  devoted  to  the  sixth  and 
last  volume  of  the  Rig-veda.  The  preparations  for  the  Con- 
gress of  Orientalists  held  in  London  in  September,  and  writing 
his  opening  address  as  President  of  the  Aryan  Section,  occu- 
pied much  of  Max  Mijller's  time.  His  mother  returned  to 
Germany  in  March,  but  throughout  the  year  the  Max  Miillers 

■^  His  friends  wished  him  to  give  a  course  of  historical  lectures  at 
Oxford. 


1874]  Visit  from  Professor  Cams  461 

had  innumerable  guests,  among  them  the  reigning  Prince  and 
Princess  of  Roumania. 

To  HIS  Wife  (staying  near  her  old  home). 

January  8. 
'  Our  own  life  is  such  perfect  brightness  that  I  cannot  bear  the 
slightest  grumble  about  this  or  that  not  being  exactly  as  one  likes  it. 
It  seems  to  me  so  ungrateful  to  allow  one  moment  to  pass  that  is  not 
full  of  joy  and  happiness,  and  devotion  to  Him  who  gives  us  all 
this  richly  to  enjoy.  The  clouds  will  come,  they  must  come,  but 
they  ought  never  to  be  of  our  own  making.' 

January  12,  1874. 

*  By  a  grave  one  learns  what  life  really  is — that  it  is  not  here  but 
elsewhere ;  that  this  is  the  exile,  and  there  is  our  home.  As  we  grow 
older  the  train  of  life  goes  faster  and  faster,  those  with  whom  we 
travelled  together  step  out  from  station  to  station,  and  our  own  station, 
too,  will  soon  be  reached.' 

To  Edward  Tylor,  Esq. 

January  14. 
'  If  you  have  read  Whitney's  book,  would  you  not  write  a  review  of 
it  for  the  Academy  P  I  know  Whitney  is  an  opponent  of  mine,  or, 
I  should  rather  say,  he  hates  me,  but  that  does  not  matter,  and  if  you 
think  that  on  any  point  he  is  right  and  I  am  wrong,  I  shall  not  be 
angry  if  you  say  so.' 

To  HIS  Wife. 

April  13,  1874. 

'  The  spirit  of  love  and  the  spirit  of  truth  are  the  two  life-springs 
of  our  whole  being,  or,  what  is  the  same,  of  our  whole  religion,  for 
whatever  we  are,  or  do,  or  feel,  or  think,  is  nothing  without  the  key- 
note of  religion.  If  we  lose  that  bond  which  holds  us  and  binds  us 
to  a  higher  world,  our  life  becomes  purposeless,  joyless ;  if  it  holds 
us  and  supports  us,  life  becomes  perfect,  all  little  cares  vanish,  and 
we  feel  we  are  working  out  a  great  purpose  as  well  as  we  can, 
a  purpose  not  our  own,  not  selfish,  not  self-seeking,  but  in  the  truest 
sense  of  the  word  God-serving  and  God-seeking. 

'  I  shall  have  more  time  for  my  children  when  the  Veda  is 
finished.  I  now  always  feel,  and  have  felt  for  years,  that  every  hour 
when  I  could  work  was  due  to  the  Veda,  but  I  shall  feel  that  no  more.' 

Max  Miiller  had  a  great  pleasure  this  spring  in  a  visit  to 
Oxford  of  his  old  friend  Victor  Carus,  with  his  wife  and 
daughters.  He  was  on  his  way  to  Edinburgh,  where  he  had 
undertaken  a  course  of  lectures. 


h 


462  Order  pour  le  Merite  [ch.  xx 

To  Professor  Carus. 
Translatio7i.  April  28. 

'  ]My   dear  Victor, — Here    everything   is   light  and  sunny ;   you 

ought  to  have  stayed  quietly  here.     It  was  Hke  old  days  to  have  you 

here.     Life  spins  itself  further  and  further,  but  the  old  threads  run  on 

through  it.     The  death  of  Phillips  ^  has  shocked  us  all  terribly.     I  was 

not  there,  and  only  heard  of  the  accident  the  next  morning ;  when 

I  got  there  he  was  already  dead.     There  was  no  suffering,  but  he  died 

without  regaining  consciousness.     I  have  just  heard  from  Pauli  from 

Gottingen — always  the  same.     Hearty  greetings  from  us  to  you  all.' 

A  letter  from  his  old  friend  and  master,  Professor  Brock- 
haus,  v^^as  a  great  pleasure  to  him  this  spring  : — 

Translation.  May,  i874- 

'  I  heard  with  great  delight  that  you  have  been  working  very  hard 
to  finish  your  Rig-veda.  It  is  just  thirty  years  since  you  first 
announced  your  resolution  to  edit  this  gigantic  work,  and  now  the 
whole  is  finished  before  us.  With  what  delight  you  must  look  on 
the  past.  You  have  achieved  great  things,  and  your  services  to 
this,  the  richest  product  of  the  Indian  mind,  will  gain  ever  increasing 
recognition  and  admiration.' 

It  w^as  in  June  of  this  year  that  Max  MUller  received 
a  wholly  unexpected  honour,  the  Order  pour  le  Merite,  which 
may  be  called  the  Blue  Ribbon  of  Literature.  Soon  after, 
when  Max  M tiller  was  commanded  to  dine  at  Windsor,  he 
wrote  to  Prince  Leopold  to  ask  if  he  might  wear  his  Order, 
and  the  wire  came  back,  '  Not  may,  but  must.' 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  June  7,  1874. 

'  Have  you  seen  in  the  papers  that  they  have  made  me  a  Knight 
of  the  Order  pour  le  Merite  ?  I  cannot  understand  it.  There  are 
but  twenty  for  all  Germany.  The  Knights  elect  themselves,  and  the 
King  has  only  to  confirm  their  choice.  Now  the  Berliners  are  by  no 
means  my  best  friends ;  on  the  contrary,  I  have  had  from  time  to  time 
to  disagree  sharply  with  several  of  their  celebrities,  and  I  never  once 
thought  of  their  electing  me.  Well,  it  is  no  ordinary  Order,  and 
is  the  only  one  that  a  literary  man  may  wear  with  pleasure,  and  so 
I  am  really  pleased,  though  I  should  have  been  quite  happy  without 
any  Order.     I  have  not  heard  direct,  only  what  is  in  the  papers,  so 

^  Professor  of  Geology.     He  died  from  falling  downstairs  at  All  Souls. 


1874]  Order  pour  le  Merite  463 

it  may  not  be  true  after  all.    It  is  the  one  foreign  Order  I  can  wear  at 
Court  here  without  special  leave.' 

To  Professor  Carus  (who  was  to  receive  an  honorary  D.C.L. 
degree  at  Commemoration). 

Trayislation. 

'  My  dear  Victor, — Come  on  Tuesday,  that  you  may  not  be  tired 
but  have  time  to  rest.  We  are  counting  on  your  coming  to  us. 
Won't  you  bring  your  wife  or  a  daughter  with  you  ?  Two  rooms  are 
ready — you  know  that,  and  we  are  rejoicing  over  this  unexpected 
meeting.  As  to  the  Order  pour  le  Merite,  it  passes  my  comprehen- 
sion, I  only  know  as  yet  what  was  in  the  papers.  No  one  in  Berlin 
has  written  about  it.  The  Berliners  do  not  love  me  inordinately,  and 
the  election  is  with  the  Knights.  Well,  I  shall  hear  more — till  then 
we  must  "  bear  the  inevitable  with  resignation."  ' 

To  Professor  Lepsius. 

Translatmi.  Parks  'Ekv,  June  i8. 

'  My  dear  and  honourable  Friend, — I  have  not  yet  got  over  my 
shock,  but  the  astonishment  gives  way  to  mere  joy  and  gratitude. 
Never  for  a  moment  did  I  think  that  this  honour  would  be  bestowed 
upon  me  after  having  been  away  so  long  from  the  Fatherland  ^ ;  and 
I  can  never  be  grateful  enough  to  those  who  have  not  forgotten  me 
on  this  occasion.  I  feel  again  strongly  how  my  heart  is  drawing  me 
to  Germany,  and  did  I  still  possess  such  vitality  as  you  do,  I  should 
return  there  to-morrow.  Well  my  slavery  is  to  stop  this  year ;  in 
September,  I  hope  my  last  volume  of  the  Rig-veda  will  be  finished, 
and  who  knows  what  will  happen  then  1  I  shake  your  hand  most 
heartily  to-day.  Am  I  right  to  send  my  official  thanks  to  Ranke  ?  .  .  . 
What  do  you  think  of  another  trial  for  a  common  alphabet  at  the 
Congress  }  Our  paths,  as  I  told  you  before,  do  not  lie  far  apart ;  in 
short,  I  am  satisfied  to  express  the  fact  of  modification,  you  express 
the  method  of  modification.  IMy  system  is  the  more  incomplete,  by 
no  means,  however,  excluding  the  more  complete  one.  It  only  needs 
an  understanding  about  the  three  degrees  of  modification ;  I  am  only 
afraid  there  will  be  no  time  for  it.' 

To  THE  Crown  Prince. 

Parks  End,  Oxford, /une  20,  1874. 

Translation. 

'  Your  Imperial  and  Royal  Highness, — I  am  almost  afraid  that 
I  may  appear  obtrusive,  when  I  venture  to  express  to  your  Royal 

^  Max  Miiller  was  elected  one  of  the  twenty  German  Knights,  not  as  a 
foreign  Knight. 


464  Letter  to  the  Crown  Prince         [ch.  xx 

Highness  my  joy  and  gratitude  at  the  distinction  granted  to  me  by 
His  Majesty  the  Emperor.  But  the  ardent  desire  will  not  give  way  to 
conventional  constraint,  and  the  reverence  which  I  have  had  for  your 
Royal  Highness  for  so  many  years  gives  me  confidence  that  your 
Royal  Highness  will  not  be  offended  even  should  I  offend  against 
etiquette. 

'  I  really  cannot  imagine  to  whom  I  owe  my  gratitude  for  the  great 
and  unexpected  honour.  His  Majesty  the  Emperor  has  given  me 
repeated  proofs  of  his  gracious  kindness,  but  this,  it  seems  to  me, 
I  can  only  ascribe  to  the  kind  intercession  of  others.  It  suddenly 
occurred  to  me,  that  the  thought  of  bestowing  this  distinction  upon 
me  might  have  received  its  first  impulse  from  your  Royal  Highness, 
and,  whether  I  be  right  or  wrong,  I  could  not  rest  till  I  had  expressed 
how  deeply  grateful  I  feel  for  this  great  distinction,  and  how  it  inspires 
me  to  new  life  and  work. 

'  I  do  indeed  realize  just  now,  how  my  heart  clings  with  all  its 
fibres  to  Germany.  The  work  which  brought  me  to  England  firsc  of 
all,  and  which  has  kept  me  incessantly  occupied  here  for  twenty-five 
years,  the  publishing  of  the  Veda^  will  be  finished  this  summer,  and 
I  shall  then  feel  a  free  man.  If  I  could  be  of  more  use  in  Germany 
than  here,  I  should  like  to  return  to  Germany,  though  I  have  grown 
old.  I  was  very  happy  at  Strassburg;  it  was  like  an  intellectual 
sea-bath.  Only  the  task  appointed  me  did  not  seem  far-reaching 
enough.  The  Alsatians  ought  to  have  been  made  to  feel  proud  of 
their  new  Strassburg  in  spite  of  themselves,  and  just  one  course  of 
lectures  did  not  suffice  for  that.  I  had  hoped  that,  as  in  former  times 
for  Bonn,  so  now  for  Strassburg,  Germany  would  send  her  best 
men,  in  order  to  create  there  a  new  spiritual  Byzantium,  a  capital  of 
German  art,  science,  and  learning.  But  this  was  not  thought  of. 
Of  course  I  do  not  mean  to  assert  that  the  slow  and  quiet  development 
of  circumstances  is  not  perhaps  the  better  one.  I  soon  felt,  however, 
that  under  these  conditions  the  giving  up  of  my  work  in  England  was 
hardly  justified.  But  now,  having  finished  the  work  which  tied  me  to 
England,  the  old  thoughts  of  home  return,  and  especially  the  desire  to 
be  one  of  those  who  fight  under  the  flag  of  your  Royal  Highness 
on  the  battle-field  of  the  mind.  There  are  sure  to  be  such  battles,  in 
fact  there  are  such  now,  and  I  am  often  astonished  how  little  part 
the  people  take  in  the  great  religious  and  Church  questions  of  the 
present  time ;  how  the  Government  seems  left  to  bear  all  the  respon- 
sibility, and  this  makes  a  healthy  and  powerful  solution  of  the  matter 
almost  an  impossibility.  And  though  in  England  also,  material 
interests  absorb  a  great  part  of  the  moral  strength,  yet  in  struggles,  such 
as  have  begun  now  in  Germany,  the  heart  of  the  whole  nation  would  beat 


1874]  Rig-veda  finished  465 

louder  and  stronger.  What  good  would  it  do  to  Germany,  to  win  the 
whole  world  and  to  lose  herself,  to  lose  that  which  has  made  her  great, 
her  earnestness  of  life,  her  joy  in  everything  that  is  truly  beautiful, 
her  courage  in  the  search  for  truth,  her  faith  in  something  higher  than 
this  life?  There  is  much  to  conquer  still,  though  it  may  not  be 
Alsace  and  Lorraine.  Great  success  is  exhausting  for  a  while,  but  it 
seems  time  now  to  think  of  the  future,  which,  though  the  past  has 
been  great,  ought  to  be  still  greater. 

'  With  the  best  wishes  for  the  great  future  which  awaits  your  Royal 
Highness,  I  remain,  your  Royal  Highness'  obedient  servant.' 

On  July  I  the  following  entry  stands  in  his  wife's  Diary  : 
'  To-day  M.  finished  the  MS.  of  the  Rig-veda'  The  printing 
had  already  begun,  and  was  going  on  apace. 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  August  2. 

'  To-day  I  have  been  made  an  Honorary  Member  of  the  Hungarian 
Academy.  I  don't  know  how  it  came  about.  I,  of  course,  never 
stirred  in  the  matter,  and  yet  the  German  literary  men  are  so  angry 
about  it.  They  cannot  hide  their  displeasure,  but  it  does  not  hurt. 
The  nearer  I  come  to  the  end  of  the  Veda,  the  more  I  find 
there  is  to  do,  but  it  must  be  ready  for  the  Oriental  Congress  in 
September. 

'  To-morrow  is  our  wedding-day  :  how  fast  the  time  goes,  and  how 
much  sunshine  these  fifteen  years  have  brought  us,  even  though  the 
clouds  have  not  been  wholly  wanting.     God  will  help  us  further.' 

To  HIS  Wife  (who  was  at  the  death-bed  of  the  mother-aunt). 

August  19,  1874. 
'  The  death  of  those  we  love  is  the  last  lesson  we  receive  in  life — 
the  rest  we  must  learn  for  ourselves.  To  me,  the  older  I  grow  and 
the  nearer  I  feel  that  to  me  too  the  end  must  be,  the  more  perfect  and 
beautiful  all  seems  to  be ;  one  feels  surrounded  and  supported  every- 
where by  power,  wisdom,  and  love,  content  to  trust  and  wait,  incapable 
of  murmuring,  very  helpless,  very  weak,  yet  strong  in  that  very 
helplessness,  because  it  teaches  us  to  trust  to  something  not  ourselves. 
Yet  parting  with  those  we  love  is  hard — only  I  fear  there  is  nothing 
else  that  would  have  kept  our  eyes  open  to  what  is  beyond  this  life.' 

To  INI.  Renan. 

August  19. 

'  My  dear  Friend  and  illustrious  Colleague, — It  is  such  a  long 
time  since  I  had  the  pleasure  of  hearing  from  you,  that  I  cannot  allow 
I  H  h 


466       Prince  and  Princess  of  Roumama     [ch.  xx 

an  opportunity  to  pass  which  may  I  hope  bring  us  together  again. 
You  know  that  from  the  fourteenth  to  the  twenty-first  of  September 
there  will  be  a  large  gathering  of  Oriental  scholars  in  London. 
I  always  understood  that  you  would  be  here  at  the  time,  if  not  for  the 
sake  of  the  Congress,  at  least  for  a  visit  to  England,  which  you  had 
planned  last  year  and  postponed  to  this.  Now  I  hope  it  may  be  so, 
and  that  we  may  meet  not  only  in  London,  but  also  in  Oxford.  You 
know  that  a  visit  from  you  and  Madame  Renan  is  a  very  old  promise, 
and  both  I  and  my  wife  have  always  looked  forward  to  its  fulfilment 
with  great  pleasure.  We  shall,  of  course,  be  in  London  during  the 
actual  week  of  the  Congress,  but  afterwards  we  return  to  Oxford,  and 
should  be  delighted  to  show  you  all  that  is  interesting  and  beautiful 
both  here  and  in  the  neighbourhood.  Please  let  me  hear  what  your 
plans  are.  If  you  could  be  persuaded  to  join  the  Congress  we  should 
of  course  consider  it  a  great  honour,  and  you  would  find  among  the 
multitude  some  scholars  whom  you  would  like  to  meet.  My  old 
teacher  Brockhaus  is  coming,  also  Stenzler,  Weber,  Windisch,  Schrader, 
Lepsius,  Brugsch,  and  many  more ;  even  Pundits  from  India.  Now 
please  consider  all  this,  and  let  me  know  your  decision.  I  see  that 
your  great  work  on  the  Phoenician  Expedition  is  finished,  and  I  con- 
gratulate you  with  all  my  heart.  I  can  share  your  feelings,  for  I  have 
just  ordered  the  last  sheet  of  the  Rig-vcda  for  press.  Twenty-five 
years  of  work,  and  I  have  now  only  to  print  the  preface  and  various 
readings.  The  last  sheets  were  printed  from  copies  I  had  made 
at  Paris,  IMay,  1846,  during  the  bright  and  happy  days  when  Burnouf 
lectured  at  the  College  de  France.  My  wife  presents  her  kind 
regards  to  you  and  Madame  Renan,  and  hopes  I  shall  succeed  in 
persuading  }'0U  to  come.  With  old  and  unchanged  sentiments  of 
sincere  regard.' 

In  the  beginning  of  September  Max  MUller  had  the  honour 
of  receiving  the  reigning  Prince  and  Princess  of  Roumania 
under  his  roof.  They  wished  to  see  Oxford,  and  their  only 
free  days  coincided  with  some  meeting  that  filled  every  hotel 
in  Oxford.  In  a  letter  to  his  mother  Max  MUller  speaks  of 
the  Princess  as  very  clever,  and  of  the  Prince  as  a  man  of 
great  courage  and  determination.  '  They  have  both  of  them 
a  strong  feeling  for  the  duties  of  their  great  station,  and  are 
full  of  plans  for  the  good  of  the  people  committed  to  their 
care.'  They  met  again  in  London,  and  a  feeling  of  true 
esteem  and  friendship  sprang  up,  which  was  a  source  of  deep 
gratification  to  Max  MUller  to  the  last.     Only  a  few  days 


1874]  Oriental  Congress  467 

before  his  death  he  received  the  kindest  message  from  the 
King  of  Roumania  about  a  little  service  that  he  had  been 
able  to  render  to  His  Majesty. 

The  Oriental  Congress  which  met  in  London  towards  the 
close  of  September  was  a  time  of  great  interest  and  pleasure 
to  Max  Miiller,  who  afterwards  welcomed  to  his  house  in 
Oxford  many  old  friends — Professor  Lepsius  and  his  eldest 
son,  Professor  Noldeke,  Dr.  Stenzler,  Dr.  Spiegel,  Dr.  Gosche, 
M.  Leon  Feer,  and  various  distinguished  Orientals.  The  Max 
MUllers  stayed  during  the  Congress  with  the  Kingsleys  in 
their  charming  old  house  in  the  Cloisters  at  Westminster. 
Charles  Kingsley  was  in  bad  health,  not  having  really  re- 
covered from  the  severe  illness  he  had  had  during  his  visit 
to  America  in  the  summer.     His  wife  was  then  perfectly  well. 

Max  Miiller  was  President  of  the  Aryan  Section,  and  in 
opening  the  section  delivered  a  striking  address  on  the  Impor- 
tance of  Oriental  Studies.  The  Prince  of  Roumania  came  up 
from  Hastings  to  attend  it.  At  the  conclusion  of  the  address, 
Max  Miiller  presented  to  the  Congress  the  last  sheet  of  the 
last  volume  of  the  Rig-veda,  with  the  Commentary  of  Sayana- 
chirya.  His  old  teacher,  Professor  Brockhaus,  was  present  to 
witness  the  completion  of  his  pupil's  great  work.  The  address 
was  published  in  Chips,  Volume  IV.  An  appreciative  article  on 
his  work  had  lately  appeared  in  one  of  the  American  papers. 

*  Professor  F.  Max  Miiller  is  just  giving  the  last  touches  to  his 
final  volume  of  the  Rig-veda.  The  work  was  begun  twenty-five 
years  ago,  and  was  undertaken  as  a  labour  of  love,  for  those  who  at 
that  period  were  interested  in  Oriental  or  Sanskrit  studies  were  few 
indeed ;  too  few  certainly  for  the  German  scholar  to  have  anticipated 
any  reward  for  his  labour,  except  the  gratitude  of  those  few,  and  the 
consciousness  of  having  given  an  important  contribution  to  learning. 
But  within  that  twenty-five  years  the  interest  in  such  studies  has 
quadrupled  at  least,  and  thousands  now  wish  to  study  the  Rig-veda. 
I  believe  there  has  been  some  disposition  among  American  students 
of  Sanskrit  to  cridcize  Max  Miiller's  work  in  a  disparaging  way, 
but  the  Hindoo  scholars  themselves  declare  that  it  is  the  best 
rendering  of  their  ancient  hymns  which  exists,  and  such  is  the 
growing  opinion  in  England.  And  how  much  has  he  done  beside  ? 
Those  who  have  only  read  his  Chips  from  a  German  Workshop,  his 
Science  of  Religion,  his  Lectures  on  Language,  know  but  the  half  of 

H  h  2 


468  Meets  Darwin  [ch.  xx 

his  labours,  which  really  have  embraced  the  preparation  of  a  com- 
plete set  of  instrumentalities  for  the  prosecution  of  Sanskrit  studies. 
Everybody  who  is  engaged  in  any  work  of  that  kind  rushes  to  him, 
and  none  are  turned  empty  away.  At  the  same  time  he  has  mingled 
in  every  important  discussion  bearing  on  philology  and  mythology  in 
both  England  and  Germany,  generally  carrying  the  verdict  for  his 
point,  but  always  knowing  how  to  yield  gracefully  to  argument,  and, 
moreover,  always  prompt  in  recognizing  discoveries  made  by  others 
in  directions  where  he  himself  had  looked  without  making  them. 
In  short,  Max  Miiller  is  among  the  most  truthful  and  industrious 
workers  of  Europe  just  now,  and  he  has  built  up  a  reputation  which 
few  possess.' 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  October  9. 

'  We  have  lately  been  very  much  occupied,  partly  with  the  Oriental 
Congress,  partly  by  visits  to  us  and  visits  we  have  paid.  Happily 
I  had  finished  my  Veda,  and  have  only  a  little  to  do  to  the  preface, 
index,  &c.,  which  must  be  finished  this  week,  and  then  I  shall  not 
grudge  myself  a  little  freedom.  We  had  Lepsius,  father  and  son,  on 
a  visit.  Then  we  went  to  stay  with  Mr.  Grant  Duff,  formerly 
Under-Secretary  for  India,  and  with  Sir  John  Lubbock,  where  we 
met  Darwin,  Tyndall,  Spencer,  and  the  two  Lepsius'.  Lectures  will 
soon  begin  here,  and  though  I  have  been  here  through  the  vacation 
and  worked  hard,  it  has  suited  me  very  well.  Perhaps  I  shall  take 
a  hoHday  in  winter,  if  I  need  it,  and  a  visit  to  Rome  has  long 
been  hoped  for  by  us  both.  My  principal  work  is  finished,  and  I  can 
at  last  give  myself  a  treat.' 

This  visit  was  the  only  time  Max  Miiller  and  Darwin  met. 
The  conversation  turning  on  apes  as  the  progenitors  of  man, 
Max  Miiller  asserted  that  if  speech  were  left  out  of  considera- 
tion, there  was  a  fatal  flaw  in  the  line  of  facts.  '  You  are 
a  dangerous  man,'  said  Darwin,  laughingly. 

It  was  in  the  November  of  this  year  that  Bishop  Colenso 
visited  Oxford  as  the  guest,  first  of  Max  Miiller,  and  then  of 
the  Master  of  Balliol,  and  was  forbidden  to  preach  at  Carfax, 
the  City  Church,  by  the  Bishop  of  Oxford. 

On  November  27  Max  Miiller  writes: — 

To  HIS  Wife. 
'  I  sent  you  a  line  this  afternoon  after  I  had  seen   Colenso.     It 
seems  an   unwarrantable   stretch   of  authority   on  the   part   of  the 


1874]  Bishop  Colenso  469 

Bishop,  for  there  is  no  legal  censure  of  any  kind  against  Colenso, 
He  has  simply  spoken  out  and  said  what  every  bishop  knows  or 
ought  to  know.  I  hear  there  is  an  attempt  to  prevent  his  preaching 
in  Balliol,  but  in  that  they  will  hardly  succeed.' 

November  29. 

'  Colenso  preached  an  excellent  sermon  in  Balliol  Chapel.  He 
dwelt  on  the  natural  slowness  of  all  progress  in  nature,  as  well  as 
in  the  world  of  spirit ;  that  we  ought  to  learn  to  wait,  and  not  expect 
to  see  the  kingdom  of  God  on  earth,  but  only  to  work  for  it.  The 
chapel  was  full — his  two  sons  were  there,  and  the  whole  scene  was 
very  touching.  The  time  will  come  when  they  will  thank  Colenso 
for  having  shown  that  the  Old  Testament  is  a  genuine  old  book,  full 
of  all  the  contradictions  and  impossibilities  which  we  have  "a  right  to 
expect  in  old  books,  but  which  we  seldom  see  in  books  written  on 
purpose.  With  those  who  hold  that  the  Song  of  Solomon  was 
miraculously  inspired  one  cannot  agree — it  is  with  them  as  with  those 
who  defend  the  real  material  Presence,  they  have  changed  the  highest 
truth  into  most  dangerous  falsehood.  However,  let  them  fight  it  out ; 
they  will  never  prevail.' 

On  the  same  day  Max  was  able  to  write  to  his  mother : — 

TraJisIatmt. 

*  The  last  volume  of  the  Veda  is  in  the  bookbinder's  hands — a  long 
piece  of  work  finished.  I  often  hardly  believed  that  I  should  finish  it, 
but  now  I  feel  I  have  a  right  to  rejoice,  and  shall  often  think  of  it 
with  real  delight.' 

Many  kind  congratulations  came  from  old  friends  who  had 
watched  the  progress  of  the  work  during  many  years. 
The  Master  of  Balliol  wrote : — 

'  I  heartily  congratulate  you  on  the  completion  of  your  great  work. 
I  only  disagree  with  one  thing  in  your  preface,  that  you  dare  to  speak 
of  yourself  as  an  old  man.  We  are  none  of  us  old  until  we  think 
that  we  are.' 

To  Professor  Althaus. 

Translation.  December  3. 

'  Many  thanks  for  your  letter.  Indeed,  I  had  hardly  thought  it 
possible  that  I  should  be  permitted  to  finish  this  work,  and  now  that 
it  is  finished,  something  seems  to  be  wanting  every  day.  However, 
there  is  plenty  of  material  left  for  work,  and  if  my  strength  holds  out, 
the  good  will  to  work  is  never  wanting.' 

In    December    Max   MUller   received   the   thanks   of  the 


470       Preface  to  Volume  VI  of  Rig-veda    [ch.  xx 

Secretary  of  State  for  India  in  Council  for  the  satisfactory 
manner  in  which  he  had  carried  out  the  important  work 
entrusted  to  him.  In  his  reply  to  Sir  Lewis  Malet,  Max 
Mliller  expressed  his  pleasure  that  the  work  was  done,  and 
his  gratitude  to  Her  Majesty's  Government  for  having  enabled 
him  to  finish  a  task  which  he  thought  was  worth  a  life,  and 
for  which  he  had  received  in  France,  Italy,  and  Germany  the 
highest  honours  which  a  literary  man  can  aspire  to. 

'  The  Rig-veda,  though  for  the  last  3,000  years  it  has  formed 
the  foundation  of  the  religious  life  of  India,  had  never  before  been 
rendered  accessible  to  the  people  at  large,  and  its  publication  will 
produce,  nay,  has  already  produced,  in  India  an  effect  similar  to  that 
which  the  first  printing  of  the  Bible  produced  on  the  mind  of  Europe. 
Beyond  the  frontiers  of  India  also,  the  first  edition  of  the  oldest  book 
of  the  whole  Aryan  race  has  not  been  without  its  effect,  and  as  long 
as  men  value  the  history  of  their  language,  mythology,  and  religion, 
I  feel  confident  that  this  work  will  hold  its  place  in  the  permanent 
library  of  mankind.' 

To  Max  Muller's  surprise  and  gratification,  he  received 
about  three  months  later  a  letter  from  Sir  Lewis  Malet,  in- 
forming him  '  that  the  Secretary  of  State  for  India  in  Council 
has  sanctioned  a  grant  of  money  to  you,  as  a  special  recognition 
of  your  services  in  connexion  with  the  editing  and  printing  of 
the  Rig-vcda,  in  addition  to  the  sum  received  by  you  as  an 
honorarium,  according  to  the  orginal  agreement.' 

Few  but  Sanskrit  scholars  will  have  read  the  preface  to 
this  sixth  and  last  volume  of  Max  Muller's  great  work,  and 
some  passages  are  therefore  given  from  it : — 

'When  I  had  written  the  last  line  of  the  Rig-veda  and  Sayana's 
Commentary,  and  put  down  my  pen,  I  felt  as  if  I  had  parted 
with  an  old,  old  friend.  For  thirty  years  scarcely  a  day  has  passed 
on  which  my  thoughts  have  not  dwelt  on  this  work,  and  for  many 
a  day,  and  many  a  night  too,  the  old  poets  of  the  Veda,  and 
still  more  their  orthodox  and  painstaking  expositor,  have  been  my 
never-failing  companions.  I  am  happy,  no  doubt,  that  the  work  is 
done,  and  after  having  seen  so  many  called  away  in  the  midst  of  their 
labours,  I  feel  deeply  grateful  that  I  have  been  spared  to  finish  the 
work  of  my  life.  But  habits  established  for  so  long  a  time  are  not 
broken  without  a  wrench,  and  even  now  I  begin  to  miss  my  daily 
task;  I  begin  to  long  for  some  difficult   and  corrupt   passages   to 


1874]  Burnouf  471 

grapple  with,  for  some  abrupt  quotation,  or  for  some  obscure  allusion 
to  Panini  to  trace  back  to  its  original  source. 

'It  was  in  1845,  when  attending  the  lectures  of  Eugene  Burnouf, 
that  my  thoughts  became  fixed  on  an  edition  of  the  Rig-veda  and  its 
voluminous  Commentary.  I  still  see  the  eager  faces  of  a  number  of 
young  scholars  sitting  round  the  table  when  Burnouf  was  lecturing 
with  a  vivacity,  a  keenness,  a  flow  of  knowledge,  which  I  have 
never  seen  surpassed.  ...  I  was  the  youngest  of  them  all,  and, 
though  I  had  published  a  translation  of  the  Httopadesa,  my  ideas  of 
Sanskrit  literature  did  not  reach  much  beyond  the  Epic  Poems  and 
the  Upanishads.  Nothing,  I  thought,  could  in  beauty  of  thought  or 
expression  exceed  the  Upanishads;  I  had  translated  some  of  them 
for  Schelling.  Well  do  I  remember  my  surprise  when  I  heard 
Burnouf  speak  of  them  as  works  of  small  importance,  compared 
with  the  older  portions  of  the  Veda.  Burnouf  was  lecturing  then 
on  the  first  book  of  the  Rig-veda.  He  possessed  a  complete  copy 
of  Sayana's  Commentary.  After  a  time  Burnouf  lent  me  some  of 
his  ]\ISS.  and  encouraged  me  to  copy  them.  It  was  hard  work 
at  first  .  .  .  and,  but  for  his  frank  acknowledgement  that  he  too 
could  not  always  make  out  Sayana,  I  should  never  have  had  the 
courage  to  persevere.  .  .  .  But  I  worked  on  till  a  portion  of  the  work 
was  finished,  and  after  obtaining  the  patronage  of  the  old  East  India 
Company,  I  was  able  to  publish  the  first  volume  in  1849. 

*We  are  now  in  1874.  Twenty-five  years  are  certainly  a  long 
time,  and  when  I  saw  how  some  of  my  friends  clamoured  at  the 
delay  ...  I  began  to  fear  I  might  really  be  to  blame.  I  therefore 
made  out  an  account  of  my  stewardship,  and  the  result  was  as  follows  : 
I  found  that  since  1849  there  were  three  years  in  which  I  was 
prevented  going  on  with  my  work — one  year  when  I  was  out  of 
health,  another  when  I  had  to  wait  for  the  renewal  of  the  grant, 
on  the  extinction  of  the  East  India  Company,  and  a  third  when 
waiting  for  a  MS.  from  India,  which  promised  to  be  if  not  the 
original,  yet  much  more  ancient  than  any  I  had  used.  During  the 
last  twenty-five  years  I  have  done  other  work  also.  ...  I  have  not 
thought  that  a  man  ought  to  live  by  Sanskrit  alone.  But  after 
deducting  the  three  years  when  I  could  not  print,  I  found  to  my 
own  surprise  that  I  had  published  in  my  two  editions  of  the  Rig-veda, 
the  large  one  with,  and  the  small  one  without  Sayana's  Commentary, 
what  amounted  to  an  annual  volume  of  nearly  600  pages  octavo, 
during  twenty-five  consecutive  years.  If  my  friends  will  also  take 
into  account  that  in  that  time  I  published  two  editions  of  my  History 
0/  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature,  two  editions  of  my  Sanskrit  Grammar, 
the  Prdtisdkhya,  text,  translation  and  notes,  and  the  first  volume  of 


472  Attack  on  M.  M.  [ch.  xx 

my  translation  of  the  Rig-veda,  I  think  they  will  admit  that  I  have 
not  been  altogether  faithless  to  my  first  love.' 

If  we  add  to  this  the  Lectures  on  the  Science  of  Language, 
and  innumerable  lectures  and  essays  on  language,  mythology, 
and  religion  republished  in  the  Chips,  the  total  record  of 
work  done  is  not  a  light  one  for  a  man  not  yet  fifty-one ! 

Max  M tiller  concludes  his  preface  by  a  few  lines  in  self- 
defence,  which  will  find  an  echo  in  the  hearts  of  most  authors  : 

'I  know  I  have  sometimes  been  blamed  for  not  replying  to  my 
critics,  but  such  blame  was  most  unjust.  The  fact  is  that  I  could 
not  possibly  do  it.  When  books  are  reviewed  as  they  now  are,  not 
only  in  England,  but  in  every  country  in  Europe,  nay,  even  in 
America  and  India,  what  are  we  to  do  ?  Many  of  these  reviews 
never  reach  me  at  all,  but  even  if  I  attempted  to  read  and  notice 
those  only  which  I  happen  to  see,  I  should  have  had  no  time  left  for 
anything  else.  It  was  not  want  of  respect  that  made  me  silent,  but 
simply  want  of  time.  I  venture  to  avail  myself  of  this  opportunity  to 
explain  another  apparent  neglect  on  my  part,  for  which  I  know 
I  have  been  blamed,  if  not  in  public,  at  least  in  private.  During  the 
last  ten  years,  the  number  of  books  sent  me  from  all  parts  of  the 
world  has  become  so  great  that  I  had  to  give  up  the  attempt  to 
acknowledge  them  all.  When  I  was  a  young  man  it  was  generally 
understood  that  no  acknowledgement  was  expected  when  a  book  was 
sent  without  a  letter ;  to  that  rule  I  have  conformed  both  as  a  sender 
and  receiver  of  presentation  copies.  It  is  generally  said  that 
Humboldt  acknowledged  all   books   and   answered   all   letters.  .  .  . 

Humboldt  died  before  the  Penny  Post  attained  its  full  development 

I  feel  sure  that  my  friends  will  forgive  me  if  I  do  not  always  write, 
by  return  of  post,  that  I  am  looking  forward  with  the  greatest 
pleasure  to  reading  their  books.  Nothing  gives  me  greater  pleasure 
than  reading  books  wTitten  by  men  with  whom  I  am  personally 
acquainted,  but  if  a  friend  sends  me  a  book  on  Comparative  Mytho- 
logy while  I  am  in  the  midst  of  work  on  Sanskrit  accentuation, 
I  must  put  his  work  aside  for  a  time,  and  cannot  express  an  opinion 
till  I  find  leisure  to  read  it  carefully.     Soyez  raisonnabks.' 

Here  it  is  necessary  to  revert  to  an  extraordinary  statement 
published  soon  after  Max  MUller's  death  in  the  New  York 
Nation,  and  repeated  in  other  journals.  The  Nation  says : 
*  What  Max  MUller  constantly  proclaimed  to  be  his  own  great 
work,  the  edition  of  the  Rig-veda,  was  in  reality  not  his  at 
all.  ...  A  German  scholar  did  the  work,  and  Muller  appro- 


1874]  The  ^  Nation '  answered  473 

priated  the  credit  for  it.     But  even  in  this  case,  though  the 
judgement  be  true,  it  is  harsh.     The  German  scholar  was 
paid  for  his  labour,  and  did  the  best  he  could  to  circumvent 
Miiller  in  getting  out  his  editio  prima.     The  incident  is  not 
altogether   creditable  to  either  party.'     To  those  who  have 
read  thus  far  in  the  Life  of  Max  Miiller,  it  will  seem  almost 
impossible  that  a  respectable  paper  could   publish  so  false 
a  statement.     Burnouf,  Brockhaus,  Cowell,  and   many  other 
Nestors  of  Sanskrit  scholarship  watched  from  1846  with  deep 
interest  the  progress  of  the  work,  and  knew  from  seeing  it 
how  Max  Miiller  had  spent  years  in  copying  and  collating 
MSS.  of  the  Rig-veda,  and  searching  out  obscure  references 
in  Sayana's  Commentary.     The  German  scholar  alluded  to  is 
Dr.  Aufrecht,  for  many  years  Professor  of  Sanskrit  in  Edin- 
burgh, and  then  in  Bonn.     The  passage  in  the  Nation  is  as 
insulting  to  him  as  to  Max  Miiller.     Dr.  Aufrecht  would  be 
the  first  to  acknowledge  that  the  first  volume  of  the  Rig-veda 
(the    most  difficult  of  all,  says  Mr.  Macdonell,  the  present 
excellent  Professor  of  Sanskrit  at  Oxford)  had  been  published 
three  years  before  he  and  Max  Miiller  ever  met,  and  that 
when  he  arrived  in  England  to  work  under  Max  Miiller  the 
second  volume  was  already  nearly  finished.     In  the  prefaces 
to  the  second,  third,  and  fourth  volumes  Max  Miiller  fully 
acknowledges  his  indebtedness   to    Dr.   Aufrecht.     For   the 
last  two  volumes   he   had  the   assistance  of  other  younger 
scholars,  and  in  the  prefaces  to  these  volumes  he  mentions 
this,  and   in  Volume  VI   gives  the  names  of  Dr.  Eggeling, 
now  Professor  of  Sanskrit  at  Edinburgh,  and  Dr.  Thibaut, 
Professor  of  Sanskrit  at  Benares,  as  his  helpers.     Dr.  Kiel- 
horn,  Professor  of  Sanskrit  at  Gottingen,  writes  :  '  While  I  was 
in  Oxford  (from  1862-65)  ...  I  have  often  seen  Max  Muller 
at  work  on  the  Rig-veda,  and  had  occasion  to  consult  the 
index   to   the   text,    which   he    had    compiled    many   years 
before.'     Dr.  Eggeling  writes  :  '  From  what  I  saw  personally 
of  Max  Mailer's  mode  of  working,  I  may  say  that  I  always 
admired  the  extremely  careful  and  scholarly  way  in  which  he 
dealt  with  his  manuscript  materials  in  constituting  his  final 
text'     M.  Barthe,  writing  in  April,    1874,  says:    '  M.   Max 
Muller  is,  and  must  always  remain,  the  first  editor  of  the 


474  Illness  of  Mrs.  Kingsley 

Rig-veda.     He  was  the  one  man  in  Europe  who  had  courage 

enough  to  enter  on  this  path.     It  was  he  who  took  up  the 

work  as  it  fell  from  the  failing  hands  of  Rosen,  and  who, 

extending  the  design  of  Rosen,  conceived  it  as  worthy  to  be 

the    principal  work   of  his  own  life.'     Professor   Macdonell, 

after   a    careful    examination,    calculates    that,    if    Professor 

Aufrecht  had  worked  absohitcly  alone  at  Volum.es  III  and  IV, 

and  the  end  of  Volume  II,  collecting  and  collating  all  MSS., 

&c.,   he  would  have  done  but  little  over  one-third   of  the 

work,  of  which  all  is  ascribed  to  him  in  the  article  imposed 

(no  doubt)  on  the  Nation.     Had  there  been  any  truth  in  the 

accusation    its   discovery   would   not  have   been   left   to   an 

anonymous  accuser  in  America,  nor  its   exposure   reserved 

until  after  Max  Muller's  death. 

A  great  anxiety  fell  on  the  Max  MUlIers  towards  the  close 

of  the  year.     Mrs.  Kingsley  became  alarmingly  ill,  and   no 

hope  was  given  that  her  life  would  be  spared.     Max  Miiller 

wrote  to  his  mother: —  _, 

Decejnber  12. 

'  I  meant  to  write   to  you   to-morrow  (Sunday),  but  a  sad  duty 

calls  us  away.     Mrs.  Kingsley  is  very  ill,  the  doctors  have  given  her 

up,  and  as  she  wishes  to  see  G.  once  again,  we  shall  start  very  early 

to-morrow  morning  for  Eversley,  and  return  in  the  evening.     It  is 

a  heart  disease  which  has  come  on  suddenly.     She  herself  considers 

her  state  as  hopeless,  so  do  her  husband  and  children,  yet  they  write 

with  a  quiet  resignation  that  astonishes  one.     There  has  never  been 

a  happier  family  life,   and  this  sudden  end  is  terrible.     It  will  be 

a  trying  day,  and  I  could  not  let  G.  go  alone.     We  have  not  been 

there  together  since  we  spent  the  first  week  of  our  honeymoon  there.' 

To  THE  Same.  ^        , 

JJece^nber  27, 

'  We  went  to  Eversley.  Mrs.  Kingsley  spoke  quietly  to  G.  about 
everything,  and  asked  me  to  play  something.  Her  husband  and 
children  were  so  quiet  and  self-possessed.  I  have  never  seen  any- 
thing like  it.  She  is  a  little  better,  but  she  might  die  at  any  moment. 
They  have  had  such  a  happy  life  together,  and  it  was  heart-breaking 
to  see  it  all.' 

As  they  left  Charles  Kingsley  said  to  them,  '  When  I  am 
left  alone  you  will  come  to  me.'  His  wife  lived  on,  but  in 
little  more  than  a  month  the  Max  Mullers  returned  to 
Eversley  for  his  funeral. 


CHAPTER   XXI     • 

1875 

Death  of  Charles  Kingsley.  Visit  to  Italy.  Windsor.  Last  visit  of 
mother.  Chips^  Volume  IV.  The  Mumbles.  Manchester.  Plans  for 
return  to  Germany.    Maximilian  Order.     Oxford  Girls'  High  School. 

From  the  moment  that  he  had  written  the  last  line  of  the 
last  volume  of  the  Rig-veda,  Max  Miiller's  thoughts  again 
turned  longingly  to  his  own  country :  though  he  fully  realized 
how  hard  it  would  be  to  break  the  ties  of  twenty-seven  years 
that  bound  him  to  Oxford,  and  he  also  found  it  very  difficult 
to  decide  whether  England  or  Germany  would  offer  the  best 
opening  for  his  son,  who  was  then  only  eight  years  old. 
Yet  on  account  of  his  education  it  was  necessary  to  come 
soon  to  a  decision.  As  he  said  in  one  of  his  letters  at  this 
time,  he  '  waited  for  some  intimation.' 

To  Professor  Tiele  of  Leyden. 

Translation.  January  3,  1875. 

'Dear  Friend, — I  should  have  liked  to  write  to  you  ere  this  to 
thank  you  for  your  kind  letter  and  for  the  essays  on  the  science  of 
language,  but  my  hands  were  so  full  that  I  put  off  everything  which 
was  not  absolutely  necessary.  Shortly  after  receiving  your  essay, 
I  got  another  from  Darwin  fih,  inspired,  however,  by  Darwin  pere, 
which  had  to  be  answered  by  return.  It  had  to  be  written  and 
printed  in  a  week,  an  excuse  for  the  many  printer's  mistakes.  I  sent 
you  a  copy  to-day,  in  which  I  refer  to  your  essay.  It  was  an  oppor- 
tunity of  bringing  to  Hght  the  affair  of  Whitney  &  Co.,  though 
I  detest  this  sort  of  thing.  I  had  never  before  seen  the  Whitney 
lectures,  and  I  must  confess  my  astonishment  that  such  a  work  has 
been  pushed  into  the  foreground  by  personal  efforts.  The  man  takes 
my  lectures,  lectures  on  them  and  out  of  them,  and  then  publishes 
them,  and  to  prove  his  own  originality  kicks  me.  Voila  tout  1  I  do 
not  find  one  single  thought  in  the  whole  book  which  is  original. 


476  Letter  to  Darwin  [ch.  xxi 

Well,  I  am  little  disturbed  or  troubled  by  this  sort  of  thing,  and 
without  Mr.  George  Darwin's  attack,  I  should  have  taken  no  notice 
of  the  book  at  all.  I  read  the  other  day  that  Schiller,  when  he 
published  the  Horen,  ordered  and  paid  for  twelve  reviews  in  the  Jena 
Joiir7ial/ur  Liiterahir.     Can  such  things  happen  still  ? 

'  The  serious  evil  of  the  tendency  of  Philosophy  and  Religion  in 
the  present  day  is  that  it  so  neglects  the  historical  side.  All  feeling 
for  the  past  is  gone,  and  we  have  to  lend  our  ear  to  things  which 
Plato  would  not  have  ventured  to  make  his  adversaries  utter.  The 
more  rude,  the  more  original,  is  everybody's  view  now.  And  nothing 
can  be  done ;  we  have  to  work  for  the  few,  not  for  the  many ;  in  the 
end  we  work  best  for  ourselves  alone,  leaving  the  success  to  circum- 
stances. If  we  only  succeed  in  finding  sufficient  competent  judges 
who  take  an  interest  in  our  doings  and  strivings,  we  can  rest  satisfied. 
I  feel  convinced  that  we  shall  live  to  see  a  change  and  a  return  to 
thoroughness  in  work.  I  long  for  Italy,  which  I  have  never  really 
seen.  My  mother  is  still  living  at  Chemnitz :  she  did  not  like  Eng- 
land, her  lively  spirit  missed  the  social  intercourse.  I  hope  I  may  see 
her  this  summer.' 

To  Charles  Darwin,  Esq. 

T KPi.ov^ ,  January  7. 
'  I  hope  in  the  course  of  the  year  to  be  able  to  place  my  whole 
argument  before  you.  Even  if  I  cannot  hope  to  convince  you,  I  trust 
at  least  to  be  able  to  show  you  that  there  are  difficulties  connected 
with  the  origin  of  language  which  deserve  careful  consideration,  which 
possibly  to  me  may  seem  greater  than  to  you,  but  which,  I  feel  sure, 
you  would  be  the  last  person  to  wish  to  ignore.  I  can  assure  you 
I  feel,  as  strongly  as  any  mere  layman  in  natural  history  can  feel  it, 
the  impulsive  force  of  your  arguments.  If  I  hesitate  in  following  you 
in  your  explanation  of  the  last  animal  metamorphosis,  it  is  not 
because  I  am  afraid,  but  simply  because  I  see  certain  elements  in 
human  nature  which  would  remain  unexplained.  To  ordinary 
observers  these  elements  may  seem  infinitesimally  small  and  hardly 
worth  a  thought ;  but  you  know  how  the  infinitesimally  small  is,  after 
all,  what  is  really  important  in  evolution.  You  know  better  than  any- 
body how  infinitely  great  is  the  difference  between  man  and  animal  : 
what  I  want  to  know  is  the  first  small  and  hardly  perceptible  cause  of 
that  difference,  and  I  believe  I  find  it  in  language  and  what  is  implied 
by  language.' 

During  the  winter  of  1874-5,  Prince  Leopold  had  a  severe 
attack  of  typhoid  fever,  which  called  forth  the  following 
letter : — 


1875]  Death  of  Charles  Kmgsley  477 

To  Robert  Collins,  Esq. 

Parks  "E^T),  Jamiary  22,  1875. 

'  Many  a  time  have  I  taken  the  pen  to  write  to  you,  and  always  put 
it  down  again,  fearing  that  I  was  only  taking  up  your  time,  every 
minute  of  which  must  now  be  so  precious.  Yet  I  hope  it  is  not  very 
selfish  if  I  ask  you  to  tell  the  Prince  how  deeply  I  feel  for  him  in  his 
heavy  trials,  and  how  I  hope  and  trust  that  he  may  soon  recover  his 
health.  I  know  how  you  must  be  suffering,  seeing  the  Prince  suffer 
so  much,  he  who  with  his  brightness  and  kindness  towards  everybody 
might  have  enjoyed  life  so  much,  and  been  a  source  of  joy  to  all 
around  him.  I  know  your  strong  feelings  for  the  Prince,  and  I  can 
fully  understand  them.  It  was  often  difficult  to  remember  that  he  was 
a  young  Prince,  when  one  wished  to  show  him  how  much  one  appre- 
ciated his  fine  qualities,  his  power  of  endurance,  his  frankness,  his 
uprightness,  his  sympathy  wdth  all  that  was  noble  and  good,  how  one 
really  admired  him  and  loved  him.  Discouraging  as  the  accounts  are, 
it  is  always  right  to  hope,  and  I  hope  most  earnestly  that  our  worst 
fears  may  not  come  true. 

'  I  was  with  the  Kingsleys  a  few  weeks  ago  to  say  good-bye.  I  am 
afraid,  while  I  am  writing,  he  has  left  us,  and  she  will  follow  soon. 
That  bright  Vicarage  of  Eversley,  where  I  spent  my  honeymoon  and 
which  I  had  not  seen  since,  looked  very  sad  when  I  saw  it  last,  yet 
what  a  blessing  to  be  called  away  together.' 

The  sad  anticipations  expressed  in  the  end  of  this  letter 
to  Mr.  CoHins  proved  but  too  true  with  regard  to  Charles 
Kingsley,  and  the  Max  Mlillers  were  among  the  crowd  of 
mourners  who  attended  his  funeral.  Max  Miiller  has  described 
that  solemn  and  striking  scene  in  his  preface  to  the  new 
edition  of  Charles  Kingsley 's  Roman  and  Teuton. 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  January  29,  1875. 

'  Yesterday  I  was  at  Eversley  for  Kingsley 's  funeral.  It  was  a  very 
trying  day.  G.  stayed  there  to  help  her  aunt  and  the  two  daughters. 
Kingsley's  was  a  loving,  noble  nature,  and  the  feeling  for  him  is  very 
strong.  The  Queen  wrote  Mrs.  Kingsley  a  very  beautiful  autograph 
letter ;  the  Prince  of  Wales  was  represented  by  an  equerry.  Stanley 
read  the  service.  The  poor  wife  never  saw  her  husband  again.  She  is 
herself  very  ill  of  heart  disease,  and  may  die  at  any  moment !  The 
composure  of  the  wife  and  daughters  astonishes  one :  I  am  only 
afraid  the  worst  is  to  come.   He  is  a  great  loss  to  me ;  he  has  always 


478  Death  of  Charles  Kingsley         [ch.  xxi 

been  a  very  true  friend,  and,  long  as  I  have  known  him,  we  never  had 
a  misunderstanding.' 

To  HIS  Wife  (at  Eversley). 

Oxpo^n,  January  30. 
'All  one's  thoughts  dwell  on  that  grave  at  Eversley,  and  on  the 
desolate  house  near  it.  If  we  miss  him,  how  must  they  feel  without 
his  inspiriting  presence,  his  constant  care  and  love  for  all  around 
him !  One  never  thought  of  anything  but  life  when  one  saw  him  and 
talked  to  him,  for  even  in  his  illness  there  was  no  diminution  in  his 
vigorous  activity.  It  is  strange  how  little  we  all  think  of  death  as  the 
condition  of  all  the  happiness  which  we  here  enjoy.  If  we  would 
but  learn  to  value  each  hour  of  life,  to  enjoy  it  fully,  to  use  it  fully, 
never  to  spoil  a  minute  by  selfishness,  then  death  would  never  come 
too  soon;  it  is  the  wasted  hours  which  are  like  death  in  life,  and 
which  make  life  really  so  short.  He  was  always  himself,  his  very  best 
self.  I  never  heard  him  say  an  unkind  word,  though  I  have  seen  him 
provoked  and  worried.  It  is  not  too  late  even  now  to  learn  from 
him,  to  try  to  be  more  humble,  more  forbearing,  more  courteous,  or, 
what  is  at  the  root  of  all,  more  loving,  for  that  seemed  to  me  the  real 
secret  of  his  noble  life.  And  how  he  conquered  !  Those  who  would 
not  be  present  at  his  marriage  were  proud  to  be  at  his  funeral.' 

The  death  of  Charles  Kingsley  left  a  gap  to  Max  Miiller 
and  his  w^ife  which  was  never  filled  up.  The  mutual  affection 
had  been  strong  and  deep,  and  though  their  busy  lives  kept 
them  from  meeting  often,  the  feeling  of  warm  affection  never 
lessened.  Max  Miiller  at  this  time  was  so  entirely  overdone 
and  overworked  that  his  doctor  ordered  complete  change,  and 
he  resolved  to  go  to  Rome,  which  had  been  his  dream  from 
boyhood. 

To  THE  Duke  of  Argyll. 

OxYOKD,  January  29,  1875. 

*  I  should  have  answered  your  Grace's  letter  before,  but  my  thoughts 
have  been  of  late  absorbed  by  Kingsley's  illness  and  death.  I  went 
to  his  funeral  yesterday:  it  was  beautiful — ^just  as  he  would  have 
wished  it.  All  classes  were  represented — he  knew  no  classes,  and 
was  loved  by  all.  There  were  his  parishioners  young  and  old, 
soldiers,  gipsies,  huntsmen  and  the  hounds,  officers,  deans,  bishops, 
the  representative  of  the  Prince  of  Wales,  and  many  of  his  old  friends. 
His  face  in  death  was  sublime :  I  never  saw  such  a  change ;  all  the 
struggle  and  worry  of  his  face  were  gone,  and  there  one  saw  the 


1875]  Primeval  Revelation  479 

perfect,  massive  features  as  nature  had  intended  them.  There  is 
another  light  gone  out — life  darker  and  poorer — and  if  one  looks 
round,  one  sees  no  one  to  take  his  place. 

'I  am  glad  to  hear  that  you  are  preparing  for  another  battle. 
The  question  of  development  must  be  argued  out.  I  only  wish  it 
could  be  argued  without  those  constant  appeals  ad  populum.  I  confess 
I  am  by  no  means  clear  in  my  own  mind.  There  seem  to  be  de- 
velopment and  degradation  running  side  by  side  wherever  we  touch 
the  history  of  the  world,  and  what  seems  improvement  from  one  point 
of  view  seems  degradation  from  another.  Thus  polytheism  is  an  im- 
provement on  monotheism,  or,  as  I  call  it,  Henotheism,  as  long  as 
monotheism  represents  only  a  behef  in  one  god,  not  in  the  One  God. 
The  belief  in  one  god  which  has  not  yet  passed  through  the  negation 
of  other  gods,  is  as  it  were  a  behef  in  one  accidental  god,  and  com- 
pared with  it,  polytheism,  or  a  behef  in  many  single  gods,  is  richer, 
fuller,  more  perfect,  as  enabling  man  to  feel  a  Divine  presence  in  more 
and  more  manifestations,  and  at  last,  everywhere.  From  that  last 
stage  the  transition  into  real  monotheism  is  natural,  almost  inevitable. 
Now  in  one  sense,  Henotheism  may  seem  more  perfect  than  polytheism, 
for  it  does  not  purposely  exclude  monotheism — monotheism  is  con- 
tained in  it,  but  the  One  God  is  not  conceived  distinctly,  till  the  idea 
of  one  god  has  passed  through  two  negations. 

'  I  look  upon  primeval  revelation  as  a  figment  of  scholastic  theo- 
logians, which  falls  to  pieces  as  soon  as  we  try  to  grasp  and  define  it. 
The  first  suspicion  of  a  something  beyond  what  we  see,  was  the 
first  revelation,  and  that  revelation  is  continued  to  the  present  day, 
and,  we  trust,  growing  more  perfect.  What  I  meant  by  saying  that 
3,000  years  before  Agamemnon  our  forefathers  worshipped  a  Heavenly 
Father,  was  this.  The  name  Dyaus  pita,  Ztvs  Trarrip,  Jupiter,  Ti'u-s, 
occurs  in  four  of  the  Aryan  languages.  Therefore  it  must  have  existed 
before  Sanskrit  was  Sanskrit  and  Greek  Greek.  The  oldest  literary 
Sanskrit  carries  us  back  to  1,500  b.  c,  and  it  is  then  so  difi"erent  from 
Greek  that  no  Greek  would  have  recognized  any  similarity  between 
his  language  and  that  of  the  Veda.  I  do  not  think  2,000  or  3,000 
years  too  much  to  explain  that  differentiation;  the  changes  are  far 
greater  than  those  which  have  taken  place  in  3,000  years  between 
Vedic  Sanskrit  and  Bengali.  However,  I  generally  abstain  from  ex- 
pressing linguistic  time  in  definite  figures,  and  I  cannot  recollect  the 
passage  where  I  said  3,000  before  Agamemnon. 

'  I  should  not  say  that  the  worship  of  Dyaus  pita  excluded  poly- 
theism— the  very  idea  of  father  led  to  that  of  a  mother,  and  so  we  find 
in  the  Veda,  Prz'thivi  INIala,  Earth,  the  Mother,  and  Agni,  fire,  the 
brother  of  man. 


480  Monotheism  [ch.  xxi 

'  I  know  of  no  religious  expression  among  the  Aryans  older  than 
DyatiS  pita^ 

To  THE  Same. 

Oxford,  February  4,  1875. 

*  The  earliest  known  religious  form  of  the  Aryan  race  is,  as  nearly 
as  possible,  a  pure  monotheism — yes,  that  is  perfectly  true.  But  it 
was  an  undoubting  monotheism,  in  one  sense  perhaps  the  happiest 
monotheism — yet  not  safe  against  doubts  and  negation.  Doubt  and 
negation  followed,  it  may  be  by  necessity,  and  the  unconscious, 
defenceless  monotheism  gave  way  to  polytheism.  That  religious 
form,  however,  contained  within  itself  the  germs  of  future  growth,  and 
by  a  new  negation  the  polytheistic  form  gave  way  again  to  conscious, 
determined  monotheism.  Now,  in  one  sense,  the  first  childlike  mono- 
theism may  seem  more  perfect  than  the  second,  and  polytheism  may 
be  treated  as  a  mere  degradation.  But  from  another  and,  it  seems  to 
me,  a  more  historical  point  of  view,  polytheism  makes  an  advance  on 
unconscious  monotheism,  because  through  it  alone  does  man  reach 
the  higher  monotheism  which  definitely  excludes  a  return  to  polytheism. 

'  Before  the  earliest  expression  given  by  the  Aryan  nation  to  their 
belief  in  a  Heaven-Father,  there  is  no  doubt  an  endless  vista  of 
earlier  stages.  Such  words  as  Dyaus  pita  are  like  tertiary  and  meta- 
morphic  rocks — we  can  read  in  them  a  long  history;  but,  however 
far  back  we  may  follow  the  history  of  linguistic  and  mental  growth 
among  the  Aryan  nations,  nowhere  is  there  any  trace,  as  far  as  I  can 
see,  of  what  is  vaguely  called  fetichism.  It  may  have  been  there,  but 
as  yet  there  is  no  trace  of  it. 

'  Among  the  Jews,  I  doubt  whether  the  Book  of  Job,  as  we  have  it, 
is  older  than  the  Pentateuch.  The  arguments  on  either  side  are  very 
weak,  however.  It  is  possible  that  the  Assyrian  monuments  may  give 
us  earlier  phases  of  Semitic  religious  thought ;  but  I  think  it  is  wise, 
for  the  present  at  least,  to  wait. 

'  In  religion,  as  in  language  and  other  intellectual  manifestations, 
what  is  really  important  is  the  germ,  not  the  fruit.  "  A  suspicion  of 
something  beyond  what  is  seen,"  springing  naturally  from  a  healthy 
mind,  would  be  far  more  important  in  the  early  ages  of  mankind  than 
a  ready-made  catechism.  Man  has  to  gain  not  only  his  daily  bread, 
but,  what  is  far  more  important,  his  thoughts,  his  words,  his  faith,  in 
the  sweat  of  his  brow.  In  that  sense,  I  am  a  thorough  Darwinian. 
Where  I  differ  from  Darwin  is  when  he  does  not  see  that  nothing 
can  become  actual  but  what  was  potential ;  that  mere  environment 
explains  nothing,  because  what  surrounds  and  determines  is  as  much 
given  as  what  is  surrounded  and  determined;  that  both  presuppose 


1875]  Creation  481 

each  other  and  are  meant  for  each  other.  Now  I  take  my  stand 
against  Darwin  on  language,  because  language  is  the  necessary  con- 
dition of  every  other  mental  activity,  religion  not  excluded,  and  I  am 
able  to  prove  that  this  indispensable  condition  of  all  mental  growth  is 
entirely  absent  in  animals.     This  is  my  palpable  argument. 

'There  is,  however,  another  argument,  based  on  the  nature  of  all 
known  languages,  viz.  that  they  presuppose  the  faculty  of  numbering, 
an  argument  somewhat  Pythagorean,  but  not  therefore  the  less  true. 

'  Even  if  it  could  be  proved  that  man  was  the  lineal  descendant  of 
an  ape,  that  would  not  upset  my  argument.  The  ape  who  could 
become  the  ancestor  of  man,  would  be  a  totally  different  being  from 
the  ape  that  remained  for  ever  the  ancestor  of  apes.  That  ape  would 
be  simply  an  embryonic  man,  and  we  have  no  ground  to  be  very  proud 
of  our  own  embryonic  phases.  Yet  I  quite  agree  that  I  ste  no 
evidence  whatever  to  force  us  to  admit  as  real  and  historical  what 
Darwin  has  simply  proved  to  be  possible  and  convenient.  That  man, 
under  all  circumstances,  was  a  special  creation,  we  see  with  our  eyes, 
for  every  day  man  is  a  special  creation,  different  from  all  other 
creatures.  I  grant  also  that  in  one  sense  man  may,  from  the  first, 
have  had  an  intuition  or  a  recollection  of  the  existence  of  his  Maker — • 
but  potentia  only — like  every  child  that  is  born  into  this  world,  never 
actually,  till  that  intuition  could  be  expressed  in  words,  and  such  words 
as  maker  or  existence  are  very,  very  late.  We  ourselves  are  still 
satisfied  with  the  word  father,  as  applied  to  the  Deity,  yet  almost 
everything  that  is  implied  hy  father  must  be  taken  out,  before  the 
word  is  fit  to  convey  what  we  wish  it  to  convey.  We  mean  at  least 
father,  but  we  can  say  no  more. 

'  I  look  upon  the  account  of  Creation  as  given  in  Genesis  as  simply 
historical,  as  showing  the  highest  expression  that  could  be  given  by 
the  Jews  at  that  early  time  to  their  conception  of  the  beginning  of  the 
world.  We  have  learnt,  certainly  since  Kant,  that  the  knowledge  of 
beginnings  is  denied  to  us,  that  all  we  can  do  is  to  grope  back  a  little 
way,  and  then  to  trust.  1  think  I  have  a  right  to  accept  a  special 
beginning  of  man,  because  I  cannot  account  for  what  he  is,  if  I  look 
upon  him  as  the  product  of  anything  else  known  to  me.  I  require  no 
more  a  leap  for  him  than  for  any  other  creature ;  I  accept  him  at  what 
I  find  him  from  the  first  dawn  of  history  to  the  present  day.  I  have 
no  feeling  for  or  against  Darwinism,  and  I  always  try  in  approaching 
these  problems  to  care  for  nothing  that  I  may  care  for  in  my  heart. 
I  am  certain  that  we  are  led ;  I  am  certain  we  ought  to  follow ;  I  am 
certain  that,  even  if  we  go  wrong,  as  long  as  we  do  it  because  we  will 
not  resist  the  power  of  facts  and  arguments,  we  are  right.  If  Darwin's 
facts  were  irresistible,  I  should  accept  the  ape-theory  without  a  murmur, 
I  li 


482  Cartoon  in  Vanity  Fair  [ch.  xxi 

because  I  should  feel  that  we  were  meant  to  accept  it.  But  I  feel  with 
you  that  never  was  a  theory  of  such  importance  put  forward  with  a 
smaller  array  of  powerful  arguments  than  by  Darwin.  "  What  is,  is 
best : "  these  were  Kingsley's  last  words,  used  no  doubt  in  a  purely 
ethical  sense,  but  applicable  nevertheless  to  all  pursuit  of  truth.' 

To  Professor  Lepstus. 

Translation.  Parks  End,  February  13. 

' .  .  .  I  think  of  going  to  Rome  with  my  wife  on  February  23. 
The  doctor  prescribes  warm  air  and  rest,  and  so  I  intend  to  carry 
out  a  long-cherished  wish  and  to  convince  myself  that  Rome  really 
exists.  I  hope  the  Congress  in  London  has  made  you  feel  none  the 
worse ;  it  was  too  delightful  to  meet  again  the  dear  old  well-known 
faces.  Here  the  whole  thing  has  certainly  made  a  good  impression. 
You  will  have  seen  in  the  papers  the  death  of  Charles  Kingsley — 
another  cable  snapped  that  tied  me  here.  I  was  with  him  a  short 
time  before  his  death.  "  What  is,  is  best,"  were  his  last  words  to  me  1 
And  that  is  an  English  clergyman !  Why  have  we,  in  spite  of  all  the 
great  learning,  no  such  men  in  the  Church  in  Germany?' 

Before  leaving  home,  Max  MUller  was  much  amused  at 
being  asked  by  Pelllgrini  to  give  him  an  interview,  and  allow 
his  cartoon  to  appear  in  Vanity  Fair.  The  day  was  fixed, 
and  the  artist  arrived ;  the  conversation  during  and  after 
luncheon  was  most  brilliant,  Pelligrini  apparently  taking  no 
notes,  mental  or  otherwise,  of  his  host.  The  next  week  the 
admirable  cartoon  appeared,  far  less  of  a  caricature  than 
many  of  his  weekly  victims,  and  Jehu  Juniors  notice  was 
very  amusing : — 

'  Never  was  there  a  man  with  so  many  learned  titles  or  with  so 
good  a  claim  to  them  as  Max  Miiller.  He  is  a  glorified  Dryasdust 
of  the  most  successful  kind.  He  is  the  one  man  who  knows  every- 
thing about  every  language.  He  has  written  libraries,  and  in  order 
to  do  so  has  achieved  work  which  would  do  credit  to  Universities. 
Most  of  his  books  are  of  that  high  order  which  nobody  will  read  and 
most  people  will  never  hear  of;  yet  he  is  known  to  the  many,  and 
indeed  is  one  of  the  few  of  those  who  have  trodden  the  higher  and 
more  thorny  paths  of  science  whose  names  command  respect  even 
from  the  vulgar.' 


'&' 


The  following  letter  is  not  only  the  first  of  a  long  cor- 
respondence with  Dr.  Legge,  afterwards  Professor  of  Chinese 


1875]  Sacred  Books  of  the  East  483 

in  Oxford,  but  contains  the  first  reference  to  Max  Miiller's 
scheme  of  translations  of  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  which 
was  eventually  carried  out  at  the  expense  of  the  University 
of  Oxford  and  the  Indian  Government. 

To  Rev.  Dr.  Legge. 

Oxford,  February  13,  1875. 

'  It  would  be  the  greatest  pleasure  to  me  to  make  your  personal 
acquaintance.  I  have  long  wished  for  an  opportunity  of  being  intro- 
duced to  you,  and  being  able  to  tell  you  how  much  I  admire  your 
magnificent  edition  of  the  Chinese  Classics. 

'  As  to  the  soundness  of  your  work,  I  have,  of  course,  no  right  to 
express  an  opinion,  but  I  knew  when  I  heard  my  old  friend  Stanislas 
Julien  speak  of  your  work  in  the  highest  terms,  that  it  must,  indeed, 
be  of  the  highest  order  to  extort  such  praise  from  a  man  not  very 
lavish  of  praise. 

*  All  I  can  say  for  myself  is  that  I  wish  we  had  such  translations  as 
yours  of  the  other  sacred  writings  of  the  world. 

'  I  am  trying  very  hard  to  get  a  number  of  scholars  together  for 
a  translation  of  these  works,  but  the  task  is  no  easy  one.' 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  February  14. 

'  So  I  am  really  going  to  Rome !  In  a  week  I  shall  give  my  last 
lecture,  and  then  we  shall  start.  Of  course,  till  then  I  have  a  good 
deal  to  do,  and  I  can  hardly  realize  that  at  my  age  I  shall  really  see 
Rome.  We  shall  be  away  March  and  April,  and,  if  all  goes  well,  it  will 
be  a  delightful  journey,  full  of  enjoyment.  I  really  want  a  change, 
for  I  have  worked  very  hard  lately,  and  shall  see  how  the  dole e  far 
niente  suits  me.  I  have  felt  Kingsley's  death  deeply.  He  was  such 
a  strong  man,  so  full  of  life,  and  so  really  attached  to  me  ;  and  even  in 
his  last  days  he  said  that  we  (that  is,  G.  and  I)  were  the  dearest  to 
him,  after  wife  and  children.     So  many  feel  the  great  loss  he  is.' 

To  THE  Same. 
Translation.  February  20. 

'  We  want  to  see  all  quietly,  and  the  best  of  everything ;  not  all  the 
galleries,  just  to  say  we  have  seen  them.  We  already  have  invitations 
in  Italy  from  cardinals  and  dukes  down  to  Garibaldi,  but  shall  not  pay 
any  visits  of  an  evening,  but  rest  quietly  on  the  sofa  and  sleep. 
A  couple  of  days  at  Albani  and  Frascati  were  better  than  statues  in 
the  Vatican.  I  am  getting  too  old  for  that,  but  never  for  beautiful 
nature. 

Ii2 


484  Visit  to  Italy  [ch.  xxi 

'  I  have  not  yet  presented  the  Veda  to  the  Queen,  for  she  is  still  at 
Osborne.     It  must  wait  now  till  I  return/ 

Unfortunately  Max  Miiller  was  really  too  much  over- 
worked when  he  left  England  to  enjoy  Italy  as  much  as  he 
expected.  The  journey  out  by  Pisa,  Siena,  and  Orvieto,  was 
full  of  delight,  in  spite  of  the  constant  rain ;  but  hardly  had 
he  reached  Rome,  than  he  fell  ill  and  was  in  his  room  for 
several  days.  In  spite  of  this,  he  managed  to  see  a  good 
deal;  but  at  the  cost  of  great  fatigue. 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  Naples,  March  13. 

'  We  arrived  here  yesterday.  Rome  was  too  much  for  me.  I  had 
no  rest.  The  papers  mentioned  my  name,  and  one  visit  followed 
another.  Then  the  multitude  of  things  new  and  old  to  be  seen. 
I  could  get  no  sleep.  At  last  the  University  wanted  to  give  me  a 
banquet,  so  I  settled  to  come  here  first  for  a  fortnight's  rest,  and  return 
to  Rome  after  Easter.  We  have  already  seen  a  great  deal,  and  people 
were  most  kind,  sending  me  cards  to  see  things  that  are  generally 
closed.  In  the  Chambers  I  made  acquaintance  with  Bonghi,  the 
Minister  of  Public  Instruction,  and  Sella,  Minister  of  Finance.  But 
I  was  longing  for  rest,  for  my  journey  was  to  be  a  refreshment ; 
instead  of  that,  it  was  a  great  effort.  Here  we  are  settled  at  the  Hotel 
d'Angleterre,  in  the  centre  of  the  bay,  with  wonderful  views  over  the 
sea.  The  camellias  are  in  bloom  in  the  open  air,  and  the  leaves  are 
coming  out  on  the  trees.  The  oranges  hang  on  the  orange-trees 
wherever  one  looks ;  the  weather  is  mild,  not  too  warm,  just  what  one 
wants  for  travelling.  We  have  good  accounts  of  the  children,  and  all 
would  be  perfect  if  we  had  more  rest.  One  forms  exaggerated 
expectations  of  Rome,  because  one  has  read  so  much  about  it,  and  it 
is  after  all  unique  in  its  interest.  St.  Peter's,  St.  Paul's  outside  the 
walls,  Sta.  Maria  Maggiore,  impress  one  immensely  ;  then  the  old  town, 
with  its  columns  and  triumphal  arches,  just  as  it  was  2,000  years  ago. 
We  left  the  environs  till  our  return,  as  the  season  is  rather  late.  We 
think  of  staying  about  here  for  a  fortnight.' 

To  Professor  Lepsius. 
Translation.  Naples,  April  i. 

' ...  In  spite  of  disagreeable  interruptions  through  illness,  we  enjoy 
Italy  to  the  full.  For  me  it  is  all  a  new  world ;  it  comes  just  a  little  too 
late,  it  only  remains  pure  enjoyment,  which  it  is  impossible  to  make 
use  of  for  anything  any  more.     That  makes  me  think  of  something. 


1875]  Rome — Florence  485 

The  best  collaborators  for  the  translation  of  the  Sacred  Writings  of 
Mankind,  which  I  have  in  view,  are  Germans,  so  the  translations 
would  have  to  be  translated  into  EngHsh.  Would  not  such  a  work — 
German — be  an  undertaking  worthy  of  the  Leibniz- Academy  ?  Do 
think  it  over  :  the  funds  would  be  of  no  great  importance,  and  it 
would  sell.  The  English  translation  might  in  that  case  follow  the 
German  original  translation.  The  thought  struck  me  the  other  day  in 
Sorrento,  when  I  was  ill  in  bed.  I  should  like  to  hear  from  you  what 
you  think  of  it;  but,  as  I  have  already  entered  into  communication 
with  Longmans,  I  shall  have  to  take  a  definitive  step  on  my  return 
home.' 

On  Max  Miiller's  return  to  Rome,  he  seemed  so  much 
stronger  that  he  fully  hoped  to  be  able  to  attend  the  banquet 
which  the  University  wished  to  give  in  his  honour.  But  it 
had  to  be  given  up,  as  he  fell  ill  again.  He  received  the 
greatest  kindness  in  his  illness,  the  Ministers  Bonghi  and 
Sella  sitting  with  him  constantly,  and  a  German  friend, 
Baron  Hoffmann,  owner  of  the  lovely  Villa  Mattei,  brought 
him  fruit  and  flowers  daily.  As  soon  as  possible  he  moved 
on  to  Perugia,  and  thence  to  Florence.  In  Florence  another 
banquet  was  proposed,  but  gratefully  declined.  But  the 
students  would  not  be  defrauded  of  seeing  the  great  Acharya, 
and  so  he  attended  Count  de  Gubernatis'  Sanskrit  lecture, 
when  he  tells  his  mother,  '  as  I  entered  they  all  stood  up 
and  clapped  till  I  felt  quite  confused.'  One  evening  he  was 
invited  by  Count  and  Countess  de  Gubernatis  to  their  house. 
The  staircase  and  entrance  were  lined  by  all  the  students 
of  the  Oriental  faculty,  and  he  was  presented  with  an  album 
of  photographs  of  the  leading  Italian  Orientalists,  with  a 
beautiful  portrait  of  Galileo  on  the  cover,  in  water-colours. 
The  head  student  made  a  suitable  speech,  to  which  Max 
MuUer  had  to  reply  in  French  on  the  spur  of  the  moment. 

To  Professor  Klaus  Groth. 

Translation.  Florence,  April  17,  1875. 

'  My  dear  old  Friend, — How  often  have  I  wanted  to  write  to  you, 
first  in  England,  then  in  Italy  !  I  am  ashamed,  and  yet  I  am  not 
ashamed,  for  you  are  one  of  the  few  whom  I  understand,  even  when 
I  am  silent,  and  I  know  that  you  mistrust  my  silence  as  little  as 
I  should  mistrust  yours.     In  most  things  we  are  just  as  we  were,  and 


486  Italy  [cH.  XXI 

there  is  not  much  news  to  tell  you.  Last  year  I  worked  like  a  horse 
to  finish  my  Veda,  which  I  have  done,  thank  God,  but  not  without 
mental  and  physical  fatigue,  which  would  not  pass  off  till  my  doctor 
ordered  me  change  of  air,  which  I  understood  as  a  journey  to  Italy. 
We  started  the  end  of  February,  went  along  the  Corniche  to  Genoa, 
then  to  Pisa,  Siena,  and  Orvieto — which  are  beautiful.  The  poems 
that  men  can  build  with  a  few  stones  are  even  more  wonderful  than 
the  poems  built  of  letters  and  words.  Then  we  went  to  Rome.  You 
know  how  travellers  exaggerate,  and  fill  our  heads  with  ideas  which  we 
then  finish  painting.  But  the  worst  is  that  with  Rome,  in  spite  of  all 
that,  and  in  spite  of  certain  disillusions,  the  city  amazes  one,  enchants 
one,  and  will  not  let  one  go.  Its  age  does  not  affect  me.  I  am 
accustomed  to  greater  antiquity  in  India;  the  classics  no  longer  make 
the  impression  they  did  thirty  years  ago ;  the  glories  of  the  Papacy 
and  the  Roman  Church  have  no  existence  for  me ;  but,  in  spite  of  all 
that,  the  historical  reality  that  the  eye  sees  in  every  corner  satisfies 
one — the  real  Forum,  the  real  Arch  of  Constantine,  the  real  Grave  of 
the  Scipios,  the  real  road  by  which  St.  Paul  approached  Rome :  and  so 
it  goes  on,  and  it  strengthens  one.  In  Rome  my  misfortunes  began. 
I  was  ill,  had  to  leave,  went  to  Naples — but  there  I  was  worse,  and 
to  get  better  went  to  La  Cava,  Amalfi,  Salerno,  Sorrento ;  it  was 
exquisite,  but  the  power  of  enjoyment  was  lacking.  My  wife  took  the 
greatest  care  of  me,  and  we  found  a  good  English  doctor.  When 
I  was  fully  recovered,  we  went  again  to  Rome  for  a  fortnight,  and  I 
was  hardly  three  days  there  before  a  gastric  fever  seized  me,  and 
1  was  a  prisoner  to  my  room  nearly  all  the  time.  What  is  Tantalus 
compared  to  this  ?  At  last  I  got  over  it,  and  when  I  had  seen  the 
most  necessary  things,  we  started  home  by  Perugia,  Assisi,  and 
Florence.  I  shall  meet  my  old  mother  in  Cologne,  and  take  her  to 
Oxford.  We  have  had  good  news  of  the  children  all  the  time,  and 
shall  rejoice  when  we  are  with  them  again.  What  are  your  plans,  and 
shall  we  not  soon  meet  ?  .  .  .  I  send  you  some  letters  of  Schiller's,  which 
will  interest  you.  I  have  received  some  more  lately,  and  think  of 
making  them  into  a  pamphlet.  Unfortunately  I  could  not  get  the 
originals.  I  have  begged  to  see  the  originals,  and  hope  to  get  them. 
For  the  rest,  all  goes  on  quietly.' 

To  Professor  Rolleston. 

Florence,  April  24,  1875. 

'  Oxford  has  been,  and  is  still,  in  a  state  of  hibernation ;  I  expect 

nothing  for  some  years  to  come.     It  will  wake  after  a  time,  but  I  doubt 

whether  much  is  gained  by  disturbing  its  slumbers  for  the  present. 

My  only  comfort  at  Oxford  is  that  one  can  work  on  quietly  there. 


1875]  The  Italians  487 

without  anybody  taking  the  slightest  notice  of  one.  In  all  other 
respects  I  feel  that  one  is  perfectly  useless  there — in  fact,  that  there  is 
less  of  a  real  University  and  University  life  than  there  was  when  I  first 
came,  twenty-five  years  ago.  However,  the  pendulum  will  swing  back, 
and  there  is  plenty  of  good  material  ready  among  the  young  men  for 
having  again  a  real  University  at  Oxford ;  not  simply  a  machine  for 
shooting  the  examinations,  but  a  machine  for  getting  the  world  on 
a  step  further.  Italy  is  hard  at  work  both  in  primary  and  secondary 
education ;  the  difficulty  is  the  South,  which  has  almost  discouraged 
the  North.  Priestly  rule  has  done  fearful  mischief,  and  I  do  not  know 
whether  it  has  left  more  of  ignorance  and  superstition,  or  of  downright 
recklessness  and  atheism.  However,  there  is  a  good  leaven  at  work, 
and  the  bad  will  go  down,  I  believe. 

'  We  have  enjoyed  our  journey,  except  that  I  have  lost  much  time 
by  illness — gastric  fever.  I  am  better  now,  and  we  hope  to  be  back 
the  first  week  in  May.' 

To  Dean  Stanley. 

Oxford,  May  13. 

'  Our  happy  flight  to  Italy  is  over.  I  am  decidedly  better,  and 
a  good  dose  of  quiet  home-life  will  soon  set  me  up,  I  hope.  I  brought 
my  old  mother  with  me  from  Germany,  so  that  our  little  house  is  full. 
The  last  friend  of  yours  we  saw  was  the  Duke  of  Sermoneta.  I  could 
not  see  him  at  Rome,  as  I  was  not  up  to  paying  visits,  but  we  met  at 
Florence,  where  he  is  staying,  and  soon  to  be  married  to  Miss  Ellis. 
He  is  a  delightful  man,  all  the  more  attractive  on  account  of  his 
helplessness.  We  also  met  the  Count  and  Countess  of  Lingen  (Crown 
Prince  and  Princess)  at  Florence,  working  hard  from  morning  till 
night — a  perfect  pair  of  noble  creatures.  They  spoke  much  of  you. 
I  sat  at  dinner  by  Madame  Minghetti;  do  you  know  her?  a  most 
attractive  grandmother.  In  spite  of  my  being  confined  to  my  room 
and  unable  to  go  out  much,  I  saw  much  of  the  Italians  and  of  the 
leading  statesmen,  Sella  being  evidently  their  strongest  man.  Italy  is 
working  hard  ;  one  can  hardly  trust  one's  eyes  when  one  sees  Rome 
without  monks  and  monkeries.  They  have  learnt  the  German  secret, 
and  I  expect  their  schools  in  a  little  time  will  beat  the  German  schools. 
Soldiers  who  cannot  read  and  write  have  to  serve  four  years ;  those 
who  can,  three  years  only.  Imagine  how  that  tells  on  the  village 
schools  !  The  inheritance  of  priestly  rule  is  fearful :  superstition  and 
open  atheism  divide  the  population.  Love  of  their  country  is  their 
chief  ennobling  power  at  present.  One  feels  hopeful  about  Italy ;  the 
North  will  strengthen  the  South,  the  South  soften  the  North.  That 
a  nation  could  have  lived  through  such  governments  as  the  Papal,  the 


488  Rig-veda  [ch.  xxi 

Neapolitan,  and  the  Austrian,  shows  what  there  is  in  it,  and  what  it 
may  grow  into  with  fresh  air  and  light. 

'  I  was  quite  overwhelmed  with  the  reception  they  gave  me  in  the 
different  Universities — banquets,  deputations,  presents  from  the  students 
— only  I  was  not  up  to  any  efforts  of  speech-making  and  eating  and 
drinking,  and  had  to  promise  to  come  again.  I  think  one  might 
exchange  Oxford  for  Florence ;  it  combines  all  the  charms  of  Italy 
with  the  bracing  air  of  England.  Anyhow,  as  soon  as  I  can,  I  shall 
go  there  again. 

'  I  wanted  to  ask  your  advice.  At  the  time  of  the  extinction  of  the 
East  India  Company,  the  Queen  accepted  the  dedication  of  my  edition 
of  the  Rig-veda.  The  work  is  now  finished,  and  I  should  like  to 
present  the  last  volume  to  the  Queen.  It  is  the  work  of  a  whole  Ufa, 
at  least  of  thirty  years,  and  I  doubt  whether  there  is  much  life  left  for 
hard  work  now.  Whom  should  I  apply  to  ?  I  have  a  great  dislike  to 
Chamberlains  el  hoc  genus  omne,  and  yet  I  should  like  the  Queen 
to  know  that  I  have  now  fulfilled  the  task  which  brought  me  to 
England  in  1846!  On  my  return  to  England  I  found  a  letter  that 
Lord  Salisbury  had  proposed  that  a  further  grant  should  be  paid  to 
me  in  recognition  of  my  services  in  editing  the  Rig-veda.  I  had  no 
right  to  expect  anything  of  the  kind,  and  I  was  very  much  pleased, 
particularly  as  it  came  from  him. 

'  I  have  many  things  I  want  to  talk  about  with  you  ;  when  shall  we 
meet?  At  present  I  am  tunnelling  through  a  whole  Mont  Cenis  of 
letters  and  books ;  oh  that  my  enemies  only  would  write  books,  and 
not  my  friends,  who  all  expect  an  acknowledgement ! ' 

The  following  shows  the  feeling  with  which  the  Rig-veda 
was  received  by  enlightened  Hindus  : — 

From  the  Secretary  of  the  Am  Brahmo  Somaj. 

Calcutta,  May  28,  1875. 

'  Sir,- — Allow  me  to  convey  to  you  the  best  and  most  sincere  thanks 
of  the  Committee  of  the  Adi  Brahmo  Somaj  for  your  very  kind  present 
of  your  edition  of  the  Rig-veda,  the  sixth  volume  of  which  they  received 
the  other  day.  They  cannot  express  to  you  their  sense  of  the  value 
of  your  magnificent  present. 

'  The  Committee  further  beg  to  offer  you  their  hearty  congratula- 
tions on  the  completion  of  the  gigantic  task  which  has  occupied  you 
for  the  last  quarter  of  a  century.  By  publishing  the  Rig-veda  at  a  time 
when  Vedic  learning  has,  by  some  sad  fatality,  become  almost  extinct 
in  the  land  of  its  birth,  you  have  conferred  a  boon  upon  us  Hindus, 
for  which  we  cannot  but  be  eternally  grateful.' 


1875]  Visit  to  Windsor  489 

The  following  letter  is  an  acknowledgement  of  a  curious 
old  copy  of  Sir  Walter  Raleigh's  History  of  the  Worlds  from 
Charles  Kingsley's  library  : — 

To  Mrs.  Kingsley. 

Oxford, 7«w  25,  1875. 
'  My  dearest  Aunt, — Many  thanks  for  the  books  you  sent  me. 
I  was  very  glad  to  have  them,  for  they  are  very  curious,  and  then  they 
will  always  remind  me  of  our  dear  friend.  How  often  I  think  of  him, 
though,  and  of  you  too.  But  words  break  down,  and  tears  are  idle 
tears ;  what  can  we  do  but  be  silent  and  trust  ?  After  all,  life,  even  the 
longest,  is  but  a  short  absence,  and  we  must  all  learn  to  wait.  Yet 
I  do  miss  him  very  much.  I  cannot  brook  his  loss.  I  can  see  no 
why  and  wherefore,  and  we  always  want  something  of  the  kind, 
whether  rightly  or  wrongly,  to  settle  our  mind.  With  all  his  illness 
he  was  so  stout  of  heart,  so  full  of  plans,  so  happy  in  his  new  position. 
I  felt  always  happy  when  I  thought  of  him,  and  now,  when  my  thoughts 
go  their  daily  round,  I  often  start  and  say  to  myself,  Ah,  why  is  he 
gone?  There  is  another  cable  cut  which  kept  me  to  England,  and 
I  often  think  I  had  better  return  to  my  own  country,  for  nearly  all  my 
old  friends  are  gone.  However,  our  home  here  is  so  bright  and 
happy,  one  shrinks  from  touching  it.  We  are  here  three  generations 
living  together,  my  mother,  G.,  and  the  children — all  well,  all  grateful 
for  every  day  that  comes.  You  know  what  such  a  home  is — a  blessing 
that  makes  us  tremble.  I  shall  have  to  go  to  W^indsor  on  Monday  to 
see  the  Queen.  I  know  of  whom  she  will  speak  to  me,  and  I  mean 
to  tell  her  that  she  has  inherited  the  royal  gift  of  healing  wounds,  not 
by  a  touch  of  her  royal  hand,  but  by  a  touch  of  her  own  royal  heart. 
I  may  say  so,  may  I  not  ? ' 

On  June  28  Max  Miiller  was  summoned  to  Windsor  to  dine 
and  sleep,  and  present  his  last  volume  of  the  Rig-veda  to 
Her  Majesty  in  person.  It  was  on  this  occasion  that  he  left 
his  luggage  behind  at  Oxford,  as  described  so  amusingly  in 
Auld  Lang  Syiie. 

To  HIS  Wipe. 

Windsor  Castije,  June  29. 

'  Nothing  could  be  kinder  than  the  Queen.  She  spoke  in  German, 
and  most  beautifully.  I  had  to  tell  her  something  about  the  Veda. 
Then  she  spoke  with  deep  feeling  of  Kingsley,  and  inquired  about 
her  and  the  children.  Then  we  had  some  conversation  about  schools 
and  education  in  Germany  and  England,  and  lastly  about  Tennyson's 


490  Charles  Kingsley  [ch.  xxi 

new  play  \  She  had  only  read  the  first  act — I  had  read  three — but 
we  both  agreed  we  were  still  waiting  for  what  was  to  come.  Prince 
and  Princess  Christian,  Princess  Beatrice,  and  Prince  Leopold  dined. 
I  sat  by  the  Duchess  of  Roxburghe,  a  very  pleasant  and  intelligent 
woman,  and  Lady  Lansdowne.  Prince  Christian  has  asked  me  to 
stay  with  him  to-day,  so  I  shall  not  be  back  before  to-morrow  after- 
noon. I  am  to  see  the  Queen  again  to-day  at  three,  to  give  her  the 
book.' 

Not  long  after  the  Queen,  through  Prince  Leopold,  sent 
the  Max  Mullers  the  letter  she  had  received  from  Mrs. 
Kingsley  on  the  death  of  her  husband,  in  answer  to  Her 
Majesty's  autograph  letter.  Mrs.  Kingsley  had  the  gift  of 
letter-writing,  and  this  letter  to  her  Sovereign  was  worthy 
of  the  writer. 

To  H.R.H.  Prince  Leopold. 

Translation.  Oxfokvi,  July  22,  1875. 

'  Your  Royal  Highness, — I  beg  you  to  express  to  Her  Majesty  the 
Queen,  in  my  name  and  the  name  of  my  wife,  our  heartfelt  gratitude 
for  allowing  us  to  see  that  beautiful  and  most  touching  letter.  Yes, 
so  it  was  !  I  knew  the  little  paradise  of  earthly  happiness  at  Eversley, 
and  the  warm  heart  that  beat  there,  a  heart  that  was  never  closed  to  the 
highest  or  the  lowest.  I  owe  much,  much  to  him.  He  was  a  friend 
to  me,  such  as  few  have  been  in  England.  Our  views  were  often  far 
apart,  but  I  never  heard  an  irritable  or  hard  word  fall  from  his  lips. 
One  never  felt  any  coldness  in  him.  I  saw  him  till  nearly  the  end. 
I  saw  him  when  he  believed  that  his  wife,  who  was  his  very  life,  might 
die  at  any  moment ;  saw  him  in  his  last  illness,  when  he  said,  "  The 
shot  has  gone  home."  But  all  that  he  bore  not  merely  with  resigna- 
tion, but  with  perfect  calmness,  with  the  feeling  that  it  must  be  so,  and 
not  otherwise,  in  a  spirit  of  which  I  thought  he  was  incapable.  He 
never  knew  fear,  and  as  he  had  often  leapt  over  a  fence,  he  set  himself 
as  a  brave  rider  and  knight  to  leap  the  last  fence — Death.  I  can  still 
hear  how  he  said,  "  I  have  never  whimpered  " ;  but  one  saw  whence 
his  courage  came,  and  how  in  everything,  great  and  small,  he  looked 
above,  how  his  eyes  soared  above  the  Httle  Present  to  the  wide 
Hereafter. 

'  His  life  had  not  been  without  clouds  and  storms.  No  one  knows 
what  demand  he  made  on  himself,  in  mind  and  body,  how  many 
years  he  had  to  labour  for  daily  bread.  The  days  of  rest  came  too 
late,  and  it  is  very  true  what  his  widow  says,  he  owed  the  brightest, 

^  Queen  Mary. 


1875]       Prince  of  Wales's  Visit  to  India  491 

sunniest  days  in  his  life  to  the  kindness  and  the  thoughtful  care  of  his 
Queen.  I  saw  Woolner's  bust  a  few  days  ago ;  I  hope  it  will  be 
successful,  but  it  is  almost  impossible  to  reproduce  in  marble  so 
stormy  a  face  as  Kingsley's.  Ennobled  by  death,  his  face  was 
wonderfully  reposeful  and  fine ;  one  saw  the  ideal  of  the  man^  what  he 
should  be,  what  he  wished  to  be.  The  world  knew  him  only  as 
stammering,  helpless,  breathless  ;  he  lay  before  one,  purified,  ennobled, 
and  at  rest.  We  must  have  not  only  a  marble  likeness  of  him,  but 
a  life  of  him.  The  description  of  a  life  often  produces  more  effect 
than  the  life  itself.  But  who  shall  write  it  ?  To  write  a  true  life 
demands  the  sacrifice  of  another  life.  I  often  felt  that,  in  reading  the 
life  of  your  father.  May  I  keep  the  letter  a  few  days  ?  My  wife  is 
at  Taplow,  and  comes  home  on  Saturday.  She  was  very  dear  to 
Kingsley.  He  often  said  to  me,  "  Next  to  my  wife  and  children,  I  have 
loved  no  one  so  dearly  as  your  wife."  The  prophecy,  "  After  the 
Commemoration,  the  Deluge,"  seems  to  be  true  in  Oxford.  All  the 
meadows  are  under  water,  and  as  I  write  it  is  all  dark  with  thunder- 
clouds. Your  Royal  Highness  must  forgive  me  for  writing  in  German 
— German  often  seems  to  come  more  from  my  heart  than  English,  and 
I  know  how  easily  you  speak  and  understand  German. 

'  I  am,  with  deep  respect, 

'  Your  Royal  Highness'  obedient  servant, 
'  F.  Max  MtfLLER.' 

It  was  in  the  early  autumn  of  this  year  that  His  Royal 
Highness  the  Prince  of  Wales  (our  present  King)  paid  his 
visit  to  India.  Dean  Stanley  was  most  anxious  that  Max 
Mtiller  should  be  one  of  the  suite,  but,  to  the  infinite  relief 
of  the  Max  Mullers,  jealous  John  Bull  decreed  that  no 
'  foreign  influence '  should  accompany  His  Royal  Highness. 

To  Dean  Stanley. 

Parks  End,  Oxford,  August  13,  1875. 
'  I  guessed  from  your  last  letter  what  was  going  on.  I  wanted  to 
write  to  you  at  once,  not  to  stir  in  the  matter,  but  I  felt  it  was  wrong 
to  interfere.  If  the  offer  had  been  made,  I  believe  I  should  have  gone, 
unless  I  could  have  declined  on  the  score  of  health.  It  would  have 
been  the  greatest  sacrifice  I  could  have  made  at  my  time  of  life,  giving 
up  half  a  year  of  what  remains  to  me  of  my  happy  life  with  my  wife 
and  children,  but  I  should  have  looked  upon  it  as  sent,  and  meant  for 
some  good,  and  I  hope  and  trust  I  should  have  done  my  duty.  What 
good  I  could  have  done  I  hardly  know ;  but  we  hardly  ever  know 
that — good  comes  from  where  we  least  expect  it.     However,  I  am 


492  Fourth  Volume  of  Chips  [ch.  xxi 

grateful,  truly  grateful.  My  curiosity  to  see  India  is  not  very  great. 
It  is  the  inner  life,  not  the  outward  show  I  care  for ;  and  I  can  see 
more  of  the  former  from  reading  books,  newspapers,  and  letters,  from 
seeing  the  men  who  come  to  see  me  here,  than  from  fireworks  and 
Durbars.  I  know  I  could  have  done  nothing  for  the  Prince  in  the 
way  of  amusement  or  anything  else,  but  I  believe  in  India  my  being 
with  the  Prince  would  here  and  there  have  produced  a  good  impres- 
sion. I  can  write  no  more  to-day.  Many  thanks  for  what  you  have 
done.  I  never  told  my  wife  till  this  morning.  I  need  not  tell  you 
what  she  felt,  but  she,  too,  said,  "  I  should  have  let  you  go,  if  some 
good  could  have  come  of  it." ' 

To  THE  Same. 

Parks  End,  Oxford,  August  22,  1875. 
'  I  am  printing  at  present  a  volume  of  essays  which  is  to  form  the 
fourth  and  concluding  volume  of  my  Chips  from  a  German  Workshop. 
The  first  was  dedicated  to  Bunsen,  the  second  to  Bernays  of  Bonn, 
the  third  to  Palgrave,  and  now  I  come  to  ask  you  whether  you  would 
allow  me  to  inscribe  your  name  on  the  last.  It  contains  chiefly  essays 
on  the  Science  of  Language,  and  also  the  Westminster  Lecture,  and 
with  it  your  Sermon,  and  a  postscript  which  I  should  like  you  to  look 
at  before  it  is  struck  off.  You  have  been  to  me  during  my  stay  in 
England  semper  idem,  and  I  know  how  much  I  owe  you  for  many  kind 
words  spoken  to  me  and  of  me.  You  trusted  me  even  when  I  did  not 
act  as  you  wished,  and  you  made  allowance  for  the  difficulties  which 
a  foreigner  has  in  always  recognizing  the  right  line  of  action.  But  it 
is  not  only  as  a  tribute  of  personal  friendship  that  I  ask  you  to  accept 
the  dedication  of  my  book,  but  as  a  token  of  my  sincere  and  warmest 
admiration  for  the  noble  fight  you  have  been  fighting  all  your  life, 
through  good  and  evil  report,  giving  heart  to  others  to  follow,  and 
securing  to  your  country,  after  a  thirty  years'  war,  an  amount  of  freedom 
of  thought,  and  with  it  and  through  it,  of  sincerity  of  faith,  such  as 
no  one  could  have  dreamt  of  when  I  first  came  to  Oxford  in  1848. 
I  think  my  time  in  England  is  nearly  up.  I  doubt  whether  I  ought  to 
stay  longer.  I  am  only  tolerated  at  Oxford,  allowed  to  help  when 
I  am  wanted,  but  never  helped  myself  when  I  want  help.  If  I  had 
worked  in  Germany  as  I  have  worked  for  twenty-five  y^ears  in  England, 
my  position  would  be  very  different.  Here  I  am  nobody  in  the 
University ;  and  when  I  see  how  I  am  treated,  I  really  feel  sometimes 
ashamed  of  myself,  not  for  my  own,  but  for  my  wife's  sake.  However, 
it  is  my  own  fault.  I  would  not  give  up  a  plan  of  life  which  I  had 
made  before  I  knew  what  life  was.  In  order  to  carry  out  my  edition 
of  the  Rig-veda,  I  had  to  expatriate  myself — it  was  the  only  way  of 


1875]  Dr.  Schliemann  493 

getting  the  work  done.  But  now  it  is  done,  and  the  question  is 
whether  I  can  still  be  of  use  in  my  own  country.  I  sometimes  doubt 
it,  but  I  think  I  ought  to  try.  How  different  you  must  feel  after 
having  worked  for  your  country  as  you  have,  and  seeing  the  results  of 
your  work,  and  feeling  certain  of  the  gratitude  of  so  many  for  whom 
you  have  spent  your  life.' 

To  Dr.  Rolleston. 

August  22. 

*  You  Mezzofanti  of  all  passages  worth  remembering,  where  is  the 
passage  that  "  the  lightning  of  Jupiter  strikes  only  the  highest  peaks  "  ? 
I  don't  know  what  to  make  of  Schliemann.  I  believe  he  is  only 
giddy.  I  saw  Gladstone  for  a  moment  the  other  day.  He  seemed 
hopeful  about  further  diggings  at  Troy  under  Schliemann's  auspices.' 

To  THE  Same. 

August  27. 

'  I  have  just  read  the  poor  abstract  of  your  address  ^  in  the  Times, 
and  I  hope  soon  to  see  it  and  read  it  in  extenso.  Your  faith  in  skulls 
reminds  me  of  my  old  friend  Schwabe,  at  Dessau,  whom  I  see  men- 
tioned honourably  by  one  of  your  presidents.  He  was  a  very  curious 
person,  whose  life  ought  to  be  written.  Imagine  a  small  town  in  the 
central  desert  of  Germany,  only  discovered  when  they  built  a  railroad 
to  Leipzig.  There  he  lived  in  a  small  house,  with  a  hole  in  the  roof  to 
make  his  observations.  How  they  laughed  at  him  for  registering  the 
spots  in  the  sun  !  They  just  tolerated  him  because  he  was  a  kind  of 
wizard — could  cure  warts  and  that  sort  of  thing — yet  he  was  a  most 
perfect  gentleman,  extremely  well  read  in  literature,  firstrate  botanist, 
&c.  Well,  now  that  he  is  dead,  and  he  must  have  been  past  eighty, 
his  measurements  begin  to  tell,  and  I  hope  it  may  be  so  when  you  are 
eighty,  and  all  that,  but  before  humani  aliquid  has  happened  to  you. 
By-the-by,  you  great  Quotationist,  you  did  not  quote  Terence  rightly. 
The  true  meaning  was  given  to  that  passage  for  the  first  time,  as  far 
as  I  know,  by  the  Emperor  Max  of  Germany.  In  Terence,  surely,  it 
only  means  "I  am  a  great  busybody,  and  every  kind  of  gossip 
interests  me  " ;  but  the  Emperor  gave  a  new  meaning  to  it,  and  in  that 
meaning  you  used  it.  I  mention  this  because  a  saturnalian  reviewer 
once  abused  me  for  having  ascribed  a  passage  from  Terence  to 
a  German  emperor  ! ' 

After  his  mother's  return  to  Germany,  Max  Miiller  took 
his  family  to  the  Mumbles,  the  spit  of  land  which  forms  the 

^  British  Association. 


494  Stay  at  Mumbles  [ch.  xxi 

right  horn  of  Swansea  Bay,  and  they  thoroughly  enjoyed 
the  primitive  life  of  the  little  bathing-place.  Their  friends 
the  Story-Maskelynes  were  staying  at  the  adjoining  bay,  and 
many  pleasant  rambles  were  undertaken  together.  Before 
leaving  home,  Max  Miiller  had  finished  the  fourth  volume 
of  Chips,  dedicated  to  Dean  Stanley,  '  as  a  token  of  gratitude 
and  friendship  from  one  who  has  for  many  years  admired 
his  loyalty  to  truth,  his  singleness  of  purpose,  his  chivalrous 
courage,  and  his  unchanging  devotion  to  his  friends.'  Of  this 
volume,  one  review  says : — 

'  The  first  thing  one  wants  to  know,  in  taking  up  one  of  Professor 
Max  Miiller's  remarkable  volumes,  is  how  much  one  can  understand ; 
or  rather — because  his  style  is  as  limpid  as  his  brain  is  clear — how 
much  will  be  interesting.  That  his  Science  of  Language  will  underlie 
the  whol€,  may  be  guessed,  to  begin  with :  that  the  superstructure  will 
in  some  places  resemble  a  fortress,  in  others  a  fairy  structure  of  light 
and  graceful  design,  and  in  others  a  great  cathedral — all  this  is  well 
known  before  the  book  is  opened.  Whatever  the  fourth  volume  of 
Chips  from  a  German  Workshop  contains,  it  is  sure  to  be  brimming 
over  with  great  thoughts,  lofty  teaching,  and  the  enthusiasm  for  things 
high  and  holy.  The  learned  Professor  has  pondered  over  the  litera- 
ture of  departed  ages  till  he  breathes  himself  the  spirit  of  wisdom 
which  has  actuated  the  world's  greatest  men  since  men  began  to 
think,  and  must  needs,  perforce,  teach  whenever  he  opens  his  mouth 
to  speak,  or  takes  up  his  pen  to  write.' 

The  English  head  of  one  of  the  native  colleges  in  India 
wrote  of  the  Chips : — 

'  These  volumes,  embracing  the  minor  works  of  Professor  Miiller, 
now  first  collected,  comprise  the  very  choicest  of  his  writings.  With 
few  exceptions,  they  pertain  directly  to  India.  Most  of  them  are 
critical ;  and  their  criticism  is  of  a  higher  order  than  has  been  even 
approached  by  any  English  scholar  that  has  dealt  with  the  subjects  of 
Hindu  antiquity  and  literature.' 

On  returning  to  Oxford,  the  usual  flow  of  correspondence 
began  again. 

To  Professor  Lepsius. 

Parks  End,  October  8. 
'.  .  .  I  have  just  finished  Eber's  Egyptian  Princess.     It  is  a  most 
remarkable  book,  as  a  work  of  art  as  well  as  of  history.     It  has  quite 


1875]  Animals  and  Language  495 

astonished  me.  Whether  it  will  do  for  England  ?  A  mere  ordinary 
translation  would  not  do — it  would  just  ruin  the  book.  It  would  have 
to  be  done  by  an  expert  hand,  and  here  and  there  it  would  have  to  be 
shortened.     It  is  very  excellent.     Ever  yours.' 

To  Charles  Darwin,  Esq. 

Oxford,  October  13. 

'  Allow  me  to  present  you  my  defence  against  Professor  Whitney's 
attacks.  I  think  you  will  see  from  what  I  have  stated,  that  Professor 
Whitney  is  not  an  ally  whom  either  you  or  your  son  would  approve  of. 
I  should  never  have  noticed  him,  had  not  your  son  brought  him  so 
prominently  before  the  English  public.  However,  even  controversy 
helps  sometimes,  though  not  often,  to  clear  away  error  and  bring  out 
truth,  and  so  I  hope  I  have  not  simply  wasted  my  time  in  answering 
Professor  Whitney's  charges. 

'  The  point  at  issue  between  you  and  me  is  a  very  simple  one :  is 
that  which  can  pass  a  certain  line  in  nature  the  same  as  that  which 
cannot?  It  may  be,  no  doubt,  and  in  that  case  the  highest  animal 
would  simply  be  a  stunted  man.  But  this  seems  to  me  a  narrow  view 
of  nature,  particularly  if  we  consider  that  everything  organic  is,  after 
all,  much  more  truly  that  which  it  can  be,  than  that  which  it  is.  In 
the  higher  animals  the  potential  traces  of  language  are  smaller  than 
in  some  of  the  lower,  but  even  where  the  phonetic  organs  are  most 
perfect,  there  has  never  been  the  slightest  attempt  at  language  in  the 
true  sense  of  the  word.  Why  should  natural  science  be  unwilling  to 
admit  this  ?  Why  should  it  not,  at  all  events,  leave  the  question  an  open 
question,  until  some  truly  scientific  evidence  has  been  brought  forward, 
showing  at  least  the  potentiality  of  language  in  any  known  animal  ? 
"  More  facts  and  fewer  theories "  is  what  w^e  want,  at  least  in  the 
Science  of  Language,  and  it  is  a  misfortune  if  the  collectors  of  facts 
are  discouraged  by  being  told  that  facts  are  useless  against  theories. 
I  have  no  prejudice  whatever  against  the  faculty  of  language  in 
animals,  it  would  help  to  solve  many  difficulties.  All  I  say  is,  let  us 
wait,  let  us  look  for  facts,  and  let  us  keep  la  carriere  ouverte.' 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  Oxford,  October  9. 

'  I  hope  you  have  used  the  money  I  sent  to  give  yourself  a  little 
treat  on  your  birthday.  You  could  give  )^ourself  and  others  many 
happy  hours,  if  you  would,  and  if  instead  of  dwelling  on  your  own 
want  of  health,  you  thought  of  the  far  greater  suffering  others  have  to 
bear.  Life  must  be  as  it  is,  and  it  is  for  the  best  without  doubt,  if  we 
would  only  look  upon  it  as  such.     Your  health  would  be  much  better 


496  speech  at  Manchester  [ch.  xxi 

if  you  would  not  excite  yourself  over  trifles.  Strong  as  I  am,  I  should 
soon  be  ill  if  I  lived  in  the  constant  state  of  excitement  in  which  you 
live.  As  one  gets  older,  one  learns  to  bear  many  things  more  quietly, 
for  one  feels  that  life  is  drawing  to  its  close,  and  that  there  is  much 
one  cannot  change.  The  lectures  here  begin  soon,  and  our  delightful 
free  time  is  nearly  over,  I  have  to  go  to  Manchester  to  distribute 
some  prizes  and  make  a  speech.  One  can't  refuse  everything.  Now, 
my  dear  mother,  enjoy  your  birthday,  and  think  of  the  many  blessings 
you  have  had  in  life,  and  remember  that  we  should  learn  through 
sorrows,  so  that  we  may  leave  this  life  without  too  much  regret.' 

Max  Miiller  had  been  invited  to  present  the  Diplomas 
gained  by  the  different  schools  in  Lancashire  at  the  Oxford 
and  Cambridge  Local  Examinations.  For  this  purpose  he 
visited  Manchester,  where  he  was  the  guest  of  the  Dean,  at 
the  end  of  October.  It  was  a  great  distinction,  and  felt  to  be 
so  by  Max  Miiller,  his  predecessors  having  been  Lord  Derby, 
Lord  Selborne,  and  other  distinguished  statesmen.  The 
meeting  was  held  in  the  Free  Trade  Hall,  the  audience 
numbering  over  5,000,  The  Bishop,  the  Mayor,  and  the 
Members  for  Manchester  were  all  present.  In  his  address 
he  mentioned  the  first  attempt  at  examinations  inaugurated 
in  1857  by  the  late  Sir  Thomas  Acland,  at  which  he  had 
himself  assisted.  He  described  the  efforts  made  by  his  own 
great-grandfather,  the  pedagogue  Basedow,  for  elementary 
and  middle-class  education  in  Germany,  and  ended  by 
advocating  State-controlled  rather  than  voluntary  schools. 
This  part  of  his  speech  called  forth  strong  remonstrances 
from  all  Church  papers,  but  it  was  a  point  on  which  he  never 
wavered,  though  he  always  felt  the  necessity  of  religious,  but 
unsectarian,  teaching,  such  as  he  had  himself  been  accustomed 
to  as  a  child. 

Max  Miiller  had  not  long  returned  from  Manchester  before 
he  decided  that  the  time  had  come  when  he  should  do  wisely 
to  leave  Oxford,  and  return  to  his  own  country. 

To  Dean  Stanley. 

Parks  End,  November  6. 
'  I  send  you  a  copy  of  my  preface  to  Kingsley's  Rojnan  and  Teuton, 
with  some  alterations  here  and  there. 

'  I  wish  I  could  have  seen  you  and  had  a  quiet  talk  with  you,  before 


1875]  Settles  to  leave  England  497 

deciding  on  a  step  which,  as  you  know,  I  have  long  contemplated. 
I  hope  I  have  decided  rightly,  though  it  was  no  easy  matter  to  weigh 
everything.  I  have  now  served  the  University  for  exactly  twenty-five 
years,  and  I  have  at  last  succeeded  in  gaining  for  the  new  Science  of 
Language  a  recognized  position  among  the  subjects  required  or  allowed 
in  the  examinations,  and  in  leaving  behind  me  a  number  of  pupils,  any 
of  whom  could  fill  my  Chair  with  credit.  As  long  as  the  University 
seemed  to  approve  and  appreciate  my  work,  I  was  willing  to  stay  and 
work  on ;  and,  for  the  sake  of  my  wife  and  her  friends,  I  gave  up  the 
Professorship  offered  me  at  Strassburg,  which  from  a  pecuniary  point 
of  view  was  as  good  as  the  one  I  hold  here.  I  mean  to  go  next  April, 
and  settle  at  first  at  Dresden.  I  shall  have  to  work  hard,  as  for  some 
time  I  shall  probably  be  without  any  official  income.  But  even  my 
wife  agrees  that  I  am  right,  and  that  I  could  not  stay  longer.  If  life  is 
spared,  I  feel  as  if  I  could  still  do  some  work  in  my  quiet  retreat  in 
Germany.  When  the  time  comes,  no  doubt  it  will  be  a  wrench,  for 
I  leave  many  true  friends  behind,  and  I  feel  the  sacrifice  my  wife  has 
to  make.  I  hope  it  will  be  for  the  good  of  the  children.  Nos  amis 
les  ennemi's  I  have  found  a  true  saying  many  a  time  before — may  it  be 
so  in  this  case  also !     Ever  yours  affectionately, 

'  F.  Max  Mijller. 
'  I  wish  you  could  stay  with  us  once  more  before  we  go.     When 
shall  we  hear  better  news  of  Lady  Augusta  ? ' 

To  Professor  Lepsius. 

Translation.  Oxford,  November  12. 

'.  .  .  I  remain  here  till  Easter,  then  I  think  of  taking  a  house  in 
Dresden,  and  the  remaining  years  will  be  entirely  devoted  to  the  Veda 
and  to  religious  philosophy,  I  have  still  to  print  seven  volumes  of  the 
translation  of  the  Veda,  not  to  mention  other  things,  and  the  otium  cum 
negotiis  will  do  me  much  good.  At  all  events,  as  Bunsen  said,  the 
bird  is  free !     Do  not  yet  mention  it,  however.' 

Though  Max  MUller  had  not  yet  sent  in  his  formal  letter  of 
resignation,  his  ov^n  friends  and  his  wife's  relatives  knew  of  his 
determination,  and  letters  of  expostulation  and  regret  poured 
in  on  all  sides.  The  following  is  inserted  by  permission,  as 
representing  what  all  those  whose  friendship  Max  Miiller 
most  valued,  felt  and  expressed  at  the  time: — 

From  Rev.  Edwin  Palmer. 

Jerusalem  Chamber,  November  12. 
'  I  must  thank  you  for  your  kind  letter,  as  I  felt  that  I  had  been 
I  K  k 


498  Letter  from  Rev.  E.  Palmer       [ch.  xxi 

taking  a  considerable  liberty  in  speaking  my  mind  to  you  so  freely. 
I  can  say  nothing  against  a  resolution  to  leave  us  based  on  considera- 
tions of  your  own  strength,  and  the  time  required  to  finish  the  main 
work  of  your  life.  The  loss  to  Oxford  will  be  irremediable ;  but  after 
all  that  you  have  done  for  us,  we  have  certainly  no  right  to  complain. 
To  say  nothing  of  the  prestige  which  your  residence  among  us  and 
your  consent  to  be  reckoned  among  our  Professors  has  given  us  for  so 
many  years,  I  cannot  but  feel  that  all  of  us  who  have  made  Philology 
in  any  sense  a  special  study,  owe  to  you  directly  or  indirectly  all  that 
they  know,  and  indeed  the  very  conception  of  the  Science  of  Language. 
I  will  not  attempt  to  speak  of  the  personal  loss  to  myself.  It  is  quite 
true  that  there  seemed  to  exist  between  us  grave  diiferences  on  some 
subjects  connected  with  the  politics  of  religion  (if  I  may  use  that 
expression),  perhaps  differences  on  subjects  strictly  theological ;  but, 
in  spite  of  these,  I  have  always  valued  your  friendship  as  highly  as 
I  have  prized  your  intellectual  gifts.  Even  now  I  cannot  help  cherishing 
a  hope  that  you  may  reconsider  your  determination.  The  void  which 
your  absence  from  Oxford  would  make  is  too  painful  for  me  to 
contemplate.  Believe  me  ever,  yours  affectionately, 

'  Edwin  Palmer.' 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  Oxford,  November  21. 

'  My  speech  at  Manchester  has  excited  people  a  good  deal.  In 
England  nearly  all  the  national  schools  are  in  the  hands  of  the 
Church.  That  gives  the  clergy  great  influence  over  the  children,  and 
also  over  the  parents,  and  therefore  they  do  not  wish  to  give  them  up. 
They  naturally  say  it  is  so  arranged  that  the  religious  instruction  may 
be  properly  given,  but  the  real  reason  is  that  they  may  maintain  their 
political  influence.  If  they  could  harm  me,  or  at  least  do  something 
to  injure  me,  they  would  do  so  gladly ;  but  I  rejoice  in  their  maledictions, 
as  it  shows  I  have  produced  some  effect.  Have  you  found  a  house  for 
us,  or  shall  I  advertize  for  one  ?  I  have  long  wished  for  more  leisure 
and  quiet  for  work,  and  I  cannot  get  it  here,  as  I  am  so  constantly 
interrupted  by  all  sorts  of  people.  I  am  tired  of  the  life  here,  and  w-e 
have  enough  to  live  independently  without  my  taking  any  post.' 

The  following  letter  shows  that  Chips,  Volume  IV,  was  as 
popular  as  its  three  predecessors : — 

From  Professor  Huxley. 

4,  Marlborough  Place,  November  29. 
'  For  a  man  who  does  not  want  to  escape  paying  his  creditors,  there 
is  a  certain  inconvenience  in  having  three  addresses.     I  am  but  rarely 


1875]  Resigns  Professorship  499 

in  Jermyn  Street  at  this  season,  but  on  going  there  on  Saturday  I  found 
the  volume  of  Chips  which  you  have  been  kind  enough  to  send  me. 
Accept  my  best  thanks  for  it.  I  wish  that  the  Enghsh  workshops 
turned  out  even  a  few  shavings  of  Hke  character.     Yours  very  truly, 

'  Thomas  Huxley.' 

On  December  i  Max  Miiller  sent  his  resignation  to  the 
Vice-Chancellor,  the  Warden  of  New  College  ;  writing  also 
to  his  own  Warden  at  All  Souls  to  officially  announce  his 
determination,  as  the  resignation  of  his  Professorship  entailed 
the  loss  of  his  Fellowship.  He  writes  at  this  time  to  Dean 
Stanley :  '  I  am  very  tired  myself,  and  hardly  able  to  do 
anything.  It  has  been  a  hard  struggle,  and  I  only  hope 
I  have  decided  right.'  To  George  von  Bunsen  he  writes  : 
'  Some  things  that  kept  me  here  are  more  difficult  to  leave 
than  I  thought  at  first.' 

To  HIS  Mother. 
Translation.  December  6,  1875. 

'  My  dear,  good  Mother, — Only  a  few  lines  to  tell  you  I  have  re- 
ceived your  two  letters,  the  second  to-day  for  my  birthday.  Thank  God, 
we  are  all  well,  and  that  is  much  at  my  age.  Thanks  for  all  your  good 
wishes.  Next  year  will  be  an  important  one ;  pray  God  that  we  have 
decided  rightly.  It  was  impossible  to  put  off  the  decision  on  account 
of  Wilhelm,  who  is  still  young  enough  to  accustom  himself  to  German 
life.  I  am  very  glad  that  it  has  come  to  this.  My  position  here 
had  become  often  very  difficult,  and  the  rest  will  do  me  good. 
I  have  much  work  still  to  do,  if  my  strength  lasts,  and  for  this  reason 
I  desire  to  have  what  time  may  be  left  me  for  my  special  work.  As 
to  money,  we  must  certainly  retrench  a  little,  but  the  children  are 
provided  for,  and  our  whole  interest  is  for  them.  Dresden  seems  to 
me  the  quietest  place,  and  yet  with  all  the  advantages  of  a  large 
city.  If  we  find  it  too  dear  there,  we  must  go  to  a  smaller  town ;  but, 
as  I  say,  we  shall  have  plenty  to  eat.  The  lamentations  over  our 
leaving  are  beginning.  They  have  played  me  some  shabby  tricks, 
but  now  all  has  changed ;  but  it  is  too  late.' 

To  William  Longman,  Esq. 

Oxford,  December  8. 
'  I  must  tell  you  that  I  have  sent  in  my  resignation  of  the  Chair  of 
Comparative  Philology,   and   that   next  year   I    intend   to    settle  in 
Germany.     I  want  to  have  all  my  time  to  myself.     I  have  still  much 


500  Letter  to  Duke  of  Albany  [ch.  xxi 

work  in  hand,  which  I  wish  if  possible  to  finish,  and  I  could  not  do  it 
if  I  stay  here. 

'  I  shall  leave  Oxford  and  England  with  a  heavy  heart,  but,  as  life 
grows  shorter,  I  felt  more  and  more  that  I  was  wasting  it  in  doing 
work  which  others  could  do  as  well,  or  even  better ;  while  I  had  to 
leave  undone  work  which  I  could  do,  and  ought  to  do.  I  shall 
probably  go  in  April;  before  that  time  I  hope  to  have  finished  my 
book  on  Language  as  the  True  Barrier  between  Man  and  Beast! 

No  sooner  had  the  announcement  of  Max  MUller's  retire- 
ment appeared  in  the  papers,  than  letters  poured  in  from 
every  part  of  the  world,  whilst  all  the  chief  English  papers 
had  leading  articles  on  his  work.  He  was  by  no  means 
prepared  for  such  an  outburst  of  genuine  feeling  on  all  sides, 
and  was  deeply  touched  by  it.  At  the  same  time  letters  came 
from  Vienna  and  many  German  Universities,  from  Florence, 
and  even  from  Bucharest,  trying  to  secure  his  services. 

To  H.R.H.  THE  Duke  of  Albany. 

Parks  End,  Oxford,  December  13,  1875. 

'  Sir, — I  was  able  to  say  so  very  little  when  your  Royal  Highness 
gave  me  that  beautiful  souvenir,  that  I  must  try  whether  I  cannot 
express  my  gratitude  in  better  words.  The  happy  hours  which 
I  have  been  allowed  to  spend  with  your  Royal  Highness  will  always 
remain  among  my  most  cherished  recollections  of  dear  old  Oxford. 
I  was  often  afraid  that  an  old  German  Professor  could  hardly  be 
a  pleasant  companion  to  one  so  young,  so  bright,  and  generally  so 
happy  as  your  Royal  Highness.  Still,  I  believe  few  people  could 
have  watched  your  career  at  Oxford  with  deeper  interest,  and  felt  for 
you,  both  in  health  and  sickness,  a  truer  sympathy  than  I  have. 
I  hope  and  trust  that  the  dark  clouds  which  surrounded  your  youth 
may  now  have  disappeared  altogether,  though  I  cannot  say  that 
I  wish  your  Royal  Highness  a  perfectly  cloudless  sky ;  for,  after  all, 
the  cloudy  sky  of  England  is  more  beautiful  really  than  the  cloudless 
sky  of  Italy,  and  a  life  without  dark  shadows  is  generally  a  very 
shallow  and  useless  life.  What  I  hope  and  wish  for  you  is  an  active 
and  useful  career,  and,  before  all,  that  physical  strength  which  alone 
is  wanting  to  enable  you  to  make  that  excellent  and  unselfish  use  of 
your  high  position  and  talents  which  I  know  you  are  determined  to 
make  of  them,  if  you  can. 

'  Fortes  creantur  fortibus  et  bonis.  .  .  . 

'  The  last  weeks,  when  I  had  finally  to  decide  on  my  leaving  Oxford, 


1875]  Importance  of  Veda  501 

have  been  full  of  trouble  and  sorrow  to  me,  and  I  cannot  thank  your 
Royal  Highness  enough  for  the  unexpected  token  of  your  kind 
feelings  towards  me  :  it  was  like  a  bright  and  warm  ray  of  light  on 
a  dreary  day.  No  one  knows  how  fond  I  am  of  Oxford,  and  what  a 
sacrifice  I  make  in  leaving  it  and  leaving  England.  But  the  life  of 
a  scholar  has  its  duties,  and  I  must  not  shrink  from  them.  As  Pro- 
fessor I  have  no  sphere  of  usefulness  here.  "  The  young  men  do 
not  belong  to  the  Professor,  nor  the  Professor  to  the  young  men  " 
— that  is  what  Mr.  Bonamy  Price  says  in  his  last  pamphlet,  and  what 
I  have  felt  for  years.  As  long  as  the  edition  of  the  Veda  kept  me 
here,  I  had  an  excuse  for  staying  at  Oxford,  though  I  felt  often 
depressed  when  I  saw  how  I  had  to  fritter  away  my  time  in  trying 
to  serve  two  masters,  Sanskrit  and  the  Science  of  Language. 

'But  now,  when  the  edition  of  the  Veda  is  finished,  and  even  the 
Chips  gathered  up,  my  desire  to  continue  my  translation  of  the  Veda^ 
and  to  work  out  some  of  the  results  to  which  my  study  of  the  sacred 
writings  of  the  ancient  world  had  led  me,  became  stronger  and 
stronger.  Yet  I  felt  that  I  could  no  longer  work  as  I  had  done 
hitherto,  and  if  I  had  continued  to  discharge  my  duties  as  Professor 
of  Comparative  Philology,  I  should  have  had  to  surrender  my  San- 
skrit studies  altogether.  Were  I  Professor  of  Sanskrit  at  Oxford, 
nothing  would  have  drawn  me  away  from  this,  in  many  respects, 
delightful  place ;  but,  in  order  to  concentrate  my  powers,  and  to  do 
something  at  least  before  it  is  too  late,  I  see  no  choice  but  to  give 
up  my  pleasant  position  here,  and  retire  to  some  quiet  town  in 
Germany.  .  .  . 

*  The  dark  cloud  has  been  hanging  over  my  head  for  the  last 
fifteen  years,  and  as  a  man  who  stands  under  a  waterfall  is  little 
disturbed  by  a  few  rain-drops,  the  pudendae  iniuriolae  were  nothing 
compared  to  the  weighty  considerations  which  determined  my  course. 

'A  rumour  (and  Oxford  is  famous  for  its  Common-roomers)  says 
that  I  have  accepted  a  lucrative  position  in  Germany.  It  is  simply 
untrue.  A  lucrative  position  was  offered  me  in  Germany,  and  I  de- 
clined it.  No  one  seems  able  to  see  that  science,  too,  has  its  duties, 
or  to  believe  that  a  scholar  can  make  a  sacrifice  for  the  sake  of  his 
work.  Now,  I  believe  that  the  Veda  is  an  extremely  important  book, 
in  fact  the  only  book  in  Indian  literature  which  is  important,  not  only 
for  India,  but  for  the  early  history  of  the  whole  Aryan  race,  including 
Greeks,  Romans,  and  ourselves.  It  contains  the  first  attempts  at 
expressing  religious  thought  and  feeling,  and  it  alone  can  help  us 
to  solve  many  of  the  most  critical  problems  in  the  Science  of 
Religion.  The  Science  of  Religion  is,  in  fact,  the  history  of  all 
religions,  and  when  I  saw,   as  quite  a  young  man,  the  gap  in  our 

I  Kk3 


502  Reasons  for  leaving  England       [ch.  xxi 

materials  for  studying  the  origin  and  growth  of  religious  ideas, 
because  no  one  knew  then  or  could  know  what  the  Veda  was, 
I  determined  to  devote  my  life  to  collecting  all  the  manuscripts  that 
could  still  be  found,  and  thus  to  rescue  the  oldest  book  of  our  race 
from  that  destruction  which  would  have  been  inevitable,  unless  it  had 
been  printed.  This  has  now  been  done.  People  do  not  yet  see  the 
full  importance  of  the  Veda  in  an  historical  study  of  religion,  and  yet 
I  feel  convinced  that  the  true  solution  of  many  of  our  theological 
difficulties — difficulties  that  will  become  far  more  terrible  than  they 
are  at  present — is  to  be  found  in  the  study  of  the  history  of  all 
religions.  We  shall  then  see  what  is  essential  and  what  is  accidental, 
what  is  eternal  and  what  is  human  handiwork ;  among  all  the  possi- 
bilities displayed  before  us,  we  shall  in  the  end  discover  the  reality 
of  religion,  just  as  a  study  of  the  movements  oi  all  celestial  bodies  led 
in  the  end  to  the  discovery  of  a  law  that  supported  them  all. 

'If  I  stayed  at  Oxford  as  Professor  of  Comparative  Philology, 
I  could  not  hope  to  finish  even  my  translation  of  the  Veda,  much 
less  to  work  out  at  least  a  few  of  the  results  of  thirty  years'  study. 
That  is  why  I  leave  Oxford  to  settle  in  some  quiet  town  in  Germany, 
and  there  to  devote  myself  to  the  education  of  my  children  and  to 
my  Sanskrit  studies.  My  friends  think  me  Quixotic,  even  reckless. 
I  cannot  help  it.  All  I  can  say  is,  and  I  know  your  Royal  Highness 
will  agree  with  me.  Life  is  precious,  and  we  must  try  to  make  the 
best  use  of  it  we  can. 

'  I  have  been  proud  for  years  to  call  myself,  while  living  and 
working  in  England,  a  loyal  subject  of  Her  Majesty  the  Queen. 
I  hope  I  shall  be  so  still,  even  when  living  and  working  in  Germany. 
While  in  England  I  have  tried  to  make  my  English  friends  under- 
stand and  appreciate  all  that  is  good  and  noble  in  the  German 
character ;  when  in  Germany  I  shall  try  to  make  my  German  friends 
understand  and  appreciate  what  is  good  and  noble  in  the  English 
character. 

'  I  have  sometimes  succeeded  in  England — I  hope  I  may  succeed 
in  Germany,  for  the  estrangement  between  England  and  Germany  is 
deplorable,  and  fraught,  I  fear,  with  serious  danger.  Again  thanking 
your  Royal  Highness  for  the  many  proofs  of  your  kindness, 

*  I  have  the  honour  to  remain,  with  sincere  gratitude, 
'  Your  Royal  Highness's  most  faithful  servant, 

'F.  Max  Muller.' 

In  a  letter  to  his  mother  of  December  19,  Max  MUller  says 
that  he  longs  for  rest,  rest  to  work  at  what  really  interests 
him.     He  also  tells  her  that  he  has  just  received  the  Maxi- 


1875]  Maximilian  Order  503 

milian  Order  from  Bavaria,  and  that  it  is  more  showy  than 
the  Order  pour  le  Merite,  *  but  that  is  the  best.'  He  felt  each 
day  that,  if  freed  from  his  Oxford  lectures,  he  could  yet  do 
much  good  work,  for  he  was  true  to  his  first  love  Sanskrit, 
and  what  it  had  led  to,  the  study  of  ancient  religions,  but  his 
lectures  in  addition  were  too  much  for  his  strength. 

To  E.  Freeman,  Esq. 

Oxford,  December. 

'  As  to  politics,  all  I  meant  to  say  was  that  it  was  dangerous  to 
e^g  the  present  Government  on  to  any  action  in  the  Eastern 
Question.  Lord  Derby  is  the  same  as  he  was  at  the  time  of  the 
Cretan  insurrection — feelings  of  humanity  are  to  him,  as  a  politician, 
mere  sentimentality.  That  Cretan  business  is  the  most  horrible 
chapter  in  modern  history.  Did  you  ever  read  Stillman's  book? 
I  tried  to  review  it  in  the  Times,  but  nearly  all  the  really  damaging 
passages  were  cut  out.  If  Lord  Derby  thinks  he  has  done  some- 
thing and  enough,  I  believe  that  is  the  best  thing  that  could  happen 
just  now. 

'  I  look  upon  myself  as  a  true  Anglian.  My  Sovereign,  the  reigning 
Duke  of  Anhalt,  is  Duke  of  Engern.    See  Chips,  III,  p.  123.' 

On  December  23  he  writes  to  Dr.  Pauli :  '  I  want  at  least 
a  couple  of  years'  rest,  for  I  feel  rather  shaken.' 

To  C.  E.  Mathews,  Esq. 

Oxford,  December  15. 
*  Yes,  I  am  going.  I  feel  more  and  more  that  I  am  not  wanted  at 
Oxford,  and  at  my  time  of  life  one  does  not  like  to  feel  that  one  is 
on  sufferance  only.  My  old  friends  are  nearly  all  gone,  and  the 
treatment  I  receive  here  is  not  exactly  what  I  like.  I  want  rest  in 
order  to  finish  some  work  before  it  is  too  late.  I  shall  go  in  April  to 
Germany  to  look  out  for  a  house,  and  take  my  family  over  in  June  or 
July.' 

Towards  the  close  of  the  year  Max  MUller  brought  out  in 
Germany  a  little  volume  of  the  letters  from  Schiller  to  the 
Duke  of  Schleswig-Holstein.  It  was  known  that  many  letters 
had  passed  between  the  poet  and  his  generous  patron,  but  it 
was  believed  they  had  been  destroyed.  His  Royal  Highness 
Prince  Christian  succeeded  in  discovering  part  of  the  corre- 
spondence, which  he  entrusted  to  Max  M  tiller  for  publication. 


504  Girls'  High  School,   Oxford       [ch.  xxi 

To  H.R.H.  Prince  Leopold. 

Parks  End,  December  28,  1875. 

'Sir, — The  little  book  containing  Schiller's  correspondence  with 
the  Duke  of  Schleswig-Holstein  (the  grandfather  of  H.R.H.  Prince 
Christian)  was  only  the  small  end,  and  as  your  Royal  Highness  has 
accepted  it  so  kindly,  I  venture  to  send  to-day  what  indeed  will  seem 
the  wedge,  four  stout  bundles  of  Chips.  I  do  not  ask  you  to  read 
them,  in  fact  I  always  feel  ashamed  when  I  present  any  of  my  books, 
for  it  is  like  asking  one's  friends  to  listen  for  an  hour  or  more  to  one's 
uninterrupted  talk,  it  is  making  oneself  a  great  bore.  But  what  is 
a  poor  author  to  do  who  wishes,  if  not  to  be  read,  at  least  to  be 
shelved?  Now  all  I  really  ask  is  a  place  on  the  shelves  of  your 
library.  I  know  I  shall  be  in  good  company,  and  if  in  some  idle 
hour — and  no  life  is  tolerable  without  some  idle  hours — your  Royal 
Highness  should  open  one  of  these  volurnes,  perhaps  they  will  remind 
you  of  one  who,  when  returned  to  his  native  country,  will  always 
remember  with  gratitude  the  happy  years  which  he  spent  in  the 
country  of  his  choice,  and  who  has  only  to  think  of  the  great  Idnd- 
ness  which  he  received  when  he  least  expected  it,  in  order  to  forget 
the  little  unkindnesses  which,  after  all,  do  one  can  escape.  My  friends 
at  Oxford  are  now  doing  all  they  can  to  keep  me  here,  but  I  believe 
I  have  decided  rightly,  and  I  owe  it  to  my  enemies  that  they  have 
helped  me  to  a  right  decision. 

'  Florence  was  very  tempting.  Vienna,  too,  held  out  very  attractive 
offers,  but  I  believe  I  shall  remain  faithful  to  what  the  Germans 
somewhat  conceitedly  call  Elb-Florenz,  i.  e.  Dresden.  There  is  one 
attraction  which  I  have  little  doubt  will  sooner  or  later  bring  your 
Royal  Highness  to  Dresden,  that  is  Raphael's  Madonna,  a  picture 
totally  different  from  all  other  pictures,  and  quite  worth  a  journey 
by  itself. 

'  Your  Royal  Highness's  very  faithful  servant, 

'F.  Max  Mijller.' 

We  cannot  close  the  memories  of  this  year  without  adverting 
to  an  event  in  Oxford  v^hich  v^as  of  great  interest  to  the  Max 
MUllers,  the  foundation  and  opening  of  the  Girls'  Day  School 
by  the  Public  Day  School  Company.  All  through  this  year 
Max  MuUer  did  all  he  could  to  promote  the  scheme,  attending 
all  the  meetings  and  taking  shares,  he  having  found  by 
experience  how  unsatisfactory  teaching  at  home  by  one 
governess  generally  is. 

His   own    three    girls    were    among    the   first   twenty-five 


1875]  The  Last  Christmas  505 

scholars  with  which  the  school  opened,  and  the  other  girls 
were  almost  all  of  them  their  intimate  friends.  They  soon 
became  devoted  to  their  school ;  the  eldest  girl  was  the  first 
Prefect,  and  among  the  many  reasons  that  made  Max  Muller's 
children  feel  intensely  the  idea  of  leaving  Oxford  and  their 
loved  home  the  loss  of  their  school  was  very  prominent. 

Christmas,  the  last,  as  was  thought,  in  the  old  home,  was 
a  sad  one,  though  kept  with  the  usual  tree,  to  which  Max 
Miiller  always  invited  all  the  Germans  living  in  Oxford. 


END  OF   VOL.    I 


OXFORD :    HORACE   HART 
PRINTER  TO   THE   UNIVERSITY 


WORKS 

BY   THE 

RT.  HON.  FRIEDRICH  MAX  MULLER. 


COLLECTED  WORKS. 

1 8  Vols.     Crown  Svo,  55.  each. 

Vol.    I.    NATURAL    RELIGION:     the    Gifford    Lectures, 
1888. 

Vol.   II.    PHYSICAL   RELIGION:     the   Gifford    Lectures, 
1890. 

Vol.  III.   ANTHROPOLOGICAL  RELIGION:  the  Gifford 

Lectures,  1891. 

Vol.   IV.    THEOSOPHY;   or,   Psychological    Religion:   the 

Gifford  Lectures,  1892. 

CHIPS  FROM  A    GERMAN  WORKSHOP. 

Vol.  V.   RECENT  ESSAYS  AND  ADDRESSES. 

Vol.  VI.   BIOGRAPHICAL  ESSAYS. 

Vol.  VII.    ESSAYS  ON   LANGUAGE  AND    LITERA- 
TURE. 

Vol.  VIII.    ESSAYS  ON  MYTHOLOGY  AND  FOLK- 
LORE.   

Vol.  IX.  THE  ORIGIN  AND  GROWTH  OF  RELIGION, 

as  Illustrated  by  the  Religions  of  India:  the  Hibbert  Lectures,  1878. 

Vol.  X.  BIOGRAPHIES  OF  WORDS,  AND  THE  HOME 

OF  THE  ARYAS. 

Vols.  XI,  XII.  THE  SCIENCE  OF  LANGUAGE:  Founded 

on  Lectures  delivered  at  the  Royal  Institution  in  1861  and  1863.     2  vols. 
10^. 

Vol.  XIII.    INDIA:  What  can  it  Teach  Us? 

Vol.  XIV.    INTRODUCTION    TO   THE   SCIENCE    OF 

RELIGION.     Four  Lectures,  1870. 

Vol.  XV.    RAMAKi?/SHA^A:  his  Life  and  Sayings. 

Vol.  XVI.  THREE  LECTURES  ON  THE  VEDANTA 

PHILOSOPHY,  1894. 

Vol.  XVII.     LAST    ESSAYS.      First  Series.      Essays    on 

Language,  Folk-lore,  &c. 

Vol.  XVIII.    LAST    ESSAYS.     Second  Series.     Essays  on 

the  Science  of  Religion. 

LONGMANS,  GREEN,  &  CO. 
LONDON,   NEW  YORK,  AND   BOMBAY. 


WORKS 


BY  THE 


RT.  HON.  FRIEDRICH  MAX  MULLER. 


THE  SCIENCE  OF  THOUGHT.    8vo.    215. 

CONTRIBUTIONS    TO    THE  SCIENCE  OF   MYTHO- 
LOGY.    2  vols.    8vo.    3 2 J. 

THE  SIX  SYSTEMS  OF  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY.  8vo. 

iSs. 

AULD  LANG  SYNE.     First  Series.     8vo.  [Out  of  print. 

Contents. — Musical  Recollections — Literary  Recollections — Recollections 
of  Royalties — Beggars. 

AULD  LANG  SYNE.     Second  Series.    My  Indian  Friends. 

8vo.     los.  6d. 

DEUTSCHE  LIEBE  (GERMAN  LOVE):   Fragments  from 

the  Papers  of  an  Alien.     Collected  by  F.  Max  Muller.     Translated  from 
the  German  by  G.  A.  M.     Crown  8vo.     5^. 

MY  AUTOBIOGRAPHY.    A  Fragment.     With  6  Portraits. 

SVO.       12S.  f)d. 

Contents. — Introductory — Childhood  at  Dessau — School-days  at  Leipzig 
— University — Paris — Arrival  in  England — Early  Days  at  Oxford — Early 
Friends  at  Oxford — A  Confession. 

HANDBOOKS  FOR  THE  STUDY  OF  SANSKRIT. 
THE  SANSKRIT  TEXT  OF  THE   FIRST  BOOK   OF 

THE  HITOPADE^-A.     zs.6d. 

THE   SECOND,   THIRD   AND   FOURTH   BOOKS   OF 

THE  HITOPADEi'A ;  containing  that  Sanskrit  Text,  with  Interlinear  Trans- 
lation.    7^.  6d. 


LONGMANS,  GREEN,  &  CO. 
LONDON,   NEW  YORK,  AND  BOMBAY. 


22  3 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 


-nrTTTTTTTTTTTTT- 


1 


