Google 


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world’s books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that’s often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book’s long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 


Usage guidelines 


Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 


We also ask that you: 


+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 


+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google’s system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 


+ Maintain attribution The Google “watermark” you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 


+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can’t offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book’s appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world, Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 


About Google Book Search 


Google’s mission is to organize the world’s information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world’s books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 














GIFT OF 


Arthur Garfield Kennedy 
in memory of 


Bertha Miller Kennedy 

















(५.4... ७. [~~ 


` 1८, 2५४ 


é 


५/4. 27, 1706, 


५ 


BIBLIOTHEK 
INDOGERMANISCHER GRAMMATIKEN 


BEARBEITET VON 


ए, BUOHELER, 2. DELBRUOK, ए, FOY, ए. HUBSOHMANN, 
A. LESKIEN, G. MEYER, ए. SIEVERS, H. WEBER, W. 2. WHITNEY, 
2. WINDISOH. 


BAND Il. 
A SanscriT GRAMMAR, INCLUDING BOTH THE CLassicaL LANGUAGE, AND 


THE Oxpgr Diatects, or VEDA AND BRAHMANA 
sy Wiis Dwicat Watney. 


THIRD EDITION. 





—w 





LEIPZIG, 
DRUCK UND VERLAG VON BREITKOPF & HARTEL. 
1896. 


A 
SANSKRIT GRAMMAR, 


INCLUDING BOTH THE CLASSICAL LANGUAGE, AND THE 
OLDER DIALECTS, OF VEDA AND BRAHMANA. 


BY 


WILLIAM DWIGHT WHITNEY, 


LATE PROFESSOR OF SANSKRIT AMD COMPARATIVE PHILOLOGY IN KALB COLLEOE, 
‘MEW-HAVEN, 





THIRD EDITION. 


THIS WORK 15 COPYRIGHT. 


LEIPZIG: 
BREITKOPF & HARTEL. 


BOSTON: 
GINN & COMPANY. 


1896. 
र 


Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1879, by W. D. Whitney in the office 
of the Librarian of Congress at Washington D. C. 


491.25 


~ W 623 
ed. 3 
८.२ 


Printers: Breitkopf & Hirtel, Leipzig. 


PREFACE 


70 THE First Epirion. 





It was in June, 1875, as I chanced to be for a day or 
two in Leipzig, that I was unexpectedly invited to prepare 
the Sanskrit grammar for the Indo-European series projected 
by Messrs. Breitkopf and Hartel. After some consideration, 
and consultation with friends, I accepted the task, and have 
since devoted to it what time could be spared from regular 
duties, after the satisfaction of engagements earlier formed. 
If the delay seems a long one, it was nevertheless unavoid- 
able; and I would gladly, in the interest of the work itself, 
have made it still longer. In every such case, it is necess- 
ary to make a compromise between measurably satisfying a 
present pressing need, and doing the subject fuller justice 
at the cost of more time; and it seemed as if the call for 
a Sanskrit grammar on a somewhat different plan from those 
already in use — excellent as some of these in many respects 
are — was urgent enough to recommend a speedy com- 
pletion of the work begun. 

The objects had especially in view in the preparation 
of this grammar have been the following: 

1. To make a presentation of the facts of the language 
primarily as they show themselves in use in the literature, 
and only secondarily as they are laid down by the native 
grammarians. The earliest European grammars were by the 
necessity of the case chiefly founded on their native prede- 











PREFACE ix 


able to make (unfortunately a very imperfect one) of the im- 
portant Maitrayani-Sambita. * 

Of the deficiencies of my mork I am, I think, not less 
fully aware than any critic of it, even the severest, is likely 
to be. Should it be found to answer its intended purpose 
well enough to come to another edition, my endeavor will 
be to improve and complete it; and I shall be grateful for 
any corrections or suggestions which may aid me in mak- 
ing it a more efficient help to the study of the Sanskrit 
language and literature. 


Gorua, July 1879. 
W. D. W. 


PREFACE 


TO THE SEcoND Epirion. 


Ih preparing a new edition of this grammar, I have 
made use of the new material gathered by myself during 
the intervening years,** and also of that gathered by others, 
80 far as it was accessible to me and fitted into my plan;*** 
and I have had the benefit of kind suggestions from various 
quarters — for all of which I desire to return a grateful 
acknowledgment. By such help, I have been able not only 
to correct and repair certain errors and omissions of the 
first edition, but also to speak with more definiteness upon 





* Since published in full by him, 1881—6. 

** A part of this new material was published by myself in 1885, 
as a Supplement to the grammar, under the title “Roots, Vorb-Forms, 
and Primary Derivatives of the Sanskrit Language”. 

*** Especially deserving of mention is Holtzmann’s collection of 
material from the Mahabharata, also published (1884) in the form of 
ॐ Supplement to this work; also Buhtlingk’s similar collection from 
the larger half of the Ramayana. 


x PREFACE. 


very many points relating to the material and usages of 
the language. 

In order not to impair the applicability of the referen- 
ces already made to the work by various authors, its para- 
graphing has been retained unchanged throughout; for in- 
creased convenience of further reference, the subdivisions 
of paragraphs have been more thoroughly marked, by letters 
(ngw and then changing a former lettering); and the par- 
agraph-numbers have been set at the outer instead of the 
inner edge of the upper margin. 

My remoteness from the place of publication has for- 
bidden me the reading of more than one proof; but the 
kindness of Professor Lanman in adding his revision (ac- 
companied by other timely suggestions) to mine, and the 
care of the printers, will be found, I trust, to have aided 
in securing a text disfigured by few errors of the press. 

Circumstances beyond my control have delayed for a 
year or two the completion of this revision, and have made 
it in some parts less complete than I should have desired. 


New-Haven, Sept. 1888. 
W. D. W. 























xvilf Istropeerios. 


to be called br&hmansa ‘apparently relating to the brahman 
or worship). In the White Yajar-Veda, it is separated into 
a work by itself, beside the sathhit& or text of verses and 
formulas, and is called the Catapaths-Braihmana Brahmana 
of a hundred ways. Other similar collections are found. be- 
longing to various other schools of Vedie study. and they 
bear the common name of Brahmaga, with the name of the 
school, or some other distinctive title. prefixed. Thus, the 
Aitareya and Kausitaki-Brahmanas, belonging to the schools 
of the Rig-Veda, the Paficaviiga and Sadvinga-Brahmapas 
and other minor works, to the Sama-Veda; the Gopatha- 
Br&éhmana, to the Atharva-Veda; and a Jaéiminiys- or Tala- 
vak&ra-Bréhmays, to the Sama-Veda, has recently ‘Burnell 
heen discovered in India; the Téittirlya-Brahmana is a col- 
lection of mingled mantra and br&hmana, like the samhita 
of the same name, but supplementary and later. These 
works are likewise regarded as canonical by the schools. 
and are learned by their sectaries with the same extreme care 
which is devoted to the satbhit&s, and their condition of 
textual preservation is of a kindred excellence. To a cer- 
tain extent, there is among them the possession of common 
material: a fact the bearings of which are not yet fully 
understood. 

Notwithstanding the inanity of no small part of their - 
contents, the Brahmanas are of a high order of interest in 
their bearings on the history of Indian institutions; and 
philologically they are not less important, since they re- 
present a form of language in most respects intermediate 
between the classical and that of the Vedas, and offer spe- 
cimens on a large scale of a prose style, and of one which 
is in the main a natural and freely developed one — the 
oldest and most primitive Indo-European prose. 

Beside the Brahmanas are sometimes found later ap- 
pendices, of a similar character, called Aranyakas (forest- 
sections): as the Aitareya-Arapyake, Taittiriya-Arapyaka, 
Brhad-Aranyaka, and so on. And from some of these, or 
even from the Brahmanas, are extracted the earliest Upa~ 
nigads (sittings, lectures on sacred subjects) — which, 











xxii InTropuction. 


accordance with approved religious doctrines. All of them 
seek the same end, the emancipation of the soul from the 
necessity of continuing its existence in a succession of 
bodies, and its unification with the All-soul; but they 
differ in regard to the means by which they seek to attain 
this end. 

The astronomical science of the Hindus is a reflection 
of that of Greece, and its literature is of recent date; but 
as mathematicians, in arithmetic and geometry, they have 
shown more independence. Their medical science, although 
its beginnings go back even to the Veda, in the use of 
medicinal plants with accompanying incantations, is of little 
account, and its proper literature by no means ancient. 


Vv. 


CONTENTS. 


PREFACR ५ , + + ~ ^ ^ ^-^ = ~ ^ 
INTRODUCTION. . . . . - . 


ALPHABET .. 2... ~ ~ च Wee 


System or Sounps; PRONUNCIATION e 
Vowels, 10; Consonants, 13 ; Quantity, 27; Accent, 28, 


|. RoLEs OF EupHonic COMBINATION . 


Introdyctory, 34; Principles, 37; Rules of Vowel Com- 
bination, 42; Permitted Finals, 49; Deaspiration, 53; 
Surd and Sonant Assimilation, 54; Combinations of 
Final 8 and r, 66; Conversion of 8 to ह, 61; Con- 
version of n tom, 64; Conversion of Dental Mutes to 
Linguals and Palatals, 66; Combinations of Final n, 
69; Combinations of Final m, 71; the Palatal Mutos 
and Sibilant, and h, 72; the Lingual Sibilant, 77; 
Extension and Abbreviation, 78; Strengthening and 
Weakening Processes, 81; Guna and Vrddhi, 81; 
YVowel-lengthening, 84; Vowel-lightening, 85; Nasal 
Increment, 86; Reduplication, 87. 


DECLENSION .... .. - } 
Gender, Number, Case, 88; Uses of the Cases, 89; 
Endings of Declension, 103; Variation of Stem, 107; 
Accent in Deolension, 108. 


Nouns ann Apsectiyes ... . च 
Classification ete., 141; Declension I., Stems ina, 112; 
Declension II., Stems in i and प, 116; Declension 
IIL, Stems in Long Vowels (4, i, i): A. Root-words 
ete., 124; Stems in Diphthongs, 130; छ, Derivative 
Stems etc., 131; Declension IV., Stems in fF or ar, 
187; Declension V., Stems in Consonants, 144; 
A. Root-stems etc., 143; 5, Derivative Stems in as, 
is, as, 163; 0. Derivative Stems in an, 156: D. 
in in, 161; HB. in ant or at, 163; F. Perfect Par- 
ticiples in vais, 169; G. Comparatives in yas or 
yas, 172; Comparison, 173. 





Page. 
v 
xi 
1—9 
0—34 
4—87 
88—110 
111—176 


मष ConTEenTs. 


Chap. 
VI. Numenats . . 
Cardinals, 177; Ordinals otc., 183. 


VII. Pronouns .. . . far ean eae 
Porsonal, 185; Demonstrative, 188; Interrogativo, 
104; Relative, 196; other Pronouns: Emphatic, In- 
definite, 196; Nouns used pronominally, 197; 
Pronominal Derivatives, Possessives etc., 197; Ad- 
fectives declined pronominally, 199. 


VIII. Consuaation . « we eee 
Voice, Tonse, Mode, Number, Person, 200; Verbal 
Adjectives and Nouns, 203; Secondary Conjugations, 
203; Personal Endings, 204; Subjunctive Mode, 209; 
Optative, 244; Imperative, 243; Uses of the Modes, 
215; Partioiples, 220; Augment, 220; Reduplication, 
222; Accent of the Verb, 223. 


IX. Toe PResentT-SysTeEM. ^ र च ५ च ५ ees 
General, 227; Conjugations and onjugation Classes, 
228} Root-Class (second or adeclass), 281; Re- 
duplicating Class (third or hu-class), 242; Nasal 
Class (seventh or rudh-class), 260; nu and u-Classes 
(fifth and eighth, or su- and tan-classes), 264; nd- 
Class (ninth or kri-class), 260; a-Clase (frst or 
Dhii-class), 264; Accented &-Class (sixth or tud- 
class), 269; ya-Class (fourth or div-class), 271; 
Accented y&-Olass or Passive Conjugation, 275; 
So-called tenth or cur-class, 277; Uses of the Pres- 
ent and Imperfect, 278. 


ड, Tae Perrect-System. . = . . . ^ 
Perfect Tense, 279; Perfect Participle, 291; Modes 
of the Perfect, 292; Pluperfect, 205; Usos of the 
Perfect, 295. 


XI. Tae Aonist-Systems . . . 
Classification, 297; I, Simple Aorist: 1. Root-Aorist 
299; Passive Aorist 3d sing. 304; 2. the a-Aorist, 
305; IL. 8. Reduplicated Aorist, 308; III. Sibilant 
Aorist, 313; 4. the s-Aorist, 314; 6. the ig-Aorist, 
320; 6. the eig-Aorist, 323; 7. the sa-Aorist, 326; 
Precative, 926; Uses of the Aorist, 328. 





NIL Tue Furure-Systems + च च ee = = =" ५ 
I. Tho 8-Future, 331; Preterit of the e-Future, Con- 
ditional, 334; I, The Periphrastic Future, 335; 
Uses of the Futures and Conditional, 337. 





Page. 

177—185 
185—199 
200—226 
227—278 
279—296 
297—330 
330—339 


ConTEnTs. xxv 


Chap. Page. 
XIII. VERBAL ADJECTIVES AND Nouns: Parrici- 

PLES, INFINITIVES, GERUNDS . . . - 340—360 

Passive Participle in t& or ०६, 340; Past Active 

Participle in tavant, 344; Future Passive Parti- 

ciples, Gerundives, 345; Infinitives, 347; Uses of 

tho Infinitives, 351; Gorunds, 355; Adverbial Gerand 

in am, 359. 


XIV. Derivative on SeconDARY ConJUGATION . . 360—391 
1. Passive, 364; II. Intensive, 362; Present-System, ‘ 
365; Perfect, Aorist, Future, etc. 370; III. Desider- 
ative, 372; Present-System, 374; Perfect, Aorist, 
Future, ९९. 376; IV. Causative, 378; Present-System, 
380; Porfect, Aorist, Future, ctc., 883; ए. Denom- 
inative, 386. 

XY. PERIPHRASTIC AND ComMPOUND CONJUGATION 391—403 
The Periphrastic Perfect, 392; Participial Pertphras- 
tic Phrases, 394; Composition with Prepositional 
Prefixes, 395; Other Verbal Compounds, 400. 


XVI. INDECLINABLES. . . . 5 “4083—417 
Adverbs, 403; Prepositions, 414; Conjunetions, 446 ~ 
Interjections, 417. 


XVII. Derivation of DECLINABLE StEMS. . . . . 418—480 
A. Primary Derivatives, 420; छ. Secondary Deriva- 
tives, 454. 


XVIII. Formation or Coupounp Stems. . . . 480—515 

Classification, 480; I. Copulative Compounds, 485 
Il. Determinative Compounds, 489; A. Dependent 
Compounds, 489; B. Descriptive Compounds, 494; 
IIL, Secondary Adjective Compounds, 601; A. Pos- 
sessive Compounds, 604 ; BB. Compounds with Governed 
Final Member, 611; Adjective Compounds as Nouns 
and as Adverbs, 512; Anomalous Compounds 6414; 
Stem-finals altered in Composition, 614; Loose 
Construction with Compounds, 616. 


APPENDIX. , 2... „ , ^ + ~ ^ ee + 816-520 
A. Examples of Various Sanskrit Type, 516; B. Ex- 
ample of Accentuated Text, 518; Synopsis of the 
conjugation of roots bhi and kp, 620. 


Sanserir-Inpex. © 2. + = + च, + ee ee , 521--539 
GeneraL-InDEx. © 2 + + = + + „+ ~ + . ee SAO BSL 








1.1 1/1. 1 . Raj फ. 
५ ८1... 81. 1 0 - Big-Veda. 


PU. Pracea Upanisad 
R एकष्य 
Ragh Raghavais 
OS. Catkhiyans (riate-Sttra. एति. Rigveda-Prancakkys. 
RTI. Raja Tarangimi. 
RV. Rig-Veda 
3. Simas 





1 

DKC. Daza-Kamara-Carita 

ट, Epos ‘MBb. sod B. 

GB. Gopaths Brabmana SV. Sama-Veda 

GG%. Gobbiliya-Grhya-Satr. TA. Taittiriya-Aracyaka. 


H. Hitopadegas. ‘TB. Tait 





Har, Harivance. TPr. Taittiriya-Praticakbya. 
J, Jaiminiya ‘or Talavakara)Brab- Tribh. Tribbasyaratna comm. to 


8४. 


maps. प्रष्ठा). 
JU, Jaiminiya-Upanisad-Brah- TS. Taittiriya-Sambita. 
mans. ए. Upanigads. 
K. Kathaks. V. Vedas (RV., AV., 
Kap. Kapligthala-Samhita, Vas. Vasistha. 


KS. Kaugitaki- (or (/aikbayana-) VBS. Varaha-Brhat-Samhita 
Brahiwnaps. Vet. Vetalapaiicavingati. 


KU. Kaugitaki-Brabmana-Upani- Vikr. Vikramorvaci 
gud 


VPr. Vajasaneyi-Praticakbya. 


Kg 

KH. Kaugike-Sttra. V8. Kan. do. 

KH, Katha-Sarit-Sigars. ए, Yajfiavalkya. 
५10४ Upanigad. 





a 


. Katydyana-Vrauta-BSiitra, VS. Vajaseneyi-Sanibita. 


Kanva-text. 


प ^+ 21781. 


ALPHABET. 


1. Tue natives of India write their ancient and sacred 
language in a variety of alphabets — generally, in each 
part of the country, in the same alphabet which they use 
for their own vernacular. The mode of writing, however, 
which is employed throughout the heart of Aryan India, or 
in Hindustan proper, is alone adopted by European scholars: 
it is called the devandgart. 


2 This name 18 of doubtful origin and value. A more comprehensive 
name is na&gari (perhaps, of the city); and deva-ndgari is nagari of 
the gods, or of the Brakmans, 

3. Much that relates to the history of the Indian alphabets is still 
obseure. The earliest written monuments of known date in the country are 
the insoriptions containing the edicts of Agoka or Piyadasl, of about the 
middle of the third century ए. 0. They are in two different systems of 
characters, of which one shows distinct signs of derivation from a Semitic 
source, while the other is also probably, though much less evidently, of the 
same origin. From the latter, the Lath, or Southern Acoka character (of 
Girnar), come the later Indian alphabets, both those of the northern Aryan 
languages and those of the southern Dravidian languages. The ndgari, 
devandgari, Bengali, Guzeriti, and others, are varieties of its northern 
derivatives; and with them are related some of the alphabets of peoples 
outside of India — as in Tibet and Farther India — who have adopted Hindu 
culture or religion. 

8, There is reason to believe that writing was first employed in India 
for practical purposes — for correspondence and business and the like — 
and only by degrees came to be applied also to literary use. The literature, 
to a great extent, and the more fally in proportion to its claimed sanctity 
and authority, ignores all written record, and assumes to be kept in existence 
by oral tradition alone, 

Whitney, Grammar. 3. ed. 1 








3] 1. ALPHABET. 2 


8. Of the devandgari itself there are minor varieties, depending on 
differences of locality or of period, as also of individual hand (seo examples 
in Weber's catalogue of the Berlin Sanskrit MSS., in Rajendrslala Mitra’s 
notices of MSS. in Indian libraries, in the published fac-similes of in- 
scriptions, and so on); and these are in some measure reflected in the type 
prepared for printing, both in India and in Europe. But a student who 
makes himself familiar with one style of printed characters will have little 
difficulty with the others, and will soon learn, by practice, to read the manu- 
scripts. A few specimens of types other than those used in this work are 
given in Appendix A. 

&, On account of the difficulty of combining them with the smaller sizes 
of our Roman and Italic type, the devand&gari characters are used below only 
in connection with the first or largest size. And, in accordance with the 
laudable usage of recent grammars, they are, wherever given, also trans- 
literated, in Clarendon letters; while the latter alone are used in the other 
sizes. 

4, The student may be advised to try to familiarize himself from 
the start with the devandgari mode of writing. At the same time, 
it is not indispensable that he should do so until, having learned the 
principal paradigms, he comes to begin reading and analysing and 
parsing; and many will find the latter the more practical, and in the 
end equally or more effective, way. 


5. The characters of the devanfgari alphabet, and the 
European letters which will be used in transliterating them, 
are as follows: 


short long 
1g a8 11 a 
palatal +3 i ५१ ए 
Vowels: simple ¢ labial sso ou “Ht 
lingual 12oy “RF 
dental + ल्‌ 1] (५ q Q 
diphth { palatal » ठ्‌ € ” > ai 
"० | abil ज्ञरो ow AY ष्ण 
Visarga wih 
Anusvara w =, © 4 or th (see 730). 
surd surd ssp, sonant- «= son. asp. nasal 


guttural vw Hk wu @kh ण्ह »A| gh ATA 
palatal न्च 6 = Beh »Tj sHjh ~Ah 
Mutes 1 lingual ग्ट { =@ th »Z qd »G dh गणा 
dental =aqt s@ th भद्‌ त =» dh न्नम्‌ 
labial श्प p »Q ph » Gb *भ bh «Am 



































ॐ या. उक क सथर, 14 
& Tie Hom ए > dus item The mend 
म भी -o be ‘Sermed by 
‘eourn 2 9 7 7 त  › न 7 gen them 
Jv ureewure uf che oer. 
a7. The secumi oui ‘urch पठ each series are aspirates: 
chus Xemie he suri nore Ww ws have de corresponding 
sand पयय इने, md उष te wma: न्‌ इ the corres- 
pending soant mmc: T gh OF (द che preewe char 
कलषा -क आषा पकस्व ind ieulr 2 devermine 
ॐ प cee छ + ग oem me -र noes गः तात्य sminds. and 
९७८ Theatiee “the उष @ ami gb धवत्‌ ok. mr. -3 hevond question. 
क ase ae doulas, oo vat way ae sari th ‘or example. differs 
‘oem 2 1 श 3 ए ए. 5 7 ११३ 
[ sea on ume त 17 1 87 amine bit 
[शि क क 9 त 5 2 5 1. 1 
७५५५. ०2०८१ इ कमत पेष, शधो ace भ्ठ -प्णयम्तो crgresemted by the 
कि ५८. =: sana, 0 mtagee १ “ac Lacm SysGmeme af the similar ancient 
Ores epee we ae 8.8) 
ww The woant ०.8. 8 indersod ani ieseribed as made 
पा ५ अदः say. wth ५ awe epe die Revamd wer che येतद २८ अव mute 
sewe Sut chece axe gras chavreceal iicutes ia the war af accepting 
ke eagiaaastum und aume af he dest pauMece पेड भत fem that the modern 
२५ grvaeneativa i 96 sack a charmer, and ३९.२८ the clement following 
the ४५० as a “giver Yes”, अयित, or 98 an emzharired दाधा of the 
pegmang of the saceeniiag sound The qrestiea 19 ome २६ crest diftealty, 
aml pos it dhe epinivas of the highest anchorites are much at variance. 
३७७५४ aspitatee are 20:2. :9 uve in Init in the promunciative of the vermacular 
as weil as 98 2 १ 
sh By the PrinyaRhyas, che aspirates of beth clanves are <aDed sogman : 
७६८) weight meas either arveparind Sy 6 rusk of breath (taking figman 
iw ie were व जहतः erage). ५८ aecevenpanied by @ spirant (below, 58). 
Awd avme wative szthurities dedize the surd aspirates as made by the combi- 
७९६१७ of coud sunk men-aspirate with its own corresponding urd spirant; and 
Abo wxant कहर, of each somamt nen-aspirate with the sonant spirant, the 
००५५५ (doles, GS Bat this wenld make ue two classes of aspirates of 
qulte dlveres character, ant would also make th thé same as ts, {h as tq, ch 
aa ey , is te any measere plausible only of the last. Panini has no 
mame 3 the echeme given im his comment (to i 4. 9) attributes 
^~ ५५७७ MARMARA grout expcretivn, amd to the non-aspinstes alpapréiga 
|. +) 
Jv ie usual among Buropean scholars to pronounce 


pees of aspirates as the corresponding non-aspirates 

















5é—] Il. System or Sounns. 20 


66. The y is by its physical character a palatal utterance; and 
it is classed as & palatal semivowel by the Hindu phonetists. It is 
one of the most common of Sanskrit sounds. 


57. The qv is pronounced as English or French ९ 
(German w) by the modern Hindus — except when preceded 
by a consonant in the same syllable, in which case it has 
rather the sound of English ४; and European scholars follow 
the same practice (with ot without the same exception). 


a, By its whole treatment in the euphony of the language, however, 
the v stands related to an u-vowel precisely as y to an s-vowel. It 
is, then, a » only according to the original Roman value of that 
letter — that is to say, a w-sound in the English sense; though (as 
was stated above for the ऊ) it may well have becn less markedly 
separated from ४ than English चठ, or more like French ow in oui etc. 
But, as the original w has in most European languages been changed 
to ० (English), so also in India, and that from a very early time: the 
Paninean scheme and two of the Pratigakhyas (VPr. and TPr.) distinctly 
define the sound as made between the upper teeth and the lower 
lip — which, of course, identifies it with the ordinary modern v-sound. 
As a matter of practice, the usual pronunciation need not be seriously 
objected to; yet the student should not fail to note that the rules of 
Sanskrit euphony and the name of “semivowel” have no application 
except to a w-sound in the English sense: a v-sound (German ९०) is 
no semivowel, but a spirant, standing on the same articulate stage 
with the English th-sounds and the f. 


58. The ए is classed as a labial semivowel by the Hindu phonet- 
ical authorities. It has a somewhat greater frequency than the y. 


a. In the Veda, under the same circumstances as the y (above, 56 a), 
v is to be read as a vowel, प. 


b. As to the interchange of v and b, see above, 50a. 

59. Spirants. Under the name Ogman (literally heat, 
steam, flatus), which is usually and well represented by 
spirant, some of the Hindu authorities include all the remain- 
ing sounds of the alphabet; others apply the term only to 
the three sibilants and the aspiration — to which it will here 
also be restricted. 


8, The term is not found in the Paninean scheme; by different treatises 
the guttural and labial breathings, these and the visarga, or all those and 
anusvara, are also (in addition to the sibilants and h) called igman (see 

















प्र] II. System or Sounps. 26 


० It is convenient also in transliteration to distinguish the as- 
similated m by a special sign, rh, from the anusvdra of more inde- 
pendent origin, 4; and this method will be followed in the present work. 


74, This is the whole system of sounds recognized by the written 
character; for certain other transitional sounds, more or less widely 
recognized in the theories of the Hindu phonetists, see below, 230. 


75. The whole spoken alphabet, then, may be arranged 
in the following manner, in order to show, so far as is 
possible in a single scheme, the relations and important 
classifications of its various members: 


a, @ 
फन ७५७ 
९ ९ 
oe “~ % Vowels 
* % 
i, i HE lou, a 
५४ 4 a ५ ० ज 
Son. y Tr 1 v Semivowels 
५ ५५ क on 
a a 2 n m Nasals 
= ra on ५ 
a Anusvara 
« 
Aspiration 
ve 
h Visarga 
१५ 
Burd | ९ a a Sibilants 
1 Ms 6 
gh jh dh dh bh asp. 
1 at 3 a iat 
Son. | [1 j qd dad ४ unasp. 
ey ५ a २५ “ 
kh ch th th ph asp, | Mutes 
“ow * os ५ 
Surd | k c t t ए unasp. 
ie = oo 6 
Gutt. Pal, Ling. Dent. Lab. 


a. The figures set undor the characters give the average per- 
centage of frequency of each sound, found by counting the number 
of times which it occurred in an aggrogate of 10,000 sounds of con- 
tinous text, in ten different passages, of 1,000 sounds each, selected 
from different epochs of the literature: namely, two from the Rig-Veda, 
one from the Atharva-Veda, two from different Brahmanas, and one 
each from Manu, Bhagavad-Gita, Cakuntala, Hitopadega, and Vasa- 
vadatta (J.A.0.8., vol. X., p. cl). 





¶१९-] Il. System or Sounps. 28 


making a heavy syllable. The last syllable of a pada (pri- 
mary division of a verse) is reckoned as either heavy or 
light. 

a. The distinction in terms between the difference of long and short in 


vowel-sound and that of heavy and light in syllable-construction is valuable, 
and should be observed. 


IV. Accent. 


80. The phenomena of accent are, by the Hindu gram- 
marians of all ages alike, described and treated as depend- 
ing on a variation of tone or pitch; of any difference of 
stress involved, they make no account. 

81. The primary tones (svara) or accent-pitches are two: 
a higher (udatta raised), or acute; and a lower (anudétta 
not raised), or grave. A third (called svarita: a term of 
doubtful meaning) is always of secondary origin, being (when 
not enclitic: see below, 85) the result of actual combination 
of an acute vowel and a following grave vowel into one 
syllable. It is also uniformly defined as compound in pitch, 
a union of higher and lower tone within the limits of a 
single syllable. It is thus identical in physical character 
with the Greek and Latin circumflex, and fully entitled to 
be called by the same name. 


88. Strictly, therefore, there is but one distinction of tone in the 
Sanskrit accentual system, as described by the native grammarians 
and marked in the written texts: the accented syllable is raised in tone 
above the unaccented; while then further, in certain cases of the 
fusion of an accented and an unaccented element into one syllable, 
that syllable retains the compounded tone of both elements. 

88. The svarita or circumflex is only rarely found on a pure long 
vowel or diphthong, but almost always on a syllable in which a vowol, 
short or long, is preceded by a y or v representing an originally acute 
i- or u-vowel. 

a. In transliteration, in this work, the udatta or acute will be 
marked with the ordinary sign of acute, and the svarita or circumflex 
(as being a downward slide of the voice forward) with what is usually 
called the grave accent: thus, 4, acute, ya or va, circumflex. 


29 Accent. स [-85 


84. The Pritigakhyas distinguish and name separately the circumflexed 
tones arising by different processes of combination: thus, the circumflex is 
called 

a. Kedipra (quick), when an acute i- or u-vowol (short or long) is 
converted into y or v before a dissimilar vowel of grave tone: thus, vyapta 
from vi-Apta, apsvantér from apsu antar. 

b. J&tya (native) or nitya (own), when the same combination les 
farther back, in the make-up of ५ stem or form, and so is constant, or 
belongs to the word in all circumstances of its occurrence: thus, kva (from 
kia), svar (इः), nydk (nfak), budhnya (budhn{a), kanya (kan{a), 
nadyas (nadi-as), tanva (tanti-a). 

c. The words of both the above classes are in the Veda, in the great 
majority of cases, to be read with restoration of the acute vowel as a separate 
syllable: thus, apsd antér, salar, nadias, ctc. In somo texts, part of 
them are written correspondingly: thus, sivar, tanava, budhniya. 

त. Pragligts, when the acuto and grave vowels are of such character 
that they are fused into a long vowel or diphthong (128 c): thus, divi ’va 
(RV. AY. ete.), from divi iva; siidgata (TS.), from sh-udgata; nai ‘va 
*gniyat ((B.), from n& eva agniyat. 

७. Abhinihita, when an initial grave a is absorbed by a final acute 
6 or 6 (186): thus, té ‘bruvan, from té abruvan; 80 ‘bravit, from _ 
86 abravit. 





85. But further, the Hindu grammarians agree in de- 
claring the (naturally grave) syllable following an acute, 
whether in the same or in another word, to be svarita or 
circumflex — unless, indeed, it be itself followed by an 
acute or circumflex; in which case it retains its grave 
tone. This is called by European scholars the enclitic or 
dependent circumflex. 


& Thus, in téna and té ca, the syllable na and word ca are 
regarded and marked as circumflex; but in téna té and té ca svar 
they are grave. 

b. This seems to mean that the voice, which 1s borne up at the higher 
Pitch to the end of the acute syllable, does not ordinarily drop to grave 
Pitch by an instantaneous movement, but descends by a more or less per- 
ceptible slide in the course of the following syllable. No Hindu authority 
suggests the theory of a middle or intermediate tone for the enclitic, any 
more than for the independent ciroumflex. For the most part, the two are 
identifled with one another, in treatment and designation. The enclitic 
circumflex is likewise divided into a number of sub-varieties, with different 
names: they are of too little consequence to be worth reporting. 


ॐ8- | आ. Srerem vt उ ॐ 


86. The च्छा difference ५ te rey kinds छ cirommiier is 
shown clearly envngi by tbe face 1. the indepensemt ecreamiiex 
takes the place of the sects a8 tie propir अदयः of a word while 
the enclitic is the mere thaduw folowing aa acute. apd following it 
im spother word precisely as ix the same word: 2 tbe independent 
circumflex maivtsins its character im a sitcativus whik the eeclitic 
before > following ciremafiex or acu ketes is cirecmfex character. 
and becomes grave: murourer, 3. in many of the sysems of marking 
accent below. 88. the two are quite differenty indiead 

87. The ace-ptustiva is marked ic mamuserip:s only of the older 
literature: wamely. im tbe primary Vedie texu. or sathhitas in two 
off the Brabmazas Taiztiriva and (atepatha . in the Taittir-ya-Arasyaka. 
in certain passages of the Aitareya-Arazyaka ard in the Suparnadiyaya. 
There are भ number of nxthods of writing accent. more or leas different 
from one another: the one found in manuseripts of the Rig-Veda. 
which is most widely known. and of which most of the others are 
only slight modificatio-s. is as follows. 

a. The acute syllable is Jeft unmarked: the cireumflex. whether 
independent or enciitic, has a short perpendicuiar stroke above; and 
the grave next preceding an acute or independent, circumflex has a 
short horizontal stroke beiow. Thus. 

Aa agnim; FEAT juhoti; नुन्वा tanvé: Gh kv 

४. But the introductory grave stroke below cannot be given if an 
acute syllable is initial; hence an unmarked syllable at the beginning 
of a word is to be understood as acute; and hence also, if several 


grave syllables precede an acute at the beginning of a sentence, they 
must all alike have the grave sign. Thus, 


FH व्ण; ते ८६; HATA karigyasi; TATA पण्ड. 

७. All the grave syllables, however, which follow a marked cir- 
cumflex are left unmarked, until the occurrence of another accented 
syllable causes the one which precedes it to take the preparatory 
stroke below. Thus, 

सीक्‌ भप; 
but सुटृशीकंटगावाम्‌ sudfetkasahdre gévam. 

त. If ४० independent circumflex be followed by an acute (or by 

another independent circumflex), a figure 1 is set after the former 


circumflexed vowel if it be short, or a figure 3 if it be long, and the 
signs of accent are applied as in the following examples: 


अ्रप्स्वरत्तः apsv aintah (from apsa antah); 
TRAP: rayds कः (from मच्छ avinih). 

















9-] If. EvrHonic CompraTion. 34 


97. In this work, the accent of each word and form will in 
general be marked, so far as there is authority determining its place 
and character. Where specific words and forms are quoted, they 
will only be so far accentuated as they are found with accent in 
accentuated texts. 


CHAPTER IIL 


RULES OF EUPHONIC COMBINATION. 


Introductory. 


98. The words in Sanskrit, as in the other languages related 
with it, are in great part analysable into roots, suffixes of derivation, 
and endings of inflection, these last being added mostly to stems 
containing suffixes, but also sometimes directly to roots. 

&. There are, of course, a certain number of uninflected words — 
indeclinables, particles; and also not a few that are incapable of analysis. 

99. The Sanskrit, indeed, possesses an exceptionally analysable 
character; its formative processes are more regular and transparent 
than those of any other Indo-European tongue. Hence the prevailing 
method of the Hindu native science of grammar, which sets up a 
certain body of roots, and prescribes the processes by which these 
may be made stems and words, giving the various added elements, 
and laying down the rules by which their combination is effected. And 
the same general method is, for like reason, followed also by European 
grammarians. 

100. The euphonic laws, accordingly, which govern the combination 
of suffix or of ending with root or stem, possess a high practical im- 
portance, and require to be laid down in preparation for the topics 
of declension and conjugation. 





101. Moreover, the formation of compounds, by joining two or 
more simple stems, is extremely frequent in Sanskrit; and this kind 
of combination has its own peculiar euphonic rules. And once more, 
in the form of the language as handed down to us by its literature, 
the words composing a sentence or paragraph are adapted to and 
combined with one another by nearly the same rules which govern 
the making of compounds; so that it is impossible to take apart and 
understand a Sanskrit sentence without knowing those rules. Hence 














39 GENERAL PRINCIPLES. (-117 


inflection ; the rules of external combination may better be left untouched 
until he comes to dealing with words in sentences, or to translating, Then, 
however, they sre indispensable, sinco the propor form of the words that 
compose the sentence is not to be determined without them. 


a. The general principles of combination underlying the euphonic 
rules, and determining their classification, may be stated as follows: 

118. Hiatus. In general, hiatus is forbidden; every 
syllable except the initial one of a sentence, or of a word 
or phrase not forming part of a sentence, must begin with 
a consonant (or with more than one). 

a. For details, and for exceptions, see 125 ff. 


४, In the earlier language, however, histus in every position was 
abundantly admitted. This appears plainly from the mantras, or metrical 
parts of the Veda, where in innumerable instances y and v are to be read 
as 1 and u, and, less often, a long vowel 15 to be resolved into two vowels, 
in order to make good the metre: 6. g., vary&na&m has to be read as 
varl-J-ne-im, svagvyam as su-ag-vi-am, and so on. In the Brshmanas, 
also, we find tvac, svar, dydus describod as dissyllables, vyaima and 
satyam as trisyllables, rajanya as of four syllables, and the like. See 
further 129 e. 

114. Deaspiration. An aspirate mute is liable to 
lose its aspiration, being allowed to stand unchanged only 


before a vowel or semivowel or nasal. 


115. Assimilation. The great body of euphonic 
changes in Sanskrit, as elsewhere, falls under the general 
head of assimilation — which takes place both between 
sounds which are so nearly alike that the difference 
between them is too insignificant to be worth preserving, 
and between those which are so diverse as to be practically 
incompatible. 

116. In part, assimilation involves the conversion of 
one sound to another of the same series, without change of 
articulating position; in part, it involves a change of position, 
or transfer to another series. 


117. Of changes within the series, the most frequent and im- 
portant occur in the adaptation of surd and sonant sounds to one 




















49 PERMITTED FINALS. (-141 


Permitted Finals. 


189. The sounds allowed to occur as finals in Sanskrit 
words standing by themselves (not in euphonic combination 
with something following) are closely limited, and those 
which would etymologically come to occupy such a position 
are often variously altered, in general accordance with their 
treatment in other circumstances, or are sometimes omitted 
altogether. 


8 The variety of consonants that would ever come at the end of either 
an inflected form or a derivative stem in the language is very small: namely, 
in forms, only t (or ते), n, m, 8; in derivative stems, only t, d, n, r, 8 
(and, in a few rare words, j). But almost all cousonants o-cur as finals 
of roots; and every root is liable to be found, alone or as last member of 
& compound, in the character of a declined s:em. 

140. All the vowel sounds, both simple and diphthongal, 
may be sounded at the end of a word. 


a. But neither दृ nor ] ever actually occurs; and कृ is rare (only as 
neuter sing. of a stem in दृ or ar, or as final of such a stem in composition). 


Thus, indra, givaya, akari, nadi, datu, cami, janayitf, 4gne, 
Givayai, vayo, agnau. 

141. Of the non-nasal mutes, only the first in each series, 
the non-aspirate surd, is allowed; the others —surd aspirate, 
and both sonants— whenever they would etymologically 
occur, are converted into this. 

Thus, agnimét for agnimath, subjt for suhfd, virdt for viradh, 
trigfap for trig}ubh. 

a. In a few roots, when their final (sonant aspirate) thus 
loses its aspiration, the original sonant aspiration of the 
initial reappears: compare & ४, below, 147. 

Thus, dagh becomes dhak, budh becomes bhut, and 80 on. 

The roots exhibiting this change are stated below, 155. 


b. There was some question among the Hindu grammarians ss to 
whether the final mute is to be estimated as of surd or of sonant quality; 
but the great weight of authority, and the invariable practice of the manu- 
scripts, favor the surd, 

Whitney, Grammar. 3. ed. 4 


























a 


























170-| TIL Evruonic Comminarion. 58 


170. ५, The 4, as already noticed (145), becomes 
visarga before a pause, 

b. It is retained unchanged only when followed by 
At or 7 th, the surd mutes of its own class. 

ec. Before the palatal and lingual surd mutes च्‌ ° and 
ङ्‌ ch, Z f and द्‌ th—it is assimilated, becoming the sibilant 
of either class respectively, namely शु ¢ or चृ इ. 

घ, Before the guttural and labial इष्यते mutes — कू ४ and 
ल्‌ kh, पए and पू्‌ ph—it is also theoretically assimilated, 
becoming respectively the jihvimiliya and upadhminiya 
spirants (69); but in practice these breathings are unknown, 
and the conversion is to visarga. 

Examples are: to b, tatas te, cakgue te; to ९, tatag oa, tasyag 
chy; padag talati; to त, nalay kamam, purugah khanati; yagah 
prapa, vrkeah phalayvan, 

171. The first three of these roles are almost universal; to the 
last one there are numerous exceptions, the sibilant belog retained (or, 
by 180, converted into 9), especially in compounds; but also, in the 
Veda, even in sentence combination. 

a, In the Veda, the retention of the sibilant in compounds fa the genéral 
Tule, the exceptlone to which are detailed in the Vodle grammars, 

४, In the lator language, the retention is mainly determined by the 
ntimacy or the antiquity and frequency of the combination. Thus, the inal 
sibilant of « proposition or ५ word Milling the offles of + preposition bafore 
a verbal root is wont to be preserved; and that of a stem before a derivative 
of Ykp, before pati, before kalpa and kiima, and 40 on. Examples are 
namaskara, vacaspati, dyugkéma, paynskalpa. 

©. Tho Vedio rotention of tho sibiiant im sentence-collocation ts detailed 
in fall in the Pratighkhyas, The ehiof classes of cases ate: 1. the final of 
+ proposition or fte like before a verbal form; 2 of « genitive beforn + 


governing noun: as पप putrdb, 185 padé; 5. of an ablative before 
himévatas other less classifiable cases: a5 करप 



















































































261—] TV. Decrexston. 88 


CHAPTER IV. 


DECLENSION. 


261, The goveral subject of declension includes nouns, adjectives, 
and pronouns, all of which are inflected in ossentially the same manner. 
But while the correspondence of nouns and adjectives is 80 close that 
they cannot well be separated in treatment (chap. V.), the pronouns, 
which exhibit many pecularities, will be best dealt with in a separate 
ebapter (VIL); and the words designating number, or numerals, also 
form class peculiar enongh to require to be presented by them- 
solves (chap. VI). 


262. Declensional forms show primarily case and num- 
ber; but they also indicate gender—since, though the 
distinctions of gender are made partly in the stem itself, 
they also appear, to no inconsiderable extent, in the changes 
of inflection. 

263. Gender. The genders are three, namely mascu- 
line, feminine, and neuter, as in the other older Indo-Euro- 
pean languages; and they follow in general the same laws 
of distribution as, for example, in Greek and Latin. 

a. Tho only words which show mo sign of gender-distinetion are the 
personal pronouns of the first and second person (491), and the numerals 
above four (483). 

264. Number. The numbers are three — singular, dual, 
and plural. 

& A fow words are asod only fn the plural: ss dards wife, dpas water; 
tho numeral dva feo, is dual only; and, as in other languages, many words 
are, by the nature of their uso, found to occur only in the singular, 

266. As to the uses of the numbers, it needs only to bo remarked 
that the dual is (with only-very rare and sporadic exceptions) used 
































288 | TY, Decuzsxsion. 98 


n& ‘sti dhanyataro mama (ii.) there i no one more fortunate than I 
(व my superior in fortune); putrath mama pr&pair gariyasam 
(MBh.) @ son dearer than my life. 

A, Occasionally, an ablative ix used instead of > partitive genitive: 
thus, mithundd ekath jaghina (R.) te slew “one out of the pair; 
tebhya ekam (KSS.) one of them. 

203. The ablative Is used with = varicty of propositions and words 
sharing > propositional charactor (1126); but ol) these haye rather an ail- 
verbial value, as streagthoning or defining the fromerolation, than any 
Proper governing force, We may notice here: 

a. In the Veda, Adhi and pari arc much used as directing end strength~ 
ening adjuncts with the ablative: as, 1865 himdvatas piri (AV.) born 
from the Himalaya (forth); sumudrad &dhi jajiige (AV.) thow art 
bora from the ocean; cérantath pari tasthagah (RY.) moving Sorth 
fron that which stands fast. 

४. Also purd (and purds), in the sense of forward from, aud henee 
before: > purk Jdrasah (RY-) before old age: and hence also, with 
words of protection and the like, from: as gugaméinah puri nidih 
(BY.) securing from iR-will. 

९. Also द, in the sense of Aither from, all the way from: as, & miilad 
4nu guyyata (AV.) let it dry completely up from the root: thamad & 
nadyo ndma stha (AYV.) since that tine ye are called rivers, But पा 
ally, and especially in the Inter language, the méasurement of interval 
implied in & is reversed in direction, and the constraction moans all the 
way to, untit: as yati girfbhya & samudrat (RV.) going from the 
mountains to the ocean; & "sy& ऊष 4059 "dgcak (VS,) until the end of 
this sacrifice; & godagit (M.) till the sixteenth year; & praddnat (0) 
until her marriage. 

204. Uses of the Genitive, a The proper value of the 
gonitive 18 adjectival; it belongs to and qualifies a noun, designating 
somothing relating to the latter in a manner which the pature of the 
ease, or the connection, defines more nearly. Other genitive con- 
structions, with adjective or verb or preposition, appear to arise out 
of this, by 4 more or loss distinctly traceable connection, 

४, The use of the genitive has become much extended, espe- 
लमा in the later language, by attribution of a noun-character to the 
adjective, and by pregnant verbal construction, so that it often bears 
the aspect of being s substitute for other vases —as dative, instru- 
mental, ablative, locative. 


385, The genitive in its normal 























307—| TY. Decuension, 104 


b. In the acousative, m or am is the mase. and fem. ending 
—am being added after a consonant and दृ, and ufter इ and त in the 
radical division, and m elsewhere after vowels. ‘Tho neuter accusative 
ia like the nominative. 

ठ, The instrumental ending for all goudors ulike is & With 
final i- aud u-vowels, the ह is variously combined, and in the older 
language it is sometimes lost by contraction with them. Stems in a 
make the case end in ena (sometimes ena in ए}, and those in & make 
it end in व्ह; but instances occur, in the early language, of tmmediate 
addition of & to both a and ह. 


a. The dative ending is in general o; and with it likewise the 
modes of combination of i and u final arc various (and disappearance 
by contraction not unknown in the oldest language). The a-atems 
are quite irregular in this case, making it end in dya— excepted is 
the pronominal element -sma, which combines (apparently) with ह to 
"कक्षो, [n the personal pronouns is found bhyam (or hyam). 


e. A fuller ending ai (like gon.-abl. &s and loc. im: seo below) 
belongs to feminine stems only, Lt is taken (with interposed ऊ) by 
the great class of those im derivative &; also by those in derivative 3, 
and {as reckoned in the later language) in derivative च, And later 
it is allowed to be taken by feminine atoms in radical इ and ठ, and 
eyen by those in i and प; these last have it in the earliest language 
in only excoptional instances. For the substitution of i for abl.-gen. 
&s, soc below, h. 


# Tho ablative has a special ending, d (ort), only in a-stems, 
masc. and neut., the a being lengthened before it (except in the per- 
sonal prononos of ist and 2d person, which have the same ending 
at fu the pl. and even, in the old language, in the dual). Everywhere 
else, the ablative is identical with the genitive, 


g. The genitive of a-stems (snd of one pronominal u-stem, 
amu) adds sya. Elsewhere, the usual abl.-gen. ending is as; but its 
irregularities of treatment in combination with a stem-final are con- 
siderable, With i and u, it is either directly added (only in the old 
language), added with interposed n, or fused to es and os respect- 
ively. With y (or ar) it yields ur for us: 169 b). 

h. The fuller de is taken by feminine stems precisely ay Ai is 
tuken in the dative: soc above. But in the language of the Brab- 
mapas and Sitras, the dative-ending ai is regularly and eou 
instead of Gs, both of ablative and of genitive. Ss 

i. The locative ending is i in co 
[पिभ with a to 
final vowel is save 























383- ] V. Nouns axp पतय, 112 


ड, ‘This class is cxscntially only + spocial class of compound adjectives, 
since in the earliest Vode the simple ४३ well ३३ the compounded root was 
sometimes used aljectively, But the compounded root was from the beginning 
much more often so used, and the later the more exclusively, so that 
practically the class is > separate and important ove, 

324. Compound adjectives having a noun as final member, but 
obtaining sa adjective sense secondarily, by having the idea of 
possession added, and being inflected as adjectives in the three gen- 
ders (1293). Thus, prajakAmA desire of progeny, whence the ad- 
jective prajdkama, meaning desirous (i. 0. having desire) of progeny; 
sabhirya (sa-}bhirya) hacing one's wife along; and 8० on. 

8, In a few cases, also, the final nown is syntactically object of the 
preceding member (1309-10): thus, atimatra immoderate (ati mitram 
beyond measure); yavayaddvegas driving away enemies. 

325. Hence, under each declension, we have to notice how a 
root or a noun-stem of that declension is infleeted when final member 
of an adjective compound, 

a. As to accent, it needs only to be remarked here that a root- 
word ending ४ compound hus the accent, but (820) loses the pecu- 
arity of monosyllabic accentuation, and does not throw the tone 
forward npon the ending (except afic in certain old forms: 410), 


Deelension |. 
Stems (masculine and neuter) in 7 a. 


326. a. This declension contains the majority of all the 
declined stems of the language. 

b, Its endings deviate more widely than any others 
from the normal. 

927. Endings: Singular, &, The tom, १०१७९. has the normal 
ending 8. 

४५ Tho २०९, (masc. and nevt.) adds m (not am); and this form has 
the office also of nom, neuter, 

©+ The instr, changes & to ena uniformly in the later language; and 
even in the oldest Vedic this is the predominant endivg (in RV, eight 
ninths of all casea), Its final ts in Vedio verse frequently made Tong (ena), 
But the normal ending #—thus, valid, (fer yajfiéna 





















336- ] ए. Nouns axp Apseorives. 118 


ॐ, The yoo. gunates the final of the stem, in mast, and fem, alike 
fn the earllor and in the later language. In the nout., it is later allowed 
to be either of the same form or the unsitered stem; and this was probably 
fhe usage in the older time also; not Instances enough are quotable to 
determine the question (AV. has u once, and VS. 9 once). 


387. Dual. a, Tho later and earlier language agree in making tho 
१०.-५९९.700, mase, and fem, by lengthening the final of the stem. The 
same cases in the neuter (according to the rule given above) end lator in 
ini and uni; but these endings are nearly unknown in the Veda (as, indeed, 
the cases sre of only rare occurrence): AV, has ini twice (RV, perhaps 
once); VS, has uni once; RV. bas wi from one w-stem, and T, once short- 
ened to §, from one or two i-atems, 

४, The unvarying ending of instr.-dat.-abl., in all genders, is bhyam 
added to the unchanged stom, 

© The gen.-loc. of all ages add ०8 to the stem in masc. and fom; 
in ५५६, tho later language interposes, as elsewhere in the woakest casos, 
a nj probably in the earlier Vedic the form would he like that of the other 
genders; bat the only occurrence noted {s ona unos in AY. 

338. Ploral. a. The nom-voc, ०४4९. and fem. adds the normal नात 
ing 88 to the gunated stom-final, making ayas and avas, The excoptions 
fn the Veda are vory fow: one word (ari) has das in both genders, and a 
few fominines have Is (like S-stems); > very few w-stems have uas. The 
neut. nom.«ace, ends later in Int and Oni (like Ani from a: 389 6); but the 
Vode bas इ and i (about equally frequent) much oftener than ini; and त 
and (more usually) प, more than half as often as fini. 

Db. The १८६०8, mare. ends in Im and fin, for older ins and fins, of 
which plain traces remain in the Veda in nearly balf the instances of ocour- 
rence, and even not dofrequontly in the later language, in the guise of 
phonetic combination (208 ¶.}. Tho accus. fem, ends in ऋ and is. But both 
mase. and fem. forms in 188 and was are found sparingly in the Veda. 

©, The instr. of all genders adds bhis to the stem. 

4, The dat.-abl. of all genders adds bhyas (in V., almost never bhias) 
to the stem. 

©, The gen. of all genders is made alike in nm ond Gnim (of 
which the & is not soldom, in the Voda, to bo resolved into aam), Steme 
with accented final in the later language may, and tn the earlier always 
do, throw forward the accent upon the ending. 

ॐ, The loc. of all genders adds su (as gu: 180) to the stem=final, 

ह. The accent is in accordance with the general rules alroady 
laid down, and there are no irregularitics calling for special notice. 


889. Examples of le 


















































364 | ४. Nouxs ann Anseorives, | 
Plusal: 
8४. FAM कन्यान्‌ देव्यस्‌ Ta 
[म [1 devyas vadhvas 
A. मेनाम्‌ कन्यान्‌ Pat न्‌ 
१6०९० kanyhs devis vadhiis 
५ सिन्‌ afi ta 
sénabhis kanyibhis devibhis § yadhiibhip 
४.५४. निनाभ्यत्‌ = कन्यान्यन्‌ देवीभ्यन्‌ PT 
sén&bhyss kanylibhyas dovibbyas 1 
8. सेनानाम्‌ कन्यानाम्‌ देवीनाम्‌ aT 
1 kanyinim  devinam vadhiinam 
४ Fg कन्यासु देवीषु aT 
[71 1 devigu vadhtiga 


a. In the Veds vadhii is + stem belonging to the other division (like 
tanti, above, 356). 


3868. Examples of Vodle forms are: 


8 G-stems: instr. sing. manig& (this simpler form is especially eom- 
mon from stems in t& and if); nom, pl. vagiisas (about twonty examples); 
३९९५६. pl. arathgamésas (a case or two). Half tho bhyns-cases are to 
Ye read as bhias; the Sm ef gen. pl. is a few times to be rerolved into 
gam; and the & and &m of nom, accus. sing, are, very rately, to be 
treated in the same manner. 


b. E-stoms: instr. sing. gdmi, g&mi; loc. g&uri; nom, etc. १४. devi; 
nom. pl. devis; gen. pl. bahvindm. The final of the stem is to be read 
as + vowel (not y) frequently, but not in tho majority of instances: thus, 
devii, devids, devidm, rédasios, 


€ The sporadic Instances of transfer between this division and the 
preceding have boon already sufiiclontly notleed. 


घ, OF the regular substitution made in the Brihmapa Janguage (807 h, 
836g, 363 ५} of the det. sing. ending ह| for the gon.-ebl ending Os, tn 
all clastes of words admitting the latter ending, a few examples may be given 
ere: abhibhiity@i rGpam (AB,) a sign of overpowering bhag 
०8 jagatyai ca (AB.) of the metres free त्‌ jogati; ०४०० तद्रा = 
1111 | 
(AB) woman's milk; dhenval vi सादत rétah (TB. that, forsooth, 









V. Nouns anp Ansecrrves. 


पपे 

papé 
पापाभ्यान्‌ 
papabhyam 
पापवोन्‌ 
289६508 


पापानि 
piipini 


Singular: 
0. 
ष पापम्‌ 
papas 
A. 
ब. 
Dd, 
Ab. 
6. 
L 
भ, 
Dual: 
NAY. पापी 
papad 
३.४. Ab, 
6. ५. 
Plural: 
फ, पापात्‌ 
x 
Papiis 
A पापान्‌ 


धापानि 
papani 


पापान्‌ 
papam 


पापया 
एकम 
पापा 
एषम 
पापाया्‌ 
एकिव 
पापायाम्‌ 
pipayiis 
array 
plpayam 
पपि 
pipe 


पपि 

papé 
पापान्यान्‌ 
pipabhyam 
पापयोन्‌ 
Piipiyos 


136 























































































































177 NUMERALS. (475 


CHAPTER VI. 


NUMERALS, 

475. The simple cardinal numerals for the first ten 
numbers (which are the foundation of the whole class), 
with their derivatives, the tens, and with some of the higher 
members of the decimal series, are as follows: 


५ टक 10 दृषा 100 शत 
oka daga gata 
26 20 विंशति 1000 ata 
तण्ड vingat{ 88116878. 
3 त्रि "30 त्रिणत्‌ 10,000 aga 
tri trihgat ayuta 
+ चतुद्‌ + चतरारिशत्‌ 100,000 ल्त 
catar catvaringat leaked 
५ चञ्च 80 पञ्चाशत्‌ 1,000,000 wat 
pAfica 80024६४ prayuta 
6 ay oo षष्टि 10,000,000 कदि 
aay 2 [ 
7 सप्त 70 सप्तति 108 ed 
sapta saptati arbudé 
eae so ana 109 मदर्‌ 
[ [ 11 maharbuda 
oa vo नवति 1010 wa 
nave navati kharvé 
10 ट्श 100 शात roll Feet 
daga gata nikharva 


a. The accent saptd and agtd is that belonging to these words in all 
accentuated texts; according to the grammarians, they are sdpta and Agta 
in the later language. See below, 483. 

b. The series of decimal numbers may be carried still further; 
but there are great differences among the different authorities with 

Whitney, Grammar, ३, ed. 12 
































189 DEMONSTRATIVE PRONOUNS. (405 


80 many pronouns and pronominal adjectives that it is 
fairly to be called the general pronominal declension. 

a. But this root has also the special irregularity that in the 
nom. sing. masc. and fem. it has sds (for whose peculiar euphonic 
treatment 866 17@a,b) and sa, instead of tds and té (compare Gr. 
6, 7, 6, and Goth. sa, so, thata). Thus: 


Singular: 
nm ०. ६ 
N. सम्‌ तत्‌ सा 
8६8 tat 8a 
A तम्‌ तत्‌ ताम्‌ 
tam tat tam 
L तेन तया 
téna taya 
D ret तमै 
|... 1 tasyai 
Ab. तस्मात्‌ तस्यात्‌ 
tasmat tasyas 
9. तस्य तस्याम्‌ 
tasya tasyas 
1, तस्मिन्‌ तप्याम्‌ 
tésmin tasyam 
Daal 
NAV. तौ a ते 
ध्व te ४६ 
1. 7. Ab. ताभ्याम्‌ ताभ्याम्‌ 
tébhyam tébhyam 
@. L. तयोम्‌ तयोस्‌ 
६४5०8 ४६०४ 
Plural 
N. a तानि तात्‌ 
४६ tani tas 
A तान्‌ तानि तात्‌ 
tin téni tis 
1 a are 


tals tabhis 
































5317- | VII. Coxsuaatton. 200 


CHAPTER शा. 


CONJUGATION. 


527. Tue subject of conjugation or verbal inflection 
inyolyes, as in the other languages of the family, the dis- 
tinctions of voice, tense, mode, number, and person. 

a. Further, besides the simpler or ordinary conjugation 
of a verbal root, there are certain more or less fully de- 
veloped secondary or derivative conjugations. 

628. Voice. There are (as in Greek) two voices, active 
and middle, distinguished by a difference in the personal 
endings. This distinction is a pervading one: there is no 
active personal form which does not have its corresponding 
middle, and pice verse; and it is extended also in part to 
the participles (but not to the infinitive). 

529, An active form is called by the Hindu grammarians 
parasmai padam ¢ word for another, und 8 middie form is called 
fitmane padam a word for one's self: the terms might be best para- 
phrased by transitive and reflexive. And the distinction thus expressed 
is doubtless the original foundation of the difference of active and 
middle forms; in the recorded condition of the language, however, 


the antithesis of transitive and reflexive meaning is in no small 
measure blurred, or oven altogether effaced. 


a. In tho epics there fs much offacement of the distinction between 
active snd middle, the choles of १०८८ being very often determined by 
tmotrical considerations alone, a 

530. Some verbs are co 
in one only; sometimes a. 














































570—} VU. Conauaarion, = 4 


gamayatat, cyivayatat, varayatat; ipsatat; jagytat. No examples 
४५९७ boon found from a nosal-class verb (680), nor any other than those 
here given from 9 passive, intensive, or desiderative. The few accented 
eases indicate that the formation follows the general rale for one made with 
an accented ending (652), 

४, The tmperative in tht 16 not a very rare formation in the older 
Jungwage, being made (in V., B, and §.) from about fifty roots, and in 
toward + hundred and fifty occurrences, Later, tt is very unusual; thus, 
only a single example has been noted in MBb., and one in B.; snd corres- 
poadingly fow in yet more modern texts. 


571. As regards its meaning, this form appears to have pre- 
yailingly In the Brabmayas, and traceably but much less distinetly in 
the Vedic texts, a specific tense-value added to its mode-valuo—as 
signifying, namely, an injunction to be carried out at a later time than 
the present: it is (like the Latin forms in to and tote) a posterior 
or fature imperative. 

a, Examples ore: ihai "vA ma tigthantam abhyéhi "ti brihi 
tith ti na agatish pratiprabritat ((B.) say to Aer “come to me as I 
stand just here,” and (afterward) announce her to us as having come; yaad 
ardhvas tigtha dravine hd dhattat (RV.) when thow xhalt stand up- 
right, [then] bestow riches here (and similarly in many cases); utktlam 
udvahd bhavo ’dihya prati dhivatat (AV.) be a eerrier up the ascent: 
after having carried up, ren back again; vanaspatir ddhi tva sthayati 
tasya vittit (1'S.) the tree will ascend theo, [then] take note of it, 

b, Examples of its use as other than 2d sing. are as follows: fat sing., 
dvyugith jagytid ahim (AY.; only case) let me watch till doy-break; 
as Sd sing, ptinar md "vignt&d rayfh (TS.) वथ wealth come again to 
we, agéth tyasya rij miirdhitnash vi pitayatat ((B.) the ding here 
shall make his head fly off; a 24 ds, nasatyay abruvan devah 
piinar & vahatid {ti (RV.) the gods said to the ९८० Agvina “bring them 
back again”; as 24 pl, pak... devégu nab sukfto bratat (1S.) ye 
toaters, announce us to the gods at well-doera, Yn the भहा language, the 
prevailing value appears to be that of a Sd sing: thus, bhavin prasidarh 
Keurutat (MBh.) may your’ worship do the facor, ensth bhavén 
abhirakgatat (7६60) fet your exeellency protect him. 


©. According to the native grammariang, the imperative in tat 
used with a benodictive implication, No instance of 
be quotable, 




























































































864} TX. Parseyt-sysTem. 248 


664. bA remove, mid.: thus, jihite, jihidhve, jfhate; Jihigva, 
jihatém; Ajihita, ajihata, QB. bas jihith&m (for jihathaim), 

686. यह quit, act. (originally identical with the former), may furiher 
shorten the T to i: thus, jabiti, jahita, jahitat (AV.); jahiman (AV.), 
johitas (TB.), jahitam (‘TA.), ajahitém (TS, AB.). In the optative, 
the radical vowel ie lost altogether; thus, jahyam, Jahyus (AY.). The 
‘24 wing. impy., socording to the grammarians, is jabihi or Jahihi or 
Jahahi; only the firet appears quotable, 

&. Forms from an a-stem, jaha, are made for this root, and even 
derivatives from a quosi-root jah. 


666. r& give, mid.: thus, raridhvam, rarith&s (impf. without 
augment); and, with i in reduplication, ririhi, But AV. bas rariava. 

@. In those verbs, the accent is generally constant on the redaplicating 
syllable. 

667. The two roots १6 and dh& (the commonest of the class) 
1986 their radical yowel altogether in the weak forms, being shortened 
to dad and dadh. In 2d sing. impv. act, thoy form respectively 
वणम्‌ and dhenf In combination with a following t or th, tho final 
dh of dadh does not follow the special rule of combination of a 
final sonant aspirate (becoming ddh with the ४ or th: 160), but — 
as also before 8 and dhv—the more general rules of aspirate and 
of aurd and sonant combination; and its lost aspiration is thrown 
back upon the initial of the root (155). 


668. The Inflection of ydha fs, then, as follows: 


Present Indicative. 








686] 1X. Paesent-sysrem. 252 


from yyuj all the forms for which examples have been noted as 
actually occuring in the oldor language. 


activo. middlo, 
| a P- 1) 4, Pp 
{ yundjini yundjiva yundjima yunajai yundjdmah 
2 yundjes yunajadhvai 


3 yundjat yunijatas yundjan yundjate 


€87, The RY. bas onco afijatas, which is anomalous as boing made 
from the weak tense-stem, Forms with double mode-sign are mot with: 
thas, tpodhan (AV.), r&dhndwat and yunajan (द); and the only 
quotable example of Sd du. act. (besides afijatas) ts hindsAtas ((B.). 
QB. bas also hinas&vas ss dst du. act.: an elsowhere unexampled form. 


3. Present Optative. 


688. The optative is made, as elsewhere, by adding the 
compounded mode-endings to the weak form of present- 
stems. Thus: 

active, middle. 


& a Pp. ४. 4. sae 
1a ga युज्याम asia युज्ञीवकति नरि 
अष अपरद अणुन yufjiyA yuAjivkhi अपु 

ote. ete, ote. ete. ete. ९६८. 


३, AB, has once the anomalous ist sing. act. vpfijiyam, And forms 
like bhufifiyam -yat, yufjiyat, are here and there met with in the 
opie (bhudijiyaétém once in GGS.). MBb., too, has onco bhuiijitam. 


4. Present Imperative, 


889. In this class (as the roots all end in consonants) 
the ending of the 2d sing. act. is always चि dhi. 


active, middle. 
6 ष. 7. ng a 


1 arent wera | WATT 
yunajini yunijave ॥ 

 युङ्ग्ि ` युगम्‌. 
yangdni 








































































































































































































































































































































































381 CausaTIvE. [--1048 


stems in अ (7384): it will be sufficient to give here in 
general the first pereons of the different formations, taking 
as model the stem धार्य dhGréya, from va तण. Thus: 

1. Present Indicative. 


active. 
4. 


५ । २. 
+ धारयामि धाए्यावस्‌ धारयामम्‌ 
dh&r4yami dhardyivas dhérdyamas 


etc. etc. etc. 
middle. 
[त a ए. 
1 धार्ये धारयाक्रे धारयामरे 
dharaye dharéyévahe dhaird4yamahe 
etc. ete. ete. 


a. The ist pl. act. in masi greatly outnumbers (as ten to one) that 
in mas in both RV. and AV. No example occurs of 2d pL act. in thana, 
nor of 3d sing. mid. in © for ate. 


2. Present Subjunctive. 


For the subjunctive may be instanced all the forms noted as 
occurring in the older language: 
active. 


1 dhardyéni dhardyava dhardyama 


\dharayasi 
dharisae, वाध dhsréyBtha 
dharéyati 
नि @Sryates dhardyan 
middle. 
1 कण्ठ्य dhéréyavabai 
jdnaréyadhve 
a) rdherayaae (नि 
(dharayate 
: (1 "स्य 


७. Only one dual mid. form in Aite occurs: m&dAyAite (RV.). The 
only RV. mid, form in Ai, except in 4st du., is m&dayadhvai. The 
primary endings in 2d and 8d sing. act. are more common than the secondary. 


3. Present Optative. 
active, 
raya ayaa धारयेम 


dharayeyam dharéyeva dhdrdyema 
ete. ete. etc. 





















































401 Vurnat Compounns, [—loes 


bination with a derivative in Am to make a periphrastic conjugation. 
Sneh roots have also been, from the earliest period of the language, 
but with increasing frequency, used in somewhat analogous combi- 
nations with othor elements, substantive and adjective as well as 
adverbial; and this has become, in part, developed finally into a 
regular and indefinitely extensible method of increasing the resources: 
of verbal expression. 

1091. a. The older language bas a number of (mostly) redoplicative 
onomatopoetio compounds with roots kp and bhi, the prefixed element end- 
‘ing in & or & (generally the former): thus, in RV,, akkhalikjtya croah- 
ing, jafjan&bhavant jlimmering, alaldbhavant making merry, kikirt 
‘eppu tear; in AY., magmagk "karam I have crushed; tn V8., 
masé (alse TS.; MS. mpsmysa) kuru; in TS., malmalabhdvant; in K,, 
manmalabhavant, kikkitakara; in MS, bibibabhavant, bharbhara 
"bhavat; in AB, bababikurvant. The arcentuation, where shown, {9 
Mike that of ३ verb-form with sccompanying prefix, 

४, Farthor, combinations with Pky of utterances used at the sacrifice, 
and mostly ending in &: thus, sviha, svadhi, avagd; also vigat. In 
theso, too, the accemtnation is generally that of > verb with prefix: 6. g. 
avagikaroti ((6.; but svadhié kardti [२] TA.), vagatkuryat (MS.); 
and, with another prefix, anuvégatkaroti ((B.). 

6. An instance or two also orcur of ordinary words in such combi- 
nations, put in corresponding form: thus, ofl kury&t ((B.) may roast 
on 9 pit (gia); anypakartos (AB,) of getting clear of debt; कषक 
bhiivayant (AA.) uniting. 

1002. a. The noun namas obcisance, homage, in a still more purely 
noun-value, becomes combined with Wp: in the Veds, only with the gerund, 
in namankftya (borlde hantagthya and karnagthya: above, 990 b). 

D. A solitary combination with 1/1 go is shown by the acontative ~ 
tam Aome; which, appearing only in ordinary phrases fn RV., is in AV. 
compoundod with the participles —in astathydnt, astamegydnt, dsta- 
mita (with accent Mike that of ordinary compounds with « prefix) —and 
in tho Brihmapas and the lator langasge t treated quite like « prefix: 
thus, astaméti ((B.). 

©. Othor ordinary accusative forms of sdjectives in combination with 
verbal derivatives of ky and bhi are found here and there In the older 
langunge: thus, grtarhk¢tya and nagnazhkjtys (TS.); nagnambhitvuka, 
pimanambhivuka ete, (TS. ot al.); 4narugkaroti (+). 


1093. In the early but not in the earliest language, a noun- 
stem thus compounded with ky or bhO (and very rarely with as), 
in verbal nouns and ordinary derivatives, and then also in verbal 
forms, begins to assume a constant ending इ (of doubtful origin). 

8. There ts no instance of this in RY., unless the इ of akkhalikftya 
(above, 1081.0) is to bo so explained. In AV., besides the obscure 

Whitney, Grammar, 3, ed. 26 










































































































































































































































































































































































APPENDIX. 


520 


Perfect-system. Aorist-system. Future-systems, 


६ babhtiva bhavigyimi | 
^ "1 : 
* pabhiivéts bhavigyént 
4bhuvam Abbavigyam 
babhiive bhavigyé [bhavitéhe] 
‘ [bhavigty4] 
babhivand bhavigyamana 
Abhavigi 
Pass.pple bhGté;—Infin. bhévitum ; — Gerunds bhfitvi, -bhtiya. 
cakara karigydmi kartismi 
kriyisam 
cakyvais karigyant 
ékargam &karigyam 
cakré karigy6 [kartihe] 
(पकए 
cakrind karigyamana 
[ ~): 


५०.715 kyt4; —Infu. kértum;— Gerands करद, -kitya. 
























































84 पश्यत INDEX. 


४, pron. ०६९. 69, 66, 66, 119; from 
dh and bh, 223g; a8 final, 147; 
compensating aspiration of initial, 
147, 155d; with following t or 
th, 160a; with preceding final 
mute, 163; m before h and an- 
other’ cons, 213; reversion to gh, 
2440, 222: in inflection, 402, 
687; in pf, 787; in intens., 10024; 
in desid., 10281; internal combn, 
222-4; ‘anomalously changed to 
a sibilant, 160f; to d, 404; du- 
plication of a cons, after, 3288; 
nasikya added after, 230b; loss 
before hi, 10115. 

cha, 99], "11009, 11048. 

10९१, pple, 957 





past 

inf., 968d; int, 10028, 

1, 1003; १०. 1028, f; caus., 

642m; root-noun, 888४, 402. 

hénta, accent of verb with, 698५, 

yhas, jakg from, 640. 

Vh& move, pres., 660, 664; ०७९. 
10264; caus., 10424, 

Vhs leave, pres., 665, 7619; aor., 
830, 889, 0127" {५१ ' 986 ०; pple, 
9674; 101. 968f; caus, aor., क्रः 
4047. 


h 
i 


539 


has, 1022 912. 
soph, 192¢, 2461, 674, 787; 
1 92४, 7164; 1) 891, 889, 
Bios, 847, 8892, 894d; ' १०. 
1028 


hf, 6956, 11222. 
shi, advbl, 1100५. 
Vhits, ouph 1889; pres., 687, 696; 
des., 10017. 
Vhinv, 7165. 
hid, euph., 2409; ए, 786; caus, 
nig. oop P j caus, 


Vou, pres., 645, 6470, 652; periphr. 
pf. ete., 40741, 1078¢. 

1/8 or hva, pros, 7611 755; pf, 
794; aor, 884५, 847, 8870 
912; fot, १96०; int, 9661; eaus., 
4042k; periphr. pf., 4071. 

seize, 201, 884s, 88005 int, 

(0 cans, 1042९. ' न. 

1/०, hfdaya, 397. 

Vbyq, sor., 847; pple, 966d. 

yhnu, pres., 626a. 

Yhras, pple, 9669. 

Vhri, pres., 645; sor, 840b; 
9678; 
10711. 

yhva, see hi. 

vay or hvar, euph., 2426; pres., 
; aor., 8689, 890; pple, 0666 





ple, 
caus., 10421; periphr. pf. 



































ए. 147, 881, Plar. Loc, 
265, 786, last 1. 
967, 9699, 1. 2 
401, 10819, 1. 3 


ERRATA. 


for FHACH read trary 

» bhévadntai » bhévantal. 

» gubya » guhya. 

» akkhalikjtya » akhkhalikttya. 








STANFORD UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES 

CEC GREEN LIBRARY. 

STANFORD, CALIFORNIA 94305-6004 
(415) 723-1493 


All books may be recalled after 7 days” 
DATEDUE ` 





