GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
DEPARTMENT OF ARCHAEOLOGY | 


CENTRAL ARCHAEOLOGICAL 
LIBRARY 


Nese Ace 7 S55” 


SCHOOL OF 
ORIENTAL AND AFRICAN STUDIES 
UNIVERSITY OF LONDON 


London Oriental Series 
Voltane J 


are my! | } a | ‘gs 


re al-fe . 


RE EE 


LONDON ORIENTAL SERIES . VOLUME I 


PHONETICS IN 
ANCIENT INDIA 


BY 
W. 5. ALLEN 
Lecturer in Gomparative Linguistics 


at the School of 
Oriental and African Studies 


GEOFFREY CUMBERLEGE 
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 
LONDON NEW YORK TORONTO 


1953 


Oxford University Press, Amen House, London E.G. 4 


Slabs Aw TORE TOMOSTO MELBOURNE WELLINOTOE 
BOMBAY CALCU TEA Maral ee a pep Cart Trrh muda. 


Geoffrey Cumberleye, Publisher to the University 


rly Nel AL 
. Ki i Ai. 


ORNTRAL ARCA ANIIOAL 
LIBRARY NEW DELL 
Aco. No... VESS 
iT yh fe 


Data... 
Re errcai. ala clsagnee 


PRINTED [8 GHEAaT BAtf Ace 


PREFACE 
Tuts book is intended as a guide to the appreciation of the earliest 
phoneticians. Whitney's pioncer expositions of certain of our 
sources some eighty years ago are acknowledged in the introduc- 
tory chapter; but a general reinterpretation has now long been 
overdue, and this fact is in itself suggestive of the remarkable quality 
of the Indian texts. For it implies that they display a level of phonetic 
discourse beyond the full comprehension of Whitney and his con- 
temporaries, such as only the advances of the late nineteenth and 
the twentieth centuries enable us to appreciate today. The recogni- 
tion that analyses so advanced in their technique should have been 
evolved at so early a date may well inspire a salutary scientific 
humility, and it would be at once arrogant and pessimistic not to 
expect that a reinterpretation will again be necessary in another 
eighty years—or even eight. 

1 am grateful to Professor J. R. Firth for the encouraging interest 
he has shown at all stages in the progress of this work, and no less 
for his constructive suggestions; and I am happy to acknowledge 
the researches of Dr. Siddheshwar Varma, the stimulus of whose 
published work has been augmented for me by the background of 
his personal association with Professor Firth over twenty years 
ago—an association which has led, in the light of contemporary 
inguistics, to a fuller realization of the wealth that lies in the 
ancient treatises. My thanks are also due to Professor J. Brough, 
who read the work in manuscript and made a number of helpful 
criticisms, and to Mr. C. A. Rylands and Mr. R. H. Robins, who 
generously undertook to read the whole of the proofs during my 
absence in India. ae 

Finally I acknowledge the generosity sliown by the authorities 
of the School of Oriente afd Afrtcan ‘Studies in providing a full 
subvention for the publication of this work. 


W. S. ALLEN 
DEPARTMENT OF PHONETICS AND LINGUISTICS - 

SCHOOL OF ORIENTAL AND AFRICAN STUDIES 

UNIVERSITY OF LONDON - 

1953 


CONTENTS 
PREFACE 


EDITIONS OF TECHNICAL WORKS REFERRED TO 


INTRODUCTION 
0.0. ‘The Grammatical Achievement 
0.1. The Indian Influence on Western Phonetics 
0.2; The Sources 
0.3. The Sanskrit Alphabet 
0.4. The Principles of Description: 
o.4o. Word and Sentence 
o.41. Phonetics and Phonology 
6.42, Terminology 
o.43. Order of Analysis 

Chart of Sanakrit Alphabet 


PART I. PROCESSES 

1.0, Mental 
1.1. Physiological: 
1.10. Classification 
1.11. Intra-buccal: 
r.110, Vowels and Consonants 
1.411, Fricatives 
1.112. Semivowels 

‘Liquids’ 
1.113. Retrofiexion 
1.12. Extra-buccal: 
1.120. Glottal 
1.121. Pulmonic 
1.122, Nasal 

Amurvara 
1,13. The vargas 


OW Oy fe we ow 


vin CONTENTS 
PART IL, LETTERS 

2.0, Consonants: 

2.00. Pulmonic and Glottal 

2,01. Velar 

2.02. Palatal 

2.03. Retroflex 

2.04. Dental 

2.05. Labial 

2.1. Vowels: 

2.10. 8 

2.11, i,u 

2.12. T,} 

3.13. @, 0; al, au 


PART III, PROSODIES 


3-0. Definition 

3-1. Junction: 

3-40. Word- and Morpheme-junction 
3-11. Initiality and finality 

3-92. Letter-junction: 

3-120. Consonant--stop (abhinidhdna) 
3-121. F+-consonant (searabhakti) 
3-122. Stop--nasal (yama) 

3.123. Fricative+-nasal 

3-124. Stop-+-fricative 

3.125. Gemination 

3-2. Syllable stricture: 

3.20. Vowel and Consonant 

3-21. Byllabic Division 

3:22, Length and Duration 

3-23. Quantity 

3.24. Tone 

3-3. Tempo 

INDEX 


EDITIONS OF TECHNICAL WORKS 
REFERRED TO 


N.B. Where more than one edition is noted, an asterisk signifies that the 
edition in question has been adopted for purposes of text and numbering 
(exceptions are duly indicated), 


sige (Ap. S.) 
Ed. Raghu Vira, YS 2, 1024, pp. 225 Hf. 
Atharva-Pratitdkhya (AP) (= Saunakiya Caturddkyadyikd) 
Ed. and tral. W. D. Whitney, JAOS vii. 333 ff. 


Atharva-Pratifakhya (See p. 5, 0-1) 
®Ed. and tral. 5S. K. Shastri. Lahore, 1939 
Ed. V. B. V. Shastri, Lahore, 1923 
Bhdradvaja-Siksd 
Ed. and tral. E. Sieg. Berlin, 1592 
Teds Nike Ro Dehionr sed BS: SATE Poona, 1938 


‘Ed. Sadhu Ram, JV'S ii, 1, 1935) pp- 108 ff. 


Mahkabhasya (Mbh.) 
*Ed. F. Kielhorn. Bombay, 1§92-1909 
With Pradipa of Kaiyata and Pradipoddyotana of Annambhaqys, ed. 
P. P.S. Sustri (Part 1, Abmikar 1-4), Macias, t945 
Trl V. Trapp (Ahnikas 1-5). Leipzig, 1933 


Panini (Pan) 
Ed. and trsl. 6. Béhtlingk. Leipzig, 1557 
Ed. and trl. 5, Chandra Vasu. Allahabad, 1891-7 
Ed. O, Bohtlingk. Bonn, 1839-40 
Trl. L. Renou (Fasc. 1, Adhkydya, i-ii). Parw, 1948 


Panintya-Siked (PS) 
Ed. and tral, A. Weber, Indische Studien, iv, 1558, pp- 345-71 
"With the SNCS = Soarencidinaprehanapepadhitel 


ia, ed. and teil. M. Ghosh. 


Pingala, Chandah Satra 
Ed. and tre A. Weber, Jedieche Studien, viii, 1863, pp. 209 ff. 
*With the commentary of Haldvudha, ed. V. N. Shastri (Bib, Indica). 
Calcutta, 1874 
Pratijiia Sitra 
A, Weber, Ober ein sum teeitcen Vajus gehdriger phonetisches Compen- 
dium, das Pratijia Sitra (Abh. d.] hin. Ak, d, Wiss, =, Berlin, 1871) 


= EDITIONS OF TECHNICAL WORKS REFERRED TO 
With the rary of Uvata. 


“®Ed. and tral. M. D. Shastri. Allahabad, 1931, Lahore, 1937 
- Ed. and tral. F. Mux Muller = Rig-Veda, vol. i, pp. t-ecomey. 
Leipzig, 1856 


®Ed. S. K. Shastri. Lahore, 1933 
Ed. A, Burnell, Mangalore, 1579 
Ed. T. Chowdhury, JS fi. 2, 1935, PP- 197 if. 
| Sarvarammata-Sikpa 
Ed, ond trl A. ©. Franke, Gottingen, 1486 
Sihsa-Sampraha (SS) | 
‘A Collection of Sikyis by Ydjiavalkya and others, ed. Yugalakisora 
Vyasa (Benares Skt. Series), Benares, 1593 
Taittiriya-Pratihikhya (TP) 
With the Tri/uipyvuratna. | 
*Ed. and tel. W. D. Whitney, JAOS ix, 1571 
Ed. Rajendralila Mitra (Bibliotheca Indica), Calcutta, 1372 
With the Padakramasadana of Mahigeya. 
Ed. V. V. Sharma. Madras, 193° 
With the commentaries of Someyirya and Giirgya Gopalayajvan, 
Ed. K. Rangacharya and R. S, Sastri (Bibl. Sansk. 33)- Mysore, 1906 
Ed. and trsl. W. Pertsch. Berlin, 1554 
Fajasaneyi-Praniakhya or Kaitydyaniya-Prat. (VP) 
With the commentaries of Uvata and Anantabhatfa. 
afd VV. Sharm. Madras, 19354 
With extracts from the commentarics. , 
Ed: and wal. A. Weber, Jndische Studien, iv, 1858, pp, 65-178, 177—- 
a3t 


ie 


The Pariligtas of the Atharcaveda, xtvii, ed. Bolling and Negelein. 
| Leipzig, 1909-10" 
| Pydsa-Siksa (FS) 
| *H, Liiders, Die Pydba-Siksi. Gitingen, 1894 
Ed. V. V. Sharms. Madras, 1929 
Ed. &. V. Sistri (Grantha text}. Tiruvadi, 1905 


INTRODUCTION 


0.0, The Grammatical Achievement 

In the sphere of grammar it is a gratifying custom of present-day 
linguists to pay lip-service to the greatest of descriptive gram- 
marians, the ancient Indian Panini: and it was an eloquent tibute 
to his achievement that one of the great linguists of our own time 
‘should write: 

Indo-European comparative grammar had (and has) at im service only 

one complete description of a language, the grammar ‘of Pinini. For ull 
other Indo-European languages it had only the traditional grammars of 
‘Greek and Latin, wofuily incomplete and unsystematic, . .. Far no lin- 
guage of the past have we a recon! comparable to Panini's record of his 
mother tongue, mor is i likely that any language spoken today will be so 
perfectly recorded.' 
But in spite of the invaluable translations of his work by Bohtlingk 
and now by Renou, unless the linguist is himself also a Sanskritist 
there are insuperable difficulties in the way of a full appreciation 
of Panini’s achievement; and even for the Sanskritist a complete 
understanding is not easily attained—again to quote Bloomfield, 

Even with the many cornmentaries that we posses . . . several lifetimes 
of work will have to be spent upon Panini before we have a conveniently 
usable exposition of the language which he recorded for all time. 

It is indeed in the extent of the interpretative material, some of 
which has itself attained to a canonical status, that we find striking 
evidence of the honour accorded to the great grammarian in his 
own land2 But this profusion of commentaries also bears witness 
to the difficulties of Panini's technique: composed with an algebraic 
condensation, his work is a linguist’s and not 4 language-teacher’s 
grammar, and for the more pedestrian purpose of teaching Sanskrit 
rewriting was a practical necessity, thus giving rise to further 
grammatical hierarchies descending to a miscellany of school- 
grammars of recent date.’ It has been calculated that there are in 
existence over a thousand different Sansknt works on Sanskrit 

' 1. Bloomfield, Language, v. 270 ff. 

7 In the Pradipoddyota of Nigeji Bhatia, written some two thousand years 
after Fanini's Ayfddinydy7, we have a eub-commentury of no less than the fourth 
owes Rarnecarlra’s Praleriyditoumudl > Whathoji Diksita's Siddhdntakau- 

B zane ty 


> PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 

grammar,’ all inspired, directly or indirectly, by Pipini's model: 
beside such a concourse the thousand manuscripts of Priscian's 
Latin Grammiar,? the pride of our western tradition, are but a drop 
in the grammatical ocean, We have also to remember that Panini 
humeelf acknowledges a mumber of predecessors, whose work, 
except for fragmentary citations, has been lost to us—Burnell has 


listed by name no less than sixty-eight of these pre-Paninean 


ns; well might the medieval philosopher Kumirila 


We cannot think of any point of time totally devoid of some work or 
other dealing with the grammatical rulea treating of the different kinds 
of roots and. affixes. 

But commendable as the cause may be, the non-Sanskritist can 
hardly be expected to acquire the grammar of Sanskrit—for which 
the Indian tradition prescribes twelve years’ study—to the sole 
end that he may more fully appreciate the work of the ‘linguistic 
Homer’,* or of later ‘grammatical sainta’,* 

In phonetics, we all too rarely look back beyond the great names 
of the nineteenth century—Henry Sweet, A. ]. Ellis, Alexander 
Melville Belli—except occasionally to honour a few lonely and half- 
forgotten figures of the immediately preceding centuries.? We 
justify some of our more grotesque and inadequate terminology 
(e.g. ‘tenuis’ and ‘media’)® by tracing it back to the Latin gram- 

s, sometimes as far as Dionysius Thrax or even Aristotle: 
but generally speaking the expressions of ancient phonetic thought 
in the west have little to repay our attention or deserve our respect, 
whereas Indian sources a3 ancient and even more ancient are 
infinitely more rewarding. And in this field the linguist is fortu- 
nately in a more advantageous position to appreciate the ancient 
achievement, in that the acquisition of a working knowledge of the 
Sanskrit sound-system demands no very considerable labour, and 
in so far as there is a basis for general phonetic discussion which 
there is not for “general grammar’.” 


* Belvalkar, Syeteru of Samehrit Grarmar, p. 4. 

* Cf. Sandys, History of Clamcal Scholarship, i. 230. 

' The Aindra School of Sanskrit Grawenurians, pr. jaf. 

* Tentrandrttika, tral, Ganganathn Jha, p. 306. 

' P. Thieme, Pariei and the Veda, p. 45. 

* Goldstiicker, Pirin, p. §2 (of Kityyana and Patafjali), 

* Cf. D. Abercrombie, ‘Forgotten Phoneticians', TPS 1o48, pp. if. 

* See further 1.120 below. * Cf. Vendryés, BSE sli, 8 F 


INTRODUCTION 4 


0.1. The Indian Influence on Western Phonetics 

Moreover the link between the ancient Indian and the modern 
Western schools of linguistics is considerably closer in phonetics 
than in grammar. For whilst Paninean techniques are only just 
beginning to banish the incubus of Latin grammar, our phonetic 
categories and terminology owe more than is perhaps generally 
realized to the influence of the Sanskrit phonetictans. ‘The impact 
of Sir William Jones's ‘discovery’ of Sanskrit on the course of 
Western linguistics is well known; but Jones, apart from his know- 
ledge of the Sanskrit language, was also acquainted with the tradi- 
tional statements of its sound-system: in his "Dissertation on the 
Orthography of Asiatic words in Roman Letters’ the whole order 
of treatment and descriptive technique is clearly based on Indian 
models. In a paper on “The English School of Phonetics" Pro- 
fessor J. R. Firth has said of this great orientalist, 

Without the Indian grammarians and phoneticians whom he introduced 
and recommended to ua, it ie difficul: to imagine our nineteenth century 
school of phonetics.” 


The influence of the Indian. works on the phonetic views of 
William Dwight Whitney may be clearly seen in the discussions 
published in the Journal of the American Oriental Society during 
the years 1862-6, subsequent upon the appearance of Lepsius's 
Standard Alphabet;' and we have the feeling that without their 
teaching Whitney might not have been in a position to express self- 
righteous indignation against that other country from which he 
had learnt so much— 


It is really arnacing how same of the most able physiologists and philo- 
logists of that nation (ie. Germany) have blundered over the simple ard 
seemingly obvious distinction between an sand a 2, anf and av, ap and 
a 6, etc.* 


The ‘seemingly obvious’ distinction of voiced and voiceless here 


' TPS 1946, op. 92 ff. 

© Te ie remarkable that a German study of the English School should fail to 
male any reference whatever to the Indian influence (H, Reudnitzky, Die Helt- 
Sreetiche Schule: Ein Rettrag sur Geschichte der enlitchen Phonetik, Marburg 
PQen}. 
4 Standard Alphabet for reducing Unvoritten Languages aad Foreign Graphic 
Sriteme to a Uniform Orthography in European Letters’ (London, 6885). 

* FAOS vii. 313. Cf Trans. Am. Piel. Amor, 1877, pp. 47 ff. 


F| PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 


referred to was subsequently recognized by Lepsius as ‘derived 
from the Sanskrit grammarians’,' 

In England the Indian inflience is evident in the work of A, J. 
Ellis, especially in Part [TV of his Harly English Pronunciation, 
where frequent references are made to Whitney's translations of 
the ancient works and also to his own observations on the speech 
of latter-day pandits, He displays on occasion a fuller appreciation 
of the ancient statements than Whitney had done, and generously 
remarks on their descriptions of “voiced 4',* 

The wonder is, not that they should be indistinct, but that they should 
have been so much more distinc: than the host of European gramenariana 
and orthoepitts who succeeded them. 

As vet, however, the lmguist cannot survey the Indian phonetic 
achievement without undertaking an extensive course of reading, 
of which only a certain proportion will be relevant to his purpose; 
and on the other hand, without having viewed the overall frame- 
work of the Indian analysis he can hardly assess individual descrip- 
tions, “he principal works have been translated and commented 
upon (so far as the phonetic climate of the translator's environment 
permitted) by such Western scholars as Whitney, Weber, Regnier, 
and Max Miiller, and more recently by Indian scholars amongst 
whom may be especially mentioned M. D. Shastri, 5. K, Shastri, 
and M. Ghosh. An interesting selection of special problems has 
been discussed in detail by Siddheshwar Varma in his Critical 
Studies in the Phonetic Observations of Indian Grammarians. The 
present study aims at presenting a systematic account of Indian 
phonetic doctrine so far as it appears to possess more than purely 
‘Sanskritic interest. Where Western antiquity provides any parti- 
culorly striking parallels or contrasts, some account of these has: 
been given with a view to the comparative evaluation of the Indian 
statements, Occasional discussions related to later Indo-Aryan 
developments have been inevitable in establishing a control for 
the pronunciations described in the treatises, 


6.2, The Sources 
OF the works themselves it will be sufficient to note that they 
fall into two main categories, the Pravitakhyas-and the Sthsas, 
* JAOS viit. 344. = 
* See further t.120. below. 


INTRODUCTION 5 

The former are phonetic treatises relating to the pronunciation of 
the four Vedas, namely: 

Ke- Veda — Rk-Pratisakhya 

Sadma-Veda — Rk-tantra-vyakarana 

Black Yajur- Veda — Taittiriya-Pratsdkhya 

| Katyayantya-Pratisakhya 
Atharva-Veda  — Atharva-Pratisakirya.,' 


The Sikeds on the other hand are, with some exceptions, less 
specifically related to a particular Veda, but in many cases supple- 
ment the teaching of the Pratigakhyas.* Whilst it is likely that the 
Pratiéakhyas are based on an early Siks& (such as that referred to 
in the Taittiriya Aranyaka),? our extant texts of the latter appear 
to be of later date than the former: the most important of them, 
the so-called Papintya-Stksa, is sometimes claimed 2s the original 
Siksa and in consequence put back toa very early date: but this, 
2s also its attribution to Panini, is highly doubtful,* Varma places 
the Prititakhyas in the period 300-150 8.c, and the extinct Siksa 
literature between 800 and 500 8.c.’ It is significant that one at 


least of the extant Siksas contains the admission, 


{f Siksd and Pritiéikhya are found at variance, the Sileg’ is said to be 
the less authoritative, as the deer is weaker than the lion.’ 


Apart from these specifically phonetic works, numerous state- 
ments on phonetic matters are to be found in the grammatical 
works, more especially in Panini’s Asfadhyayt and Patafijali's 


t As Whitney himself has admitted, the text which he hae edited and trans- 
lated uruler this title is probably mot the 4P, and so should strictly be known by 
the title which it bears, viz. Sawnakiyd Caturddhydyikd. Nevertheless, the AP, 
if euch it be (ed. S. K. Shastri, V..B..Y. Shastri), contains almost nothing of 
genotul interest, and for present purposes the title “LP may be retained without 
disadvantage to refer to Whitney's edition. 

2 Cf, Kielhorn, Ind. Antig. ¥. 141-4, 193-200 (cap. p. 199) 

1 win. iL. 1, om them oydhiydsydmah. The subjects of the Silky’ ure given as 
rennah (sound-unit’), amarak (rone’), multe (quantity’) bolas sda samtdinah. 
Siyana interprets dolawi aa “degree of buccal closure’ (ef. 1.1%. below), ede ae 
‘tempo’ and samidnak ae ‘junction’. 


Cf, Sten Koanow, Acta Orientalia, x1. iv, 1043, P- 295. 
* Cf. Thieme, op. cit., F: 56m, 


. Sarvasamemata- Siked, od. Franke, 49. 


fikgaica durbalety dhah simbaxyatea mygi yathi. 


“6 PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 
-Mahabhasya; and it is evident that in India, unlike Europe, gram- 


matical writers availed themselves of the best professional phonetic 
advice." In such ancient and non-technical works as the Brah- 
manas, Aranyakas, and Upanisads we find a familiarity with 
various phonetic categories, e.g. ‘articulator’, ‘place of articula- 
tion’, ‘stop’, ‘fricative’, ‘semivowel’, ‘vowel’, and ‘voice’ (in its 
technical connotation) ;* and in the White Yajur-Veda there appear 
in an anatomical list various features which belong to the structure 
of articulatory and not of general physiological analysis,‘ e.g. ‘teeth- 
rims’, “alveoli’,* and parts of the tongue, of which the tip is appro- 
priately associated with Sarasvatl, the goddess of speech* —_ 

The aphorisms of the phonetic works are at once prescriptive 
and descriptive. “Their avowed purpose is to preserve the oral 
tradition of the sacred texts: to this end the direst penalties are 
threatened for mispronunciation, including descent to the hell of 
Kumbhipaka;* the competent pupil, on the other hand, is en- 
couraged by verses such as that which closes the 7/P— 

Fle who knowa the distinctions of tone and length may go and sit with 

the professors.’ 
—a felicity which the commentator interprets as applying not only 
in this world but also in the next. However, the authors of our 
treatises were clearly phoneticians rather than pricsts, and a scienti- 
fic curiosity, coupled with keen audition and an effective methodo- 
logy, led to descriptions which must surely have transcended their 
original terms of reference. 

Nor are the accounts of the various authors identical; we find 
considerable divergences of pronunciation as between one treatise 
and the next, and we may surmise that these disagreements in 
many cases reflect actual dialectal features corresponding to the 


location of the several Sakae or Vedic schools. In auveh matters 


there is a singular lack of religious doymatiam, and the authors 


" Patarijali (MOA. 1. tin, on Pert, ti. 34, Kiclhorn, i. 208) makes the important 
point thut the study of grommar presupposes adequate phonetic education. 

"04. Gopatha By. i. 24 (sthdndnupraddna-keranom): Ait, Ar, 1. ii. 1, 
Chded. Up, 1, xxit 3-5 Usperda, oman, antasthd, mara, ghopacat), Cf. Liebich, 


Einfllhrung in die ind, etnheirdiche Sprochectsenacheft, ii, g: Weber, Imd. St. iv. 


75 f- 
' CE Hjelmslev, Ouckring Spragteoriens Grunmdlaggeler, p, §t. 
* (in these terms sce further 3.c3 below, 
' PS wey. 1, * Pdnifart §;(SS., p. be}, 
7 xxiv. 6. srara-eudird-otbhdga-jAo parched deirya-tertead arm, 


INTRODUCTION 7 


refer to each other's opinions in a commendably objective manner. 
Certam pronunciations, however, are generally recognized as 
faulty, and lists of such faults (e.g. in chap. xiv of the KP) are 
hardly less interesting than the details of the approved pro- 
nunciation. 

The Pratigikhyas have received the attentions of various later 
commentators, In so far as these are the bearers of a continuous 
tradition, they are able to augment and elucidate the laconic 
brevity of the aphorisms: unfortunately, however, the main stream 
of the tradition seems in many cases to have been lost, and the 
commentaries that we possess have a habit of wrapping the obvious 
in obscurity instead of casting light on the numerous difficulties. 
Moreover, it is clear that the intellectual climate of phonetic study 
had undergone a marked deterioration between the time when the 
treatises were composed and the time of our commentaries. In 
general we may say that Henry Sweet takes over where the Indian 
treatises leave off—though in some matters even Sweet could have 
learnt from them; and a recent study of a modern Indo-Aryan 
language has successfully shown that many of the ancient descrip- 
tive techniques can still be employed to advantage.' These carly 
phoneticians speak in fact to the twentieth century rather thar to 
the Middle Ages or even the mid-nineteenth century, and many @ 
statement which the commentators and even Whitney or Max 
Miiller have failed to comprehend makes immediate sense to the 
phonetician today. The one outstanding exception to the general 
mediocrity of the Indian commentators is Uvata, whose interpreta- 
tions of the RP and of the VP reveal an enlightened and enlighten- 
ing approach to a variety of phonetic topics. 


0.3. The Sanskrit Alphabet 

Whilst the statements with which we shall be concerned are of 
wide phonetic interest, even the most general of them are of course 
based on the description of a particular language, namely Sanskrit. 
On p. 20 a chart is therefore provided showing the basic system of 
sound-wnits as generally assumed by our treatises: certain diver- 
gences from this system will be considered in their appropriate 
place. As regards the transcription, two conventions have been 


' ®. N. Prosad, A Phonetic and Phonological Study of Bhojpuri (Thests sub- 
mitted for the Ph.D, Degree of the University of London, 1950). 


8 FHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 
employed: for purposes of textual quotation, the standard Roman 
transliteration of the Devanagari text is used (in italic type)—this 
will not generally concern the non-Sanskritist, as the texts will be 
ae andthe original Sanakrit, untiess it calls for special com- 
ment, relegated to footnotes, Where, however, Sanskrit sounds 
‘end sound-sequences are made a subject of phonetic discussion, a 
transcription is used which departs in some respects from the 
standard system, and which | have found convenient in the teach- 
ing of Sanskrit phonetics: such transcriptions are printed in heavy 
L.P.A. type. In the chart on p. 20 the two conventions are shown 
side by side, Where natrower transcriptions are required, these 
are indicated by the use of square brackets. 

It should be stressed at this point that, except for transcrip- 
tional purposes, the representation of a complex structure by 
category-labels based on a monosystemic analysis is an unaccept- 
able procedure, which has nevertheless been adopted by the many 
modern linguists who favour an exclusively ‘phonemic’ approach: 
the reason for setting up such @ system in our chart is that the 
Indians themselves have done so, It is true that the Devanagari 
method of writing is syllabic, but the analysis underlying it and 
actually set out, for example, in the varna-samamndya or ‘alphabet’ 
at the beginning of Pinini's grammar, comes very near to that 
which a modern ‘phonemicist’ would evolve for Sanskrit by a 
substitutional-distributional analysis of the word-isolates.! How- 
ever, we can hardly criticize our predecessors of some two millennia 
ago for a procedure which only a few linguists in the leet two 
decades have begun to reject a8 inadequate? and we shall-see that 
the Indians, unlike many of their Western successors, appreciated 
that this technique was a means to a limited practical end, and by 
no means the ultimate analysis. 


0.4. The Principles of Description 
We come now to-a consideration of the fundamental principles 


of analysis and description as postulated and as observed by the 
authors of our treatises, 


CEM. B, Emeneau, “The Nasal Phonemes of Sanskrit’, Language, xxii. 
$6 ff.; A. H. Fry, “A Phonemic Interpretation of Visargn’, Langicage, rik, 194 fF. 

Wei J. RL Fieth, "Phonological features of some Indian languages’, Proc. 
onal Int. Cony. .Phon, Se, pp. apt. WF. Twaddell, ‘On defining the Phoneme", 
(Language Monograp), xvi), especially pp. 54 f. 


a 


INTRODUCTION ° 
0.40. Word and Sentence 

In early Indian linguistic discussion we find a full awareness of 
the view that the basic linguistic unit, upon which all other 
analyses must be founded, is the sentence; a famous couplet of 
Bhartrhari's treatise on general linguistics, the Vakyapadiye, 
where the matter is debated at some length, states the case in the 
following terms: 

Within the sound-unit the component features have no incependent 
existence, nor the sound-unite within the word; nor have the words any 
separate existence apart from the sentence.’ 

For purposes of phonetic description the basic unit is also some- 
times stated as the ‘breath-proup' (eka-prana-bhaoa),* correspond- 
ing in the Vedic hymns to one line of verse. "The tendency to deny 
independence to the word is further stressed by the Sanskrit system 
af writing, which (unlike, e.g. Old Persian) takes no particular 
account of word-division.? Thus word-sequences such as taan 
eva, tat punah are written together as taaneva, tatpunah, the 
sequences -ne- and -tpu- being represented as single graphic 
units, 7). This elimination of the inter-word spaces as indica- 
tions of junction is partially compensated by the graphic representa- 
tion of such phonetic junction-features as the available symbols 
are capable of showing: thus the junction of tat-+bhavati is 
written as tadbhavati, tat+frutvaa as tacchrutvaa, tat-+-hi as 
taddhi, maa+-udakaih as modakaih, and so forth. Certain 
other junction-features are not generally indicated, sequences ‘of 
the type -h--k- or -h-+-p- being only sporadically written as -xk- 
or -p,’ since x and $ are outside the phonemic and hence the 
general graphic system. Even rarer is the indication of the linking” 
prescribed by the phoneticians in sequences such as taa’abruvan 
(for taah-+-abruvan), which is generally written with hiatus as 
taa abruvan.’ Elsewhere junction-features may be neither writ- 
ten nor prescribed, so that no distinction is recognized betw 
for example, na tena likhito lekhah, ‘he did not write the letter’, ‘ 

"i 7a. Ci, Rosetti, Le Mot, p 

*TP +. 2. -Cf Swret, Primer of Phonics § 93% Roussclot, Principe de 
fluométigque expérimentale, p. o72 (‘Le mot... n'exiate sane alvération qu’s l'état 
isolé. .. , Le groupe eaciages possbde | une individualitt propre); Thom, 
Handbuch des Sanskrit, § 160. 

1 Cf. Whitney, Skt, Gr., EO: Mocks L'Indo- Aryen, pp. 75 f 


* Cf Wackermagel, Ai. Gr., § 226. 
* Cf. Wackernagel, op. cit,, §.a85 b (pf). 


1c PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 


and natena likhito lekhah, ‘bowing, he wrote the letter’; this 
fact provides material for the construction of various types of 
word-play and riddle based on alternative divisions of the piece,' 

and our treatises do not mention any phonetic criterta by which a 
distinction might have been indicated in utterance* Whether in 
fact there were subtle distinctions of prominence such as are capable 
in English of differentiating, for example, @ notson from an ocean! 
we cannot tell—it would certainly be unwise to deny the possibility 
on the basis of an argumentum ex silentio—but it appears certain 
that in Sanskrit a delimitation of the word by purely phonetic 
criteria was even less of a possibility than in English. 

The Vedic texts in fact come down to us in two princtpal forms: 
the Samiita or ‘compound’ text, with the sentence or breath-group 
as its basic unit, and the Pade or ‘word’ text, having the word- 
isolate aa its basia; the latter is generally recognized to be an arti- 
ficial analysis devised by grammarians and others for purposes of 
instruction: that of the Reveda is generally attributed to the ancient 
grammarian Sikalya.4 In the AP we find, 

The study of the word-isolates ib designed to teach the beginnings and 
ends of words, and their correct form, tone and meaning.’ 


to which the commentator adds, 


Without studying the word-isolutes one might make errors in the con- 
tinuous text; it is for this regaon that the study of the isalutes is necessary.® 
Some statements of the relationship of Pada to Sam/uta, however, 
seem to have left room for misinterpretation: the RP makes the 
highly ambiguous observation, ‘samhitd padaprakrtih',? which 
according. to the interpretation of ‘pada-prakytih’ (where 
prakrith —"basis') might mean either “The Samhitd is the basia of 
the Pada’ or “The Samistta has the Pada as ita basis’: the term 
prakrti is also regularly used of the word-isolate in eontradiatinc- 
tion to mikira (“modification’, “variant'), the latter being applied to 


' Ck Mhd t. L1 (Rielhorn, i. 14). 
* ‘Though so long aa the tonal system survived, this must in many cases have 
provided 4 means of distinction, 
. hs D, Jones, "The word a a phonetic entity’, AF 1931, pp, 60 ; Bloom- 
field, Longuage, pp. 113 f., 182, 
weg Liebich, op, cit. pp. 20 if. 
: iv, 107. padddhyayanam antddi-fabda-mardrtha-sidndrtheon. 


x - apedddhydy? suphitden tindiavet; tarmdd ebhih kdrancir avetyddhyeydni. 
ie a 


INTRODUCTION TH 


the junction-forms. A convincing solution to the difficulty is pro- 
vided by the Vandikabharana, a commentary on the TP, which 
points out that as a result of statements such as the above ‘certain - 
slow-witted persons have made the mistake of thinking that the 
Veda is constituted of the word-isolates’, whereas in fact ‘the word- 
isolates are only treated as a basis for the purpose of facilitating 
instruction."£ " 

Here also should be mentioned the Krama-patha or ‘repetitive’ 
text, in the simplest form of which a word-sequence 1:2:4:4:5 is 
recited in pairs a5 follows—1 2:2 3:3 4:4 5, with the realization of 
the appropriate junction-features between the members of each 
pair? This device forms an instructional stepping-stone between 
the Pada and Samiifa texts; it appears to be held in no very high 
esteem, and the most that the AP can say for it 1, 

The Avama is of no use to one who knows both the Pada and the 
semuta. ... It does neither good nor ill, and has no sacred tradition,’ 

The recognized function of the Pratigakhyas appears to have 
been instructian firstly in the pronunciation of the word-tsolates 
and secondly in the mode of their synthesis in the sentence. The 
first of these duties, however, involves the teacher in further 
analysis, below the word-isolate level: and since all analysis must 
be followed by synthesis,4 the JP aptly observes that there are 
various types of synthesis*—of words, of syllables, and of sound- 
units, to which is added aa a fourth category, if we follow the com- 
mentator’s inferpretation,® the remtegration of syllable-structure.? 
Whitney, failing to understand this passage, can only remark that 
‘these four niles have no significance whatever, being a mere bit 

' On ti. 2. cibhekta-riparye tw prakpiteean wyutpddana-saukarpirtham 


diriyate. 
2 CL RP xi. 44. 
4 zi. 66. 
pa cola ’ <ipdya-hdire ana co frutah. 


* Cf, Sweet, op. cit, $9 

1 xiv. 1-4. otha ata rompfitdh: poda-compbitdkparc-revatid parna-samde- 
iddge-somiotd oti: mind-pada-snidivina-ramypogah poda-ramifatety abhidhiyate: 
yothd-man aksara-samlutddinim apy vam, 

* Thies interpremtion of atye-samierd is based on wel. 1 (vyparijamem poorddgam) ; 
cf. also. 3.20 below, 

7 Por the fourth category cf. especially Sweet, loc. cit., "Synthesis, laatly, deals 
with the organic and scoustic grouping of sounds into syllables, etc,, and the 


2 PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 
of outside classification, in which someone has amused himself by 
indulging’. In one passage of the RP Uvata notes that strictly 
speaking the author is exceeding his duties by giving rules for tonal 
synthesis within compounds; the basis of synthesis, he claims, 
should be whole words as institutionalized' units: he is prepared to 
be indulgent, however, for 

. ©: Just as a fiower-picker may aleo pick fruit, and a. wood-gatherer may 
also gather honey, such ia the case,’ 


0.41, Phonetics and Phonology 
There is, on the other hand, one respect in which our treatises 
do not fulfil the functions which they claim. The first verse of the 
Our subjects are the (phonetic) attributes in junction and in isolation 
of the four word-<clasies, viz. noun, verb, preposition and particle.’ 


This grammatical enumeration suggests that we may expect some- 
thing like a phonological treatment, with grammar and phonetics 
integrated into a functional whole; and Uvata, commenting on the 
VP, goes so far as to claim, 

This treatise excels all other treatises in that it combines the twa dis- 
This, however, is in the nature of a pious aspiration which regret- 
tably does not see fulfilment: for our text makes scant reference to 
any grammatical function.? Particularly remarkable is the failure 
of the phoneticians to discuss one of the outstanding phonological 
processes of Sanskrit, that of ‘vowel-gradation’: for certain phono- 
logical purposes it is convenient to recognize a system of vocalic 
alternation of the type: 


Grader. i u r 
» = e oO ar 
no} af au gar 


' cea pada-fdtdndin nimdhhydiopamrga-nipdtdndm  sondiya-padyau 
evsiars Oe iee. 
rig. 
* Cf Loders, Po<tsa-Sikpd, p: 109; Goldatiicker, Piet, pp. 195 fi. 


INTRODUCTION 13 
The working of this alternation js seen in verbal forms such as: 


(,/stu-, ‘praise’) (Vkr-, ‘make’) 
PP. stuta PP. krta- 
Inf. stétum Inf. kartum 
Pr. Ind. statti Pf. Ind. cakaara 


Though ignored by the phoneticians, this alternation is duly nated 
by Panini (in his opening aphorisms) and his followers, who treat 
Grades t (corresponding to the Indo-European ‘reduced’ grade) as 
basic, giving to Grade 2 (= TE ‘normal’ grade, or ‘Vollstufe’) the 
title of puna or ‘secondary quality’, and to Grade 3 the title of 
erddhi or ‘increase’.' A further phonological process which is 
similarly disregarded 1s that of samprasdrana (lit. ‘extension’),* 
whereby a sequence of the type va, ie. v--syllabicity, alternates 
with w, ic. ‘syllabic v' (cf. Pr. Ind. svapiti: PP. supta-, &c.). 
Panini uses the term both for the process and for the resultant 
vowel;? but we find neither the term nor any discussion of the 
process in the phonetic works.. Nor again do we find there any use 
of that great creation of Panini's genius, the phonological zero.* 

‘This mention of phonological omissions, however, is not to be 
taken as in any way detracting from the value of the treatises from 
a purely phonetic point of view. 


0.42. Terminology 

Before proceeding to the textual material some account must be 
given of certain terminological features which run through the 
whole system of description. | 

A particular problem is presented by the word targa, which can 

' Pde tt 08. opddhir dd-aie: ad-ef gueah: the geno-cpddh, “The term and 
process of guna are in fact first referred to by the eorly etymologmt Vicks 
(Nir. x. 29, deriving feva from fyyate). Only passing references ure found in the 
phonetic works (guna in RP xi. to, opddki in VP vy. a9, AP (ed. 5S. K. Shastri) 
ae EZ: .13,4.3) Of Edgerton, Skt. Mit. Phonology (AOS Supp. 5, 1946), 

r8 

Wari guliiasson Ge Gik tarrm So tink cline. The form prandrage is also found, 
sah Rinsho 1.13 ¢ to tefer to the replacement of - -bh- 
by -p- in dipsatl <—dabh-. See further Edgerton, ‘Soappraniraga “Emergence; 
emergent (vowel)” ', JAQS tsi. 22a f. 

a agi iy Maoh ire rironam. CY vi. i, 168 (also Vik 13, Viv. B31) 

* Pos. 1. i 36 ff Ch Buis Buiskool, Tae Trip, pp, 31 ff. ‘The modern usage 
een with Sweet, New English Grammar, pt. i, § 77 (negative inflection’): 

ef. De Saussure, — pp. 124, 25446: Nida, Morphology, p. 46; Jakobson, 
‘Siane Zero’, Mel Bally, pp. 143 0; Frei, ‘Zéro, vide et Intermittent’, 2. /. 
Phonetik 1950, 3/4, pp. 161 f. 


14 PHONETICS (N ANCIENT INDIA 


be most conveniently discussed by reference to the terminology of 
the Latin doctrine of letters.' 

The usual method of designating a particular Sanskrit consonant- 
unit is to realize its “potestas’ by combining it ina syllable with the 
vowel -a* (e.g. k(@), corresponding to a ‘figura’ @); the ‘nomen’ is 
then provided either by this syllable alone (ic. ka) or, more usually 
with the suffix -Adra, lit. ‘making’ (i.e. ka-kara), In the case of 
the vowels the necessity of adding -a does not of course arise (thus 
e.g. figura X, potestas 1, nomen i or i-kdra), Alternatively the nomen 
may be manufactured by realizing the pofestas in combination with 
the enclitic particle mr (e.g. k(iti), giving a nomen Arti), which has 
an effect comparable with that of our graphic device of inverted 
commas (1.¢. Aift = ""k’). 

The outstanding exception to this mode of designation is r, 
which 1s given the nomen ‘repha',* variously interpreted as mean- 
ing ‘growl, snarl’ (ci. the Latin ‘httera-canina’) or ‘tearing’ (as of 
¢loth),* 

To refer to a sound-unit in general, however, we encounter the 
word varna, the use of which is concisely summed up by the PP— 

What are listed (sc. in the verta-sarnimndya) are varnac.’ 


But the term tera is never used to form a nonten in the manner 
of -Adra. Its suffixal use is in fact strictly limited: it is found 
appended only to the short vowels, with the function.of designating 
not only, for example, the short -vowel i itself, but also the long il (1) 
and the rare protracted iil (13):" to denote simply the short vowel, 
i-k@ra and not j-earnea is used, [t thus becomes evident that varna 
primarily denoted not a sound-unit but a more comprehensive 
sound-quality (in fact always a vowel-quality):’ as Patafijali ex- 
presses it, it is a generic term comprehending a whole ‘family of 
sounds” (carna-fla),'° This function of the term is consistent with 


* Bee e.g. Donate (Keil, iv, 463). 

* TP i. at, chiro tyenendedm. Ci. Firth, TPS 1946, p. 0148. 

' TP i. if-17. warnuh Adrotiard var leh shdra-cyerela vyanjanlodm, 

* FP i 96. mirdeda ttind. "eg. TPi. ig. ephos tu rorya. 

® Poidihdbh, on TP i. 19. ripltyate tipdpyate vartrddi-pdjana-dhwantoad uccdr- 
putea ff rephoh. 

7 i. a4- wpedistd varpdh (Uvata: varna-somimmdye Aathiid weradh), 

"CE TP i. a0. Ararce perncttaras froydpdm, on which Trdhdryerotna has 
carpottaro hrasvo hrarva-dirgha-plutindm akhyd bhavaty. 

* A solitary exception bs provided bry Pde. vir. iv. 53 (vi-teratyor. . . .) 

Moa, t. Lot (Rielhom, i, 13), a-varndiptir upadigtd sarpam cr~erear uct easlito 
grahiyyonh. With verra-fula cf. especially D. Janes, The Phoneme, } 22. 


INTRODUCTION rs 
its meaning in other contexts, namely “colour'—a band of the 
vocalic spectrum. And although the word comes ultimately to 
designate simply a ‘sound-unit', it is noteworthy that Panini’s 
varna-samanmdya gives only the short vowel of each quality'—an 
analysis which Pinins further supports by his treatment of the long 
vowels as piwnoiogically equivalent to two short vowels of the 
samé varna.? Whilst we may note also the graphic similarity of the 
short and long vowels in the Devanagari script (y wie £23 &), it 
is unnecessary to suggest, as Skild has done, that Panini’s listing 
may have a graphic basis? whether or not Panini knew an estab- 
lished system of writing 1s still a moot point,’ but he was certainly 
too great a linguist to allow orthography to affect his phonological 
analysis.* 

Of some interest in this connexion is the indifference to vowel- 
length in the writing of Latin and Greek; the attempts of early 
Latin orthographers to introduce double writing (@a, &c.) for the. 
long vowels® had no lasting success, and a Greek grammatical 
scholiast, noting that ‘there are 24 letters but many more sounds’, 
points out that the single letter a may bear various prosodies of 
length, aspiration, and tone.’ 

We have now to consider the translation of rarta. In the 
specialized, suffixal use discussed above it may be adequately 
represented by ‘quality’ ('i-quality’, &c.); it is its wider usage that 
presents some difficulty. Whilst it there has much in. common with 
the modern term ‘phoneme’, no phonemic theory is implied by it, 
and tt would be reading at once too much and too little into the 
term thus to translate it, The non-committal ‘sound-unit’, by 
which we have thus far represented it, suffers from the disadvan- 
tage that, unlike warna, it is restricted to technical usage. A happier 
rendering, and one which would fit into the Latin terminological 


' Syoe-Silira 1-2. 
Bante toy es 10 below. 
et pst. 
yadda unautisfactory argument in favour ia that of Goldstacker, 
Papin, pp. 13 fi. 
? CF Sten Konow, op, cit,, p, 296°... the term samdimedya indicates a tradi- 
tional enumeration handed down verbally from teacher to pupil, and not a 


written lint’), 

Cf. Ritmchl, Opuicula Phitologice, iv. 142 ff; Lindsay, The Latin Language, 
Pp. of. 

® Schol, on Dionysius Theax (ed, Hilgard, p. 32 = Bekker, Anecdote Graece 
pps 774.) 


vt 


rb. PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 


tradition, 4 is ‘letter’'—letters after all come very near to being un- 
selfconscious phonemes.* One objection that may be brought 
against the term is that the vara of our earlier authors may have 
possessed no figura: Vand it is true that if they were acquainted with 
any system of writing, they do not allow it to obtrude itself on their 
discussion of pofesfas—even at a time when writing was certainly 
well known and widely employed, reading from a written text was 
condemned as one of the ‘six vilest modes of recitation’. However, 
it does not seem that the absence or latency of this third attribute 
need prevent us from using an otherwise convenient term; and we 
may support it by the fact that when the language does come to 
be written, each potestas and momen of the phoneticians’ catalogues 
receives its appropriate figura-label.* 

It remains to mention in this connexion that certain elements: 
discussed by our authors, some of them included in their individual 
versions of the alphabet, are exchided from the Paninean varpa- 
fmadndya: outstanding amongst these are the fricatives -h (psar- 
jantya), -¢ (tipadhmantya), -x( jihkoadmiitya), the nasal ny (amusnara) 
and the faucal plosives ( yama)—all of which are bound to a-more 
closely limited series of contexts than the other letters and so are 
given the title of parafraya or ‘dependent’. A further title 
accorded to them by the Paniniya-Siksa and certain other treatises 
presents some difficulty: 

The fricatives -h, -$, =x, amuwedra and the yamar share the place of 
articulation of the sounds whereen they depend, and are to be known as 
‘ayogardia’.? 

The term ayogavaha is generally interpreted as meaning ‘drawing 
unyoked’ (a-yaga-), and is explained by Patafijali as follows: 

. because they draw unyoked, ie. are heard though not mentioned 
(he 0. “though not included in the Pininean versa-samdmndya)." 

‘Cf. Abercrombie, “What isa “Letter” , Lingua, 1, 1, 54 ff. 

* CE, ‘Twaddell, op. cit., p. 4; Meriggi, m Peychligle we: Lema p. 192) 
E. Haugen, First Grammatical Treatin (Supp. to Lang. a6. 4), p. 8. 

* Cf. Weber, Ind. St. iv. 109. 

* Sarsiasamnata-Sikepd, 46, 

gti sighrl derak-kampi tatha lithito-pajhakah 


OPS =. Siete sass sjad ch cha Ghia Cais hecibn oom. 
1 32... ayogordhd sues ip Stamey bMnipinwalt. 
© hh. ‘Lta,on- Pie S ssWaMerrasate ee erhaggristhctnanssipie ent 


Janiyo-pthudenifive 


INTRODUCTION 7 
But ‘drawing unyoked' seems hardly to be a natural metaphor for 
‘heard (though) excluded’.' Uvata, in his commentary on the FP, 
hasan interesting alternative > he takes the initial a- of the term not 
as privative but as referring to the letter a and standing for the 
alphabet as a whole: his explanation then reads, 
"They are called a-yoga-td/ita because they draw, 1c. attain their realiza- 
tion, only when joined with a, &c., Le. with the letters of the alphabet,* 


In view of this explanation, Weber reads simply yogavaha in both 
text and commentary ;? but appropriate as the term would be as 
applying to the contextually bound nature of the elements in ques- 
tion, it is to be noted that the RT specifically distinguishes ayoga- 
viha (=the contextually dependent elements) from yogavdha 
(= the other letters),* 

An important cerminoiges! distinction underlying a large num-~ 
ber of the ancient descriptions is that of sthdna and karaya (it, 
‘place’ and “organ’), which, generally speaking, denote the passive 
and active organs of articulation: as the commentary to the AP 

‘The sthdna is that which is approached, the Aarapa that which apie 
proaches.” 

The terms closely correspond to what Pike calls 'Point of Articula- 
ndhdh: yad ayukid vohenty anupadiyfdi ca iniyente. There follows a discussion 
es to which pratydidre the ayogandhas could be included under, ending with 


din sete het that they may belong under none (athandrilepenupadedak kar 
teryah), and Kaiyyata accordingly assumes the title to refer to thia lock of o 


bck ie (ayuktdh aby acces akeparturmta). 
1 of the Potjiha (on PS, loc: cit.) is ennier but hardly more 
See (ma cidyate yogah eamyogo earndntarcpa jejdm), Bobtlingk's inter- 


pretation (Pap. (1840) ii, 423) ‘is o) in faocitul—“Trencung: 1 hervorbringend, die 
Vocale von den Consonanten scheidend, zwischen Beiden in der Mitte stchend.' 
Wackeriagel attributes the strangeness of the term to its having been originally 
coined for the teaching of children (Ai. Gr., i, p. bexi, n. 7: "Dies und der 
Lempert pene Charakter mancher ‘Termini wie ayogatdha- welsen auf Herkunfe 
der Jugerlunterricht’). 
wt On vil 18, akérddind carna-ramndmndyena sahital inte «te cahanty dima- 
libbarm prdpimetants th. For the use of akdridi, ‘a, &c." as = ‘ube’ 
ef. Saéyana on Jiaift. ir. vit. ii. 
* vit, 23 . CF on PS, loc. cit. (Fmd. SF. iv. 354) and on Pratijad Siirra, 22, 
* ‘The greater appropristencas of this term was evidently felt by Cunarese 
grammurians who adopted it instead of avogavdha (sce PS. 5. Saath, Lectures 
ont Pastarpeti's Meahstbhelpyes, .143.n.). The Amareli 8.(55 p. £21, 4 co-st) hie 


 ysteser ed. Shastri, p 
* Oni rg, 25. ya parame tt shdnam: yeapatramyar « tar haropam, 
Brave 


1B PHONETICS IN ANCIENT (NDIA 


tion’ and “Articulator’.’ In @ large majority of cases the articulator 
is an area of the tongue, viz. ‘root of the tongie’ (jioa-mnila), 
‘middle of the tongue’ (jthod-madhya) and “tip of the tongue’ 
( jilsoagra), whilst the opposing points of articulation are ‘root of 
the jaw’ (hanu-miila), ie. soft palate, ‘palate’ (tala) and ‘teeth’ 
(dante) or ‘teeth-roots' (danta-mila). The came classification is 
extended to the lips, so that in the articulation of the bilabials the 
AP* and the Tribhasyaratna’ prescribe the lower lip as karana and 
the upper lip as stha@na+ and the AP goes ao far as to apply it, some- 
what artificially, to infra-buccal articulation in the case of the 
glottal sounds, for which the ‘lower part of the glottis’ is con- 
sidered as the karana.* 

The Seance of minor distinctions of sthana in the alveolar 
area 1s sometimes not as clear as we could wish, but in the absence, 
so far as we know, of palatographic aids,’ this is perhaps hardly 
surprising. An attempt to apply the system to the feature of 
nasality can only lead to confusion, the nose in such cases being 
stated by some treatises to be the articulator and by others the 
point of articulation, 

Other terminological items of leas wide application will be dis- 
cussed under their appropriate headings, ‘The reader isalso referred 
to the excellent glossary now available in vol. m of Renou's Ter- 
minologie prammaticale du Sanskrit," 


0.43. Order of Analysis 


The treatment here adopted closely follows that of the Indian 
analytical procedure, which recognizes three main stages: 
i. Analysis of the basic articulatory ‘processes’. 
ii, Segmental analysis of the speech-stream (‘letters’), 
ii, Synthesis ("prosodic features’),? 
* Phonetic, PP. 120 ff. 
* i. a5. op thydndn adheraustham (sc. Aarons). 
‘On TP i. 30. atrotrarostha sthdnam utraratva-sdmydd epim sthindndim: 
sudharoy tail keanrerrcs rei. 
*h 1. ary diaeam adhara-kanthah, 
© "The first recorded instance appears to be that of an Englishman, J, Oakley. 
Coles, who in 1871, in the couse of phonetic acourney, painted the roof of his 
mouth with « mixture of four and -mucilage (cf. Roveselot, Primcapes, p. 69). 
* See also K. C. Chatrerji, Technica! Tereo and Techmigue of Sanskrit 
Grammar, pF i (Calcutta, 1945). 
fee . Firth, “Sounds and Prosodies’, TPS 1948, pp. 199 ff.; BE. J. A 
(Prosotian ia Ginenese: A Study in Synthesia’, Asia Major, 1. ib 
rg tf. 


INTRODUCTION 19 


In (ii), where the individual segments are made the basts of descrip- 
tion, the fragmented processes are regarded, by a common but 
questionable technique of inversion, a3 ‘distinctive features’, serv- 
ing, together with the various articulatory positions, to differentiate: 
one letter from another. Once the basic processes have been de- 
scribed, however, phonetic discussion under heading (ii) is largely 
confined to the places of articulation." 
* Cf, Trubetckoy's distmetion of * Arte 7 
onergemuter (TCLP iv. raj £). 


tee’ ond *Lokefister= 


20 PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 
THE SANSKRIT ALPHABET 


© Also ‘amuspdra’— 
youre SHE 


Note. ‘The order of letters aa tesented in Pinini's Siwe-Sitra shows con+ 
siderable divergences scp the A eb this fact pinta is explicable by the 
phonological, ae there adopted, (, ‘Thieme, 


Op. cits, ot Pander list of sounds, which 
looks n foe: he arrangement aa duc to the phanetie catalogue of paler 


having been adapted to the proctical requirements of t the. gras 
Pasir youtenh bcs voker tis teacteit grchape OF soceide be abies snfissen tit ad 


PART I 


PROCESSES 

1.0, Mental 

Tue Indian phoneticians spend but little time in discussing the 
mental or neural bases of speech. The introductory stanzas of the 
PS are representative: 

The soul, apprehending things with the intellect, inspires the mind 
with a desire to speak; the mind then excites the bodily fire, which im its 
tum impels the breath. ‘The breath, circulating in the lungs, is forced 
upwards and, impinging upon the heal, reachea the apecch-organs and 
gives rise ta speech-sounds. These are classified in five ways—by tone, 
by length, by piace of articulation, by process of articulation and by 
sccondary features, Thus the phoneticians have spoken: take careful 
reat | 
‘The ‘secondary features’ here referred to (anupraddna) are inter- 
preted by the Siksa-Prakaéa as ‘anundsikads’, ‘nasality, etc.’ (see 
further 1.10 below); 

The musical treatises contain similar statements, though these 
are less closely related to the actual speech-organism. ‘The relevant 
passage of the Samigttaratnakara reads as follows: 

The soul, desirous of expression, instigates the mind; the mind then 
excites the bodily fire, which in its turn inypels the breath. This then . . . 
moves gradually upwards and produces sound in the navel, the heart, the 
throat, the head and the mouth... .* 

Parallels to such statements are not far to seck in the west, 
notably in the doctrine of the Stoics, Zeno is quoted as defining 
speech in terms of 

si streum of air extending from the principal part of the soul to the throat 
and the tongue and the appropriate organs,’ 
whilst Aristotle described it as 

the striking against the so-called ‘artery’ (ic. trachea) of the air exhaled 
by the soul," 

gre. 

searatal kidlatah suing! prayat wth 


ayatminupraddnat 
iti taragridah prdher mponp tan mibodhata. 


iri 


* 1, m1. 4 ff. 


23 PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 
1.1. Phystological 

A general statement such as that of the PS also introduces, in a 
rather haphazard manner, some mention of the basic articulatory 


processes (prayatna) which are more systematically presented by 
other treatises. 


1.10, Classtfication 


These processes are divided into two main types, abhyantara, 
‘internal’, and baAya, ‘external’. The first type comprises processes 
occurring within the buccal cavity (‘intra-buccal’) and the second 
those occurring elaewhere (‘extra-buccal’), For the first type both 
the /P' and Panini* also use the term dsya-prayatna, ‘mouth- 
process’; this is interpreted by Patafjali as referring to the ares 
from the lips to the "kd@kulaka’,’ the latter being further identified 
by Kaiyyata as the thyroid cartilage or ‘Adam's Apple’.* The 
Indian classification of the processes may be summarized as fol- 


lows: 


1. Intra-buccal processes (dbhyantara-prayatna) 
(a) Closure —associated with the class of stops: 
(6) Opening — » vowels. 
(ec) Constriction, of two degrees, associated with 
(i) the class of fricatives,* 
(ti) 4) ow SMIVOWels. 
2. Extra-buccal processes (ba/hya-prayatna) 
(a) Glottal —associated with voice and non-voice (breath),® 
(6) Pulmonic— ,, 4,  88piration and non-aspiration.” 
(¢) Nasal — |, «,  nasality and non-nasality. 


Not all our statements adhere rigidly to this descriptive framework, 
‘but it may be taken as a generalization of the various systems, and 
1s s€t out in precisely the above terms by Patafijali* and by the 
Apisali- Site. Departures from this system arise when, by the 
inversion already mentioned, the basic processes are considered as 


* i. 43 (glorsed by Ovata as mmbha-prayatna). * Th be Ds 
1 MBA. 1.1.4, on Pde. loc. cit. (Mielhorn, i612). ogthdt probhyrti prdk kAkalakay. 
On Afba,, loc. cit. gritdydm jormata- “pradesah. 
i Trubetzhoy"s 'Anadherungskerrelation * hoo. cit.). 
‘emibeteili noel ae 


? Ci. Trubetzkoy's 'Exspinationsarthorrelation’ i 
' Afbh. t. i, 4, on Pde. Li g-10, Kielhorn, i. 61 ff. 
* ji, t HF. iv. 1 ff. 


PROCESSES 23 
distinctive features serving to differentiate one letter from another. . 
A passage from the 7P may be quoted in this connexion: 

The distinction of letters is effected by secondary features, by combina- 

tion, by place of articulation, by the position of the articulator, and by 
length.' 
‘The meaning of some of these terms is made clearer by Uvata, who 
quotes this passage in his commentary on the AP;? as an instance 
of ‘secondary feature’ (anupradana) he mentions the voice-process 
(2a in the above summary); as examples of ‘combination’ (samsarga) 
he gives aspiration and nasality (abc); and he interprets ‘position of 
the articulator’ (karana-vinyaya) as referring to the mtra-buccal 
processes of closure, opening and constriction (1abc), which he 
exemplifies in the statement, 

Between letters having the same place of articulation and atcondary 
features, e.g. 1, y. J, acoustic distinction ts effected by the articulator.’ 


But it will be noted that im the 7'P’s statement of ‘distinctive 
features’ these processes are treated on the same terms as the 
places ‘of articulation and a prosodic feature such as length, to 
which other writers also add tone.‘ This, however, ts by no means 
only an ancient Indian failing: Twaddell, for instance, in his mono-- 
graph On Defining the Phoneme, is prepared to admit as parallel 
‘component terms of articulatory differences’ such various features 
as places of articulation, duration, and the processes of voice, 
aspiration, closure, and constriction.’ 

A list of five resonators (pratifrutha) is also given by the TP,* 


" xxii. 2. 


4 sii. 14, Uvata refers to ‘distinctive features’ by the term guna, “quality’, 
which js also acd by the 4p. S. (iv. 7) and the Mbi. (Kielhorn, 1. 61) to refer 
nartioularly to nasality. Both Uvata (on RP iii, 2, VP iti, t30) and the 
Trbkdyyaratna (on TP i. 1) also use, in connexion with vowels, the term dharma, 
‘property’, the vowel itself then being referred to as dharmis, “possessor of a 
Property’, 

"3 milyo-ithdndnupraddndndim at thdra-jakdra-vakdrdeeion karona-kytah iruti- 


* For tone see Uvate on VP iil. 130; cf. Siddhdnta-Kowmedi 12, Tt is rejected 
by Pamfjali (MbA. 1 i 4, on Pag, 1. i. 9, Kielhorn, i, 62) on the grounds of ite 


| 
P. 45. 
‘ii 3. tarya pritiiruthdn’ bhevanty ural: kanphah tivo mubhom mdrike iti 
(Tribh.: pratiirut pratidhwanih). 


24 PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 


of which the buccal, pharyngsl, and nasal may be justified:' the 
further mention of ‘chest’ and ‘head’ os resonators, however, 1s 


probably taken over from the subjective terminology used in 
India, a3 in the west, for the description of the various voice- 
registers. 

We will now examine in detail, and in the order set out above, 
the statements on the individual processes, 


t.11. Jntra-dnccal 

Four degrees of closure between stha@na and Arana are recog- 
nized, Maximal closure is referred to as sprsfa, ‘touching’, and 
minimal closure as orepfa, ‘opened’. 


1.110.. Vowels and Consonants 

The process of minima! closure, or ‘non-contact’ (asprsfa)' pro- 
vides the phonetic criterion for the distinction of vowels (svara) 
from consonants (wyarijana): the 7'P expresses this in the following 
terms: 


For the vowels the ‘place of articulation’ signifies the place ta which 
approximation im made, and the ‘articulator’ refers to the organ which 
effects the approximation. For the rest the ‘place of articulation’ refers 
to the place where contact is made, and the ‘articulator’ refers to the organ 
which effects the contact.* 


Maximal closure, on the other hand, provides the criterion for 


the category of stops (sparia),§ 
Thus far no problems arise. But the intermediate degrees of 


"CE Joos, Acetic Phoreties, pp. s8 6. 96: Forehhammer, Theorie und 
Technik des Singers wad Sprecheni, pp. 271 ff. (Rachenresonanz, Nasenresonanz, 
Miumdresanan:}. 

* See TP xaiil. to, PS 96-37; PPL to, 30. Pike (op. cit., pp. 17 ff) gives a 
short critique of the ‘imitation-label technique’ used itt singing-classes: one of 
the instructions quoted, viz. to ‘place the tone between the eyes" finds a close 
parallel in the ‘bhei-muadaya' of the relevant passage of the FP. CY. Forchham- 
mer, op, cit., p. 276 (". .. mit aera retried rate verlassen wir des 
Gehiet der skustinch-physiniogischen E echemnungen wnd treten wuf das Gebiet 

Karperempfindungen tiber’), p. 28¢ ("Die Brustresonanz mu wohl demnach, 
scan ee di Kopfresonanz, in die Reihe der gesangtechnischen Verirrungen 
verwiesen werden") 


t PS 38, 
heroes Rake ts pas ctoeae i ieee Cobar knees 
fu yaira par tat vera mpariayall tat koronem, 
‘eg. AP aq. apptem speridndm korapam, 


PROCESSES 25 
constriction are designated by various terms. The Ap. S." refers to 
the four intra-buccal processes as 


( ) Contact (sprsfa) 

(ii) Slight contact ——_(Iat-sprita) 

(iii) Slight openness _(ad-vteyta) 

(iv) Openness (vivyta), 
a classification which is reminiscent of our modern terminology for 
describing degrees of vowel-closure. The PS employs a rather 
different set of terms:* 

(i) Contact 

(ii) Slight contact 

(iii) Half contact (nema-sprsfa)’ 

(iv) Non-contact. 


The statement of the AP provides some difficulty of interpretation. 
Like the Ap.S. it mentions (i) contact, (ii) slight contact, and (iv) 
openness; tinder (ili), however, we find the words ‘and openness’ 
(vingtam ca): Patafijali, who quotes this statement, is probably 
right in saying that we must here understand ‘slight’ (fsat) from the 
receding rule, thus bringing the statement into line with that of 
the 4p.S2 The AP commentator, however, suggests that the 
whole term isat-sprsfa is to be understood,” so that (iii) would 
then read ‘slight contact and openness'—a description which is 
more to the point than it might at first appear (see further 1.111 


below). 
To (ii) the RP gives the further title of duh-sprsfa, ‘imperiect 
contact’,? 


Processes (ii) and (iti), like (i) and (iv), provide classificatory 
criteria, (ii) for semivowels and (itl) for fricatives: ‘The application 


" tii. 
lie |- 
aco ‘ipyetd yamas fe tpn nemt-sprptdh dalah romp tells 
* Also ardhe-sprata in Yéjlavalkya-S. 209 f., Varsaratna-pradipaka 5. 39- 
* i. 29-32. gprfaqe spartdndim karapam: ipat-rppifary rakfidadin Joe: cipmecrcion 


Winypham cas panda 62. 
© bh, 1. 1-4, on Pde. 1. i, 20 (Rielhorm, © 64), ereyptam lipmamiin ipad try eset 
onupartate. ‘The VS"s description of (iii) as ‘open’ (294, Liders, p. 93) suggests 
ry Hee to observe this amutiy tte. 
i. yt. 


* xi, 10, 


26 PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 
of this descriptive framework may be exemplified by the palatal 
series as follows: 

(i) Contact —¢ 

(ii) Half contact —y 

(ili) Half openness—f [¢] 

(iv) Openness —i 


ttl. Fricatives 

One of our treatises gives a more detailed account of the articula- 
tion of the fricatives by process (iii), The 7'P, having remarked 
that “the fricatives are articulated in the same places as the corre- 
sponding stops’,' goes on to say, ‘But the centre of the articulator 

is open’,* a statement which lends same support to the view of the 
AP commentator quoted above. Whitney, commenting on this 
doctrine, makes the criticism that, 

This prescription of an unclowure of the middle of the Organ is rather 

an artificial device for saving the credit of the general prescription of 
actual contact in all the consonant. 
Palatograms showing the articulation of the fricatives by modern 
Indian speakers would tend to support the TP's observation as 
against Whitney's uninformed scepticism.? In the case of the retro- 
flex fricative the AP gives a rather more graphic description by 
referring to the tongue as ‘trough-shaped’4 (cf. Grammont, on S, Zz, 
» » la langue se dispose en forme de gouttiére et forme un canal 
trés étroit. . . .) : 

The general term for the fricatives is dsman, literally ‘hot, steam- 
ing’, perhaps because of their resemblance to the hiss of escaping 
steam; it is glossed by Uvata as vdyu, “wind'.® The term is applied 
not only to the letters f § s but also to -¢ -x -h and h,? and to the 

"Hh gy da-sthitnepiipmdna duuprieryena 

* il, ys hececmmtiee ty cieptam., 
or Presad, Bhoyperi, vol. ii, Palatograms Noa. 2, 68; bo (sarph, a:fa:, 
bhazga:), 

' Traitd de phondtique’, p. 69 (see also p. 70, figs. 81-82). Cf. Pike, op, cits, 
P. tar (’...greowed, as for a sibilant..,"): sicvers, Gr. d. Phowetik’, $41.41 Nicht 
minder wichtig ist aber, wie ox echeint, def bei ihres Bildung die Zunge in thre 
Mittellinic zu einer schmalen mehr oder weniger ticfen Rinne eingekerbt wird,") 

* On RP i, to. See further KC. Chatterji, op. cit., pp: 207 f. 

? Pinini(Stoa-Su. 5) appeani to classify bh alio as a semivowel, but as the AfbA. 
points out (1. i 3, on Pit., hoc, cit., Kielhorn, 1. 27) this ia only for convenience 


5 bm: 


PROCESSES 27 
breathy release of the aspirated stops (sosman). ‘There is:no special 
term corresponding to ‘sibilant’, though excessive sibilation is 
referred to by the RP as Asvedanam, ‘whistling’.' 


1.112. Semivowels 

As regarda process (ii), with which is associated the class of semi- 
vowels, the validity of the analysis is not entirely beyond question, 
involving as it does the postulation of a greater degree of contact 
for this class than for the fricatives. In the case of the lateral I and 
the rolled r the classification might be justified; but the case for 
y and v [w]? is less clear? We should expect the criteria for setting 
up a category of semivowels to be phonological, and related to the 
fact that they do not function-as sonants* in the structure of the 
syllable; from the phonetic point of view y and w might be de- 
scribed with the close vowels Land u,* and we may suspect that in 
erecting a separate phonetic category for them the Indians have 
been misled by their system of letters. As Pike pomts out, 

Syllabic contextual function is reflected in phonetic alphabets. Sounds 
which are described by the same procedure but which are used differently 
in phonemic systems as syllabics in contrast to nan-syllabics are given 
different symbols, and at times are given names such as ‘semivowel’ and 
the like.® 
The apparent failure of the Indians to recognize the phonological 
(as opposed to phonetic) basis of this category of letters has the 
result that whereas 4 is regularly classed as ‘open’ or ‘lacking con- 
tact’, the corresponding semivowel y is described as having ‘shght 
contact’. Regarding the nature of this contact a more specific state- 
ment is found in the 7'P: 

For ¥ contact is made on the palate by the edges of the middle of the 
tongue." 

The accuracy of this particular statement would in fact be sup- 

" xiv, 20 (Uvate adhikhe varnarya sardpo dheamh). A further fault in their 
pronunciation in given the name of fomaiya, lit. ‘shagginess”; itis interesting that 
the same metaphor is wsed in the general Greek term for the aspirates, viz, daove. 

On the alternative lwbio-dental articulation see 2.05 below. 

! See further observations on p. 67, n. 2 below. 

‘Ce J. R, Firth, “fhe Semantics of Linguistic Science’, Lingua, i 4, 1948, 
p. 402; Bloomfield, Language, pp, 104 1, 38 ff. 


as PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 


ported by palatographic evidence!—it is the description of the 
vowels that is really at fault, no distinction being generully made 
between open and close qualities * it should be mentioned, how- 
ever, that the TP, in discussing the e-vowel, prescribes some 
degree of contact, an observation which could again be supported :3 
it is only strange that it should make no such statement with 
regard to 1, where the contact is considerably greater.4 ‘The TP 
also mentions ‘approximation of the lips’ for the articulation of the 
lip-rounded vowel u.t The tradition of the 7'P is followed by the 
VS, which refers to lip-protrusion in the case of u* and, discussing 
the process of openness generally associated with the cluss of 
vowels, points out that this does not apply in the case of i and u,? 
whulst the next rule goes on to mention actual contact. It is pre- 
sumably to isolated statements such as these that the AP is refer- 
ring when it gives as the opinion of some sources that contact js 
involved in the vowels, an opinion which Whitney impatiently 
dismisses as"... too obviously and grossly incorrect, one would 
think, to be worth quoting’, 

Against the foregoing criticisms of the Indian analysis it may be 
argued that in certain contexts, more eapecially as initials, y and ¥ 
Were more tensely articulated than elsewhere, and involved greater 
contact than in sf case of f and u; for thia we have the specific 
siatements of a number of the Siksis,'° some of which even pre- 
scribe for y a pronunciation as j in such cases!'—an observation 
which is significant with regard to later developments.'* Only on 

* Cf Presa, op, cit., Palatogrum No, 89 (Try a:), 

* This shorteoming provides the Latin Phoneticians with one of their few 
triumphs (more especially Terentianus Mauris; cf Sturtevant, Premenciation 


* CL Prasad, op. cit,, Palutogranis Noa, 9, 190 (abe:, beba:p), 
) 


Lon pogiagralesu. ca 
jth sabia iti wijdeyo yo 'nyah wa yaa itt pmgtah, 


T have observed this pronunciation of y- in recitation of the Sublayayurerda 
( ¥@janmeyi-Mddhkyandina), as also # pecullar tee step realisation of Y= in 
certain cases (cf. the ‘atisamsprstaprayatna’ of the glosa on Vai. 3. 168.) 

“eg. Skt. yora> Pkt. fora (> Hindi Jaw), ke. Cf. also the develonment 


PROCESSES a9 


such grounds could the doctrine of a special degree of closure for 
the semivowels be justified ;* the earlier treatises, however, quote 
no such evidence in their defence. 

ace Sanskrit term for the category of semivowels is anta(h)sthd, 

lit. ‘standing between’. It is tempting, and has tempted modern 
commentators, to interpret this term as referring to the postulated 
‘intermediate’ degree of contact discussed above,* or, like our term 
‘semivowel’, to their phonological alternation.’ The ending -stha, 
‘standing’, however, is more readily applicable to the place which 
these letters occupy im the alphabet, viz. between the stops and the 
fricatives +4 and it is doubtful whether the ancient sources provide 
evidence for any other interpretation. 

A comparison with the ancient western classification is here of 
some interest. It will first be necessary, however, to mention that 
the Indians do not set up their vowel-consonant distinction on 
exclusively phonetic grounds: it has also 2 phonological basis in 
the structure of the syllable (see further 3.20 below); from this 
point of view the vowel is defined by its ability to function as a 
sonant or sylinbic nucleus*—as the RP observes: 


A vowel with a consonant, or cven by itself, forms a syllabic," 


and it is significant that Patafjali etymologizes the word svara 
(‘vowel’) as <"seayam rdjate = ‘is autonomous'.’ 

In Greece also both types of criteria were employed. Platu men- 
tions the classes of gunnjerra (lit, ‘having voice’) and dduora (Lit, 
‘lacking voice’);® these categories, exemplified by Greek vowels 

nd consonants respectively, appear to be set up on a Phonological 
‘basis, and might be rendered by ‘sonant’ and ‘non-sonant’, 

Aristotle goes on to relate this phonological distinction to the 
phonetic criteria of ‘non-contact’ (ave) tpoofoAye; cf. Skt. asprsta) 
and ‘contact’ (peri spooBolijs; cf. Skt. sprsfa). Plato further men- 


=> b- in Skt. cong> Pkt. copa > Hindi ban, dc. See further S. K. Chatterji, 
Origin and Development of the Bengali Language, i i, $133. 

* CE also palatogram of y (in Fr. yer) beade that of I given by Grammont, 
op. cit., p. 77, fig. 9s. 

Sap, Whitney on AP i. 30. 7 CF. Renou, Gr. Saner., § 5: 

* Cf, Uvate on RPG 9. sharfopmonin antarmadiye tithiuntity antokithtl. 

' CE Pike, op. cit., pp. 66 £ 

* xviii, 93. savyattjanah tdmuredrich duddho vdpi evare 'kparam. 

7. ik a, on Pim. t. ii. ag-j0 (Kielhorn, t 206). reayam rdjante roard anpag 
bhevati vyadjanam. The word ie in fact to be related to the root my-, ‘sound’. 
" CE also Buripices, Frag. 578 (Palameder, 2), 1. 


40 PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 


tions a sub-category of consonants which have ‘noise (yicdoc)’ but 
ho voice’ or ‘no voice but some sound (40dyyos)’, and which he 
elsewhere calls ‘intermediate’ (uéea). Aristotle refers to this class 
as 7tideowe, “half-sonant’, and proceeds to define them by. a com- 
bination of phonological and phonetic criteria; the ‘sonants’, he 
says, are ‘without contact and independently pronounceable’, the 
‘non-sonants’ are “with contact and not independently pronounce- 
able’, whilst the *half-sonants' are ‘with contact and independently 
pronounceable’.* 'The only actual example of these ‘half-sonants' 
given by Plato is—rather surprisingly—s: to this Aristotle adds r, 
and-a full list is given by Dionysius Thrax, followed by Dionysius 
of Halicarnassus, viz. s, z, 1, r, m, n.? Thus the Greek "half- 
sonants turn out to be the fricatives, the liquids and the nasals: in 
the absence of | or r vowels and (in Attic-Ionic) of y or w plides, 
the question of a phonological category of ‘semivowels’ (the usual 
translation of sjidcva)* does not arise, We are here in fact dealing 
not with semivowels but with ‘continuants’ of various types, some 
oF which may have quasi-syllabic function outside the Greek 
phonological system—as Dionysius Thrax expresses it, 

They are called ‘half-sonant’ in that, when used in mrarmurings and 
hissings, they are only lees sonorous (ebdtora) than the ‘sonutte’." 


And it is noteworthy that the Latin grammarians generally include 
amongst their ‘semeocales’ the Latin fricative f,* but not the semi- 
vowels y and w (j, 0),? Some Greek sources seem also to have 
classified as 'half-sonant’ the h-clement of the voiceless aspirates 
ph, th, kh (4, @, x);* the inclusion of the aspirate h- is rejected by 


" CF. the German use of the term ‘Geriuechiaut’ (e.g. Dieth, Vodemekum are 
| Phonetih, % 200 #f.); see also Bloomfield, Language, p. os. 
* The relevant passages from Plato and Aristotle ore: Plain: (rat. PEP 
Pail. in {,; Theat. aoqp. Aristotle: Poet.ax. 14.964, 14579; Hist. An, iv. ). $354. 
" Ed. Uhlig, pp. 11 f, = Bekker, p. 691. quifewe pde deve, [ (= of oF Sa), 
C(= ae), é (= ©e), A, 5, p, 7 CED, Hal., De Comp. 7a f., 784, 
- Cf. Marouzeau, Lesique de la terminologiv Jimputrtique, p. 492. 
ct 


fuldowa Af Adperm, dri mapdoor Frrer rin davqirrws igen wattorgaur dv re 
rely prypols coi ovypoir. 
* See c.g. Donatus, Keil, iv..967; Priscian expressly disagrees with this inclu. 
sion (Feil, ti. g, tt), 
I 


~ atte, 93. 

* Ci. Sextus Empiricus, Ade. Grama, (Math. i), to2, It i also to be noted 
that in the list of Diogenes Babylonius the aspirates are not included atnongat the 
stops (cf Diog. Laert, vil. ¢7), Attempts have been made to explain this classifica- 
tion by sssummg an affricate or fricative realization (cf. Sturtevant, op. cit., § goa; 


PROCESSES a 
iscian,’ but appears again in the Old Icelandic grammatical 
treatises, which also include the Icelandic dental fricatives.* 

The Greco-Roman tradition of the ‘semivocalis’ still finds expres- 
sion in the work of Grammont: 

Les semi-voyelles sont encore éminemment des spirantes et aussi bien 
des fricatives et des constrictives. 

There is in fact little common ground between the Indian ap- 
proach to the entahstha and the Greek approach to the qpidwvor, 
The only mention in our Indian sources of a contrast between 
instantaneous and continuous articulation is that of the RP: 

For the stops there ia momentary contact: for the vowels and fricatives 
there is continuous non-contact ;* 
and the only Western statement of a special degree of contact is 
that of Marius Victorinus: 

Semivocales in enuntiatione propria ore semicluso strepunt.* 

Our own term: ‘semivowel’ has its origin in the Greek qjjudaivor, 
through the medium of the Latin semivocalis, whilst its employ- 
ment, though nat its justification, generally corresponds more 
closely to that of the Sanskrit antahstha. 

It is further to be noted that our term ‘liquid’, a word more con- 
venient than descriptive, owes its origin to the west rather than 
the east. The Greek term éypés, lit. ‘moist’, ‘fluid’ (translated by 
the Latin figwidus) is first used in a phonetic sense by Dionysius 
Thrax, who applies it to the Greek 1, r, m, m:*° most of his com- 
mentators interpret the word as meaning ‘slippery’, i.¢. ‘unstable’, 
with reference to the metrical effect of these sounds as second 
members of a group stop-+liquid, where a preceding syllable con~ 
taining a short vowel is of ‘doubtful’ quantity, a state also referred 
to as fypds.? "Terentianus Maurus, however, explains the term as 
referring to their ‘lubrica natura’, in that they may function either 


32. 
Ed. Ublig, p. 14 = Bekker, p. 632. | | 
Hilgurd, pp. 46, 342; Bekker, pp. 8164. Cf, Priscian, Keil, ii, 9; Max. 
Victorinus, Keil, vi, 216, 


32 PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 
as vowels or as consonants'—a remarkable mterpretation as applied 
to the phonological systems of Greek or Latin.? Atilius Fortu- 
natianus sees in the term a reference to lack of tenseneas (guat 
minus vinunt habeant);? and other interpreters of Dionysius Thrax 
refer simply to their ‘smooth and even articulation’.* 
‘Liquid" is in fact one of those terms of which Grammont has 
eaid, 


‘Elles sent consacrées par un long emploi, grace auquel le lecteur eait 
imimeédiatement de quoi l'on veut parler; des appellations nouvelles pour- 
raient étre plus adéquates sans offrir le méme avantage,"* 


1.113. Ketrofiexton 

Amongst the intra-buccal articulatory processes we might have 
expected the Indians to have mentioned one further feature, 
namely, rétroflexion. ‘This, however, is generally discussed by them 
in connexion with the places of articulation (see 2.63), and also in 
relation to its prosodic function (see 3.10). ‘To consider the retro- 
flex articulations on the same terms ae the velars, palatals, dentals, 
or labials is, even from the point of view of the Indian descriptive 
framework, not entirely justified. 

In the 7/P we find a prescription regarding the position of the 
articulators in their quiescent or ‘neutral’ state (a close parallel to 
Sievers’ "Ruhelage"® or '‘Indifferenzlage’)? 


-» the tongue is extended and depressed, and the lips are in the position 
a a 


* Keil, vi. y50. 
»«. Grarcut utay nomena: 
fubrica ef muartera tn Ulis mengue ct allermice vigor ; 
Ae orm Cecil unum, Ane mimnfral componar. 

2 More justifiable is Maccdonell's use of the term (Shr. Gr,, p. 11, 4 17, ve t, 
on Skt. i, uw, ts {}—"Vowela which are Hable to be changed into semivowels , 
liquid vowels’ . Cf Renou, Gr. Sannr,, § 5. 

® Keil, vi. sae 

* Hilgerd, p.46; Bekker, p. #17; cf, Psellus op, Boissonode, Ame, Gr. ni. 213, 
Se-ahbs: ad caret De Auckib Best. Cf. also Jakobeon, ‘Observations sur le 
classement phonologique des. consonnes (Proc. Jrd int. Gong. Phom. Sr), p. 40: 
Il semble que c'est te fait du ref at qui ext décisif pour l'impresaion acous- 


* Op. eit, p. 71. * Gr. d. Phonetik*, § 55. 

7 Gr. d. Lautphynolome, p, 1§; cf. alan Sweet's ‘Orgenie Basis’ (Primer, 
$$.184-f0) and Vieror's ‘Artioolationshasia® (Eien. a, Phon.', § 128 fF.) 

ik. ao-at. anidels pronypattd jim’: giracad oythaw,on which Tnbh4,, yatra 
wos onddviertetra .. . filed... tigeim-dfsitd bhawadl (cf. Sievers, "Die Zunge liegt 
echlaff in der Mumdhoble’), 


PROCESSES 13 
In this condition the velar, palatal, dental, and labial articulators 
are approximately opposite their respective places of articulation, 
and the utterance of these series is effected simply by means of the 
closure-processes already discussed." This, however, is not the 
case with the retroflex series, which is articulated, as our treatises 
recognize, ‘by rolling back the tip of the tongue’*—that is to say, 
the place of articulation is not automatically determined by the 
application of the closure-processes to the apical articulator:’ there 
is need of a further prayatna, ‘articulatory effort’, which might 
with consistency have been included at this point.* 


1.12. Extra-buccal 
1.120, Glottal 


In their recognition of the voicing process the Indian phoneti- 
cians make one of their greatest single contributions. "The term for 
‘voiced’ (ghosavat) is, as we have already seen, found in early non- 
technical literature, and the specialist discovery is likely to have 
been of even earlier date, ‘To designate the glottis the Indians use 
either the word kanfha, which in non-technical usage means simply 
‘throat’, or more specifically khak (or dilam) hanthasya, ‘aperture 
of the throat’. In the Indian musical literature we also find the 
picturesque term s4riri vind, ‘bodily lute’,s which some authorities 
have interpreted as referring to the vocal cords; in a recent paper, 
however, Dr, A. A, Bake has pointed out that this interpretation 1s 
unfounded, and that ‘strange to say, there is no trace of the know- 
ledge of the existence of the vocal cords in the texts on the theory 
of music’? The following are typical of the phonetic statements: 
The sir, respiration, or pulmonic emission, at times of vocal activity, 


* CL Sievers; Pho, § 57: "Die Ruhelage des Sprachorgena jot dice natOrliche 
Biss fir die einaeine Asticulations-bewegungen, welche sur Bildung von 
Sprachlauten fiihren.” 

eg. TP ii. 37. pavdgrens prebesyiva mirdhani favorge. AP i. 22. murdhan- 
anti s ann Spends VP i. 78. mirdhanydh pratinesfydayrav. 

The ¥. alone suggests thia bagic distinction (285-9): 
hevorguaiien jiktula-mwadlydatos pena copay: 
| ret 9 rektra-mtdiryers picdgrene yathed apriet. 
Cf. Liters, pp. oa, o4. 

* Note va a eneha s inclusion under "Eigentongegennitze’ (TOLP iw, 103 £.). 

* e.9, Samgitadarpane, L 48. Cf. also Ait. Ar. iii. 2. §. 

* CE J. Grosset in Lavignae, Eee eee , 285. 

del a: cobepiy arigictanttrey ann, ances’ Indian Music’, read at the 
Leyden Congress of Orientalists, June 1950. 

B 2ae8 p 


34 PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 


hecomes breath (frdsa) or voice (nada) according as the glortia ia open or 
elowed .! 


When the glottis is closed, voice is produced; when it is open, breath," 


The words used to refer to the two poles of this articulatory process 
are sanmeyta, “contracted, closed’, and ertizfa, ‘opened’: it will be 
remembered that the latter term was also used_in the description 
of the intra-buceal processes. 

As regards the relationship of the voicing process to the various: 
letters, the AP states, 

Breath ix emitted in the cise of the voiceless consonants, and voice in 
the case of the voiced consonants and the vowels." 


The Moh, also notes the effect of the voicing process on inter- 
vocalic ‘voiceless’ stops, saying of the c in a word such as pacati, 


It iv overlaid by the voicing of the preceding and following vowels,* 


a feature which is further supported by the statements of the 
Prakrit Pram: ans? 

Apart from the two poles of ‘breath’ and ‘voice’, a number of 
treatises introduce a further factor into their descriptions; the RP 
observes that, 


When the glottis is in an intermediate condition (between closed and 
open) both breath and voice are produced,* 


and goes on to relate this feature to the individual letters as follows, 


Breath is emitted for the voiceless sounds and voice for the others, 
except for the voiced fricative (h) und the voiced aspirates, where hath 
breath and voter are emittedd.* 


* RP xiii, 1-2. dyed prdneah Acithyam amupradinxam hantharya khe wivpte 
iomepte od Spadyate indsatdep midatiim el eaktrihdyidan, 
* TP 4-5. sopoypte kopphe nddoh kripate: wiegte fedsah. Whilst rhopeval, 
achopa ure yenerally used for “volced', ‘voiceless’, the usual term for voice is 
nddq and not ghopa; this fact leads to miunderatanding on the part of later 
writers, who list mddo anil ghoga oe separate procemes—c, g. Siddh, Kowm. 13. 

* i t2-13. fedte 'ghopepr amupraddnah: nddo whogacot-seereny. 

* ede, 4, on Pate. 1 V¥, 109(Rielborm, i. 335), pdroe-porayor Anididiena pracchdd- 
yate; ch Keiyyeqa, deayor akdrayer ghoprrator mndhyve cakdro ghosapdn iva 


fakpyata ity arth. | | 
Met acy es Grammazrient Prakrits, pp. 131 ff, ; cf. Bloch, L'Indo-Aryen, 


* xiii, 3. 3 


* sit. 4-6, fedao ‘ghosdedim: itarezdin tu nddah : Jopmepmurnip ghopimin frees. 


PROCESSES 35 
This is supported by the statements of the TP, viz. 

When the glottis ia in an intermediate condition, ‘h-sound’ is produced ;' 

For vowels and voiced (unaspirated) consonants the emussion is voice, 
for voiceless consonants breath, and for h and the voiced aspirates 
"h-sound’,? 

Further, the RP condemns as a fault in the pronunciation of h 
‘excessive breath or similarity to a voiceless sound’. 

Regarding this third category of glottal “half-closure’ or "h- 
sound’, Max Miiller remarks, 

Dies ist ime indische Vorstellung, welche wohl! nicht zu rechtfertigen 
pat," 
and Whitney in a series of unsympathetic comments, 

1 confess myself unable to derive any distinct idea from this description, 
knowing Ho intermediate utterance between breath and sound. .. . 

(The RP) declares both breath anil sound to be present in the sonant 
pirates and in. A, which could not possibly be true of the latter, unless it 
were composed, like the former, of two separate parts, a sonant and a gurd: 
and this 1 umpossible.*” 

... The attempt to establish this distinction is forced and futile. .. . 

"That intonated and unintonated breath should be emitted from the same 
throat at once is physically impossible.’ 
Needless to say, the two western scholars were wrong, The 
modern Indo-Aryan languages bear ample evidence, if evidence 
_ were needed, that the aspiration of the voiced aspirates (2h, jh, 
&c.) is voiced aspiration,’ and there are strong historical and phono- 
logical reasons for believing the Sanskrit h to have been ‘voiced 
h’ [fi] * the possibility of such an articulation is no longer a matter 
of doubt—to quote one of many available descriptions: 

A voiced h canbe made. For thio sound the vocal cords vibrate along 


‘iL 6. madhye hakdrab. | 
1 i B+10. mide ‘mmpraddeump reara-ghopevates: hakdro Juo-caturthepu: aghopesu 


fediah. CE i. 12-14. ‘dama-virarjaniye-prathama-deitind aghogdh: ma 


Mast 


36 PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 
a considerable part of their length, while a triangular opening allowa the 
air to escape with some friction 

The failure of carly western phonetics to take note of the voicing 
process has already been suggested. Aristotle, in a passage of his 
Historia Animalium,* in fact comes nearer to its discovery than is 
generally recognized; in making the distinction between vowels and 
consonants be says that whereas the latter are produced by the 
tongue and lips, the former are produced ‘by the voice and larynx’. 
But the matter is not further pursued by him or his successors, and 
the western tradition is really that which begins with Dionysius 
Thrax; the latter distinguishes the three classes of Greek stops 
(voiceless, voiced, voiceless aspirate) by their degrees of ‘aspira- 
tion’, viz. a5 ‘smooth’, ‘medium’, and ‘rough’ respectively,’ the 
voiced stops being considered from this point of view as inter- 
mediate between the voiceless unaspirated and the voiceless aspirated 
stops. It is difficult to see how this classification can have been 
justified: Sturtevant has now rightly abandoned an earlier theory 
that the statement could refer to a /emis/fortis distinction:* and 
another hypothesis, which would to some extent fit Dionysius’ 
classification, namely, that the Greek f, 5, y represented voiced 
aspirates, is supported by no positive evidence whatever,? 

But whether or not this description was ever applicable to Greek, 
it was evidently not in the case of Latin, and with one notable 
exception is not taken over by the otherwise ovine Latin gram- 
marians. "The responsibility for tranamitting to us the still familiar 
Latin translation of the Greek terms—temuir, media, and asptrata® 
—must be borne by Priscian, who takes over the Greek classifica- 
tion in its entirety. Undaunted by the fact that Latin possesses no 
aiperatae, he applies the term to the Latin fricative f, which he 

' Westermann and Ward, Practical Phonetics for Students of African Lan- 
guage, § 250 (with diagram). 

“4%. Q. 5a5e (rd jote ode darmjerra } dorry wal-d Adpeyé ddinow, ra éd ddwwe 4 
ylaera wal rd syelin). 


Saovrapa, raw 34 Baotou Cf. Dion. Hal., De Comp.-83: Aristides 
Quintilianis, pp, 29,54 Jahn, . | 

The Seefa/fiAd distinction is in fact Found earlier in Pa.-Armtothe, De Andi. 
biftius Bayh 


* Op. cit., Pp. 86, n. Bo. * hid. § 94. 
* The Latin translations tenuis and axpirata (for Gk. judi, Sacrefa) are remark. 
able: we should expect fermi: and axpera (cf, epiritur lexis/arper for Meets pudgy! 


PROCESSES qt 
identifies with the Greek 4* (the latter having by his time probably 
developed its present fricative value). The ambiguity which the 
term thus saps was ultimately to provide Jacob Grimm with 

symmetry in his famous statement of the Lautver- 


“As este the nature of the distinction between the voiced and 
voiceless Latin stops, the ancient writers seem to have had only 
the vaguest impressions. With t and d there is the suggestion of a 
different place of articulation}—a method of differentiation that 
we find perpetuated in Hen Jonson's English Grammar, ‘The learn- 
ing of the distinction is recommended by Quintilian as an essential 
item in a boy’s education,’ but he guardedly omits to discuss the 
matter in detail, Ina description hy Terentianus Maurus, dealing 
with the distinction between b and p, @ and k, there is a sugges- 
tion, though obscurely expressed, that the author had recognized 
the extremely important /enis/fortis opposition (which Whitney 
was rather too ready to dismiss); and Marius Victorinus, para- 
phrasing this statement, does in fact use the former term." But any 
good that may have resided in these descriptions quickly perished ; 
the medieval grammarian Hugutio distinguishes aliquando from 
aliquante by the position of the stress, 

licet enim d et f sint diversae litterac, habent tamen adco affinem smum, 
quod «x sono non posset perpenidi allqua differentia ;’ 
and in the seventeenth century John Wallis states the distinctive 
feature to be nasality,” Only in the latter part of the nineteenth 
century, under the influence of Indian teaching, does the recogni- 
tion of the voicing process make headway. 


1.121. Pulmonic 

It will be convenient to consider next the process of aspiration, 
in a8 much as one of our treatises, the Ps links this with the 
palais process; 

h sine an yoced aeeviee are voiced, the SRO VO WERE and votord stops 


" og. Mar, Vict., Keil vi. 3 +1. 3, 160: 


| + CE ‘On the Relation of Surd and Sonant Trans, Am. Phil. Assn, 1877, 
pp. 4.1 if, * For texts ser Sturtevant, op. cit., $ 189a. 


7 Hoase, Dv Madu Aeei Sthchia Philologiciz, p. 34. 
* Grevenaticn Linguae Anglicanar, pp. 15 f 


38 PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 

are partly voiced; the voiceless aspirates are breathed, the voiceless stops 
ure partly breathed, ‘This w the law of specch.' 

In other words, h and the vowed aspirates are considered as more 
fully voiced than the nan-aspirates, and the voiceless aspirates 
more fully breathed than the non-aspirates. In the case of the 
voiceless pair the statement makes good sense when we consider 
feaisa, 'breath', as referring to ‘force of voiceless breath’ rather than 
simply ‘voicelessness', ‘This interpretation is supported by the 
statement of the 7'P that, 

More breath is emitted in the other voiceless consonants (Le. the 
wipirated stops and the fricutives)’ than in the unaspirated stopa,” 
and is in accordance with the grammaticul and later phonetic 
terminology of the distinction between aspirate and non-aspirate, 
namely ‘mahd-prana’, lit. ‘big-breath’, and ‘alpa-prima’, lit ‘little- 
breath’.* 

If we now turn to the PS’s statement regarding the voiced pair, 
similar considerations apply: nada, ‘voice’, being interpreted as 
force of voiced breath’, the statement implies greater breath-force 
on the release of the aspirates than of the non-aspirates. The 
Justification for such # statement is clearly reflected in kymographic 
tracings, where the voiced breath correlates with a particularly high 
amplitude in the vocalic wave-forms;? from this point of view h — 
and the release elements of the voiced aspirates may be considered 
as an ‘overblowing’ of the following vowel® (cf. also. 2.00 below). 

The Indian treatment of the aspiration-process provides little 
else for discussion, with the exception of a statement in the RP 
that, 

Some say that the aspiration of the aspirates consists of a homorganic 
fricative,” 

* 30-40. 

»»  mddinw ho-ghagah ony tbh 
ipne-nddd yeep fated co fodanos tu dho-phddayah 
| ituc~chodsdend care widedd yor dhidmaitat pracckgare. 

* CL Plato, Great. goza (- - = rod gal wcll roll ei wal roo elype wal roa [ira, 
on weupotody ra ypiapara), 

Tih a, Shiivae themecbie “nop. The Vs (250, 282: Linders, p. ge) 
gives to this special degree of breathiness the title of arhu, 

Seg. MBh. t. 1. 4, 0n Pig. t, i. 9 {Riethom, i. 61);4p. 3. iv. 9 Ch AC. 
Sen, Proc. tnd Int. Cong, Phon. Sc., p.1¢2, 

* Cf Prasad, op. cit., Rymograma Nos. 8, oz (gho:ghar, bhabiha-t), 

* Ch Pike, op. cit., pp. 71 £; Doke, Gomp. Study in Shona Phonetics, p. 92. 

* xiik 16. sopmatin ca sopmamdin igmandiuh posthdnena, 


PROCESSES 4 
a view that is repeated for the voiceless aspirates by the Ap.§. 
The breathy release of an aspirated stop inevitably has, as Sweet 
observed, ‘something of the character of the preceding consonant’ ;}* 
and, in the voiceless series at least, varying degrees of affrication 
are to be heard from speakers of some modern Indo-Aryan lan- 
guages, Dialectal pronunciations of this type are likely to have 
existed in the case of Sanskrit; the later development of the 
aspirates, however, hardly supports Uvata's assumption of a 
strongly affricated pronunciation (pd, ts, kx) such as is attested 
in, for example, High German. 


t.122. Nasal 

The nasalization process may occur in combination with various 
intra-buceal processes, and the ancient statements regarding the 
mode of combination for the most part present no great difficulty 
of interpretation, The nasal consonants are referred to cither as 
ndsikya, ‘nasal’, or anundsika, ‘having a nasal component’. Of the 
mechanism of the process the 7P says simply that, 

Nusality ia produced by opening the nasal cavity.’ 
Our phonetic treatises, as also Panini, realize that both nose and 
mouth are involved," and the 7'P further pomts out that the articu- 
lator is as for the corresponding oral consonants.’ Applied to the 
stop serica (sparta, ¢prsfa) this process gives nse to the nasal con- 
sonants 1}, Jl. 1, 1, Mm: nasalized forms of three of the semivowles, 
¥, 1, %, are also attested as junctional features in Vedic Sanskrit 
and duly noted by the phoneticians.* 

In connexion with the vowels the working of the process is 
similarly quite clear, Here again the term anunasika is regularly 

‘Wt. 9, porthdnena devtivah, 
* Primer, p. sq; cf. Pike, op. cit., p. 113: 


© ist. worgevar tain 
* CE TP y, 28. antarthd-poral co serarsan amuindskam. 

suvargal lokam for suvargam +lokum 

yajpa¥ vagtu for yajaum +vaptu ae, nee 
Galy lis found in Classical Sanskrit (and only when = phonological -n). Fis 
hot attested (see, however, Koanow, op. cit., p. 909); this i in accordance with 
the non-ocourrence of geminate r (cf. junctions of the type ®-tg-4+-9r->-L r- for 
expected *-irr-). 


i PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 

used, as opposed to the guddha or ‘pure’ non-nasalized vowels.! 
Another term, however, is also used by some of the treatises, 
namely raftta, ‘coloured’, nasalization being referred to as raga or 
raviga, i.e. (nasal) colour’.+ Some of our authors give picturesque 
descriptions of the quality of these vowels: the account in the 
| Sarvasammata-Siksa is as follows) 

The nasal colour should ative from the heart," with a sound like that of 

bella: just as the milkmuids of Suriygtra cry *tnkefiaaa' (buttermilk !"), so 
should the nasality be realized. 
The nasalized yowels are not of frequent occurrence, They appear 
in Certain types of junction (c.g. triir ekaadafaa iha for triin-- 
ekaadajann+-iha),* and as features of finality in the sentence or 
breath-group.° Apart from such cases there was a tendency, cen- 
sured by the RP but general in the modern Indo-Aryan languages, 
for vowels to take on some degree of nasal ‘colour’ in contact with 
nasal consonants,? 

But apart from the above, the accounts given by our treatises, 
as also the system of writing, present wa with a third sub-category 
of the nasalization process, ‘The name which this third feature 
hears is “anusvdre’ (m, my), which might be literally translated 
either as ‘after-sound' or ‘subordinate-sound’. ‘The contexts in. 
which it may occur are clearly defined. It is restricted to post- 
vocalic position, and its primary context is before the fricatives J, 
@. 8 (and also h), in cases where historical and phonological evidence 
point to an alternation with m or (medially) n;* at an early date it 
also made its appearance under certain conditions before r,? and 
in Classical Sanskrit replaces the Vedic ¥ and 0 before y and ¥ 

' AP iv, tary Vardapatolor lil. ¢. 

* ee APL 36, rakta-samyiio ‘mundsihgh. 

Aebpsryermdirearm- coma regan Apdaydd wtthiter: hhavet 
yatled paurdyirihd nett takr ag tty abbibhedsate 
roan rorigdh provokiowydh. .. . 
Ch Varma, op. cit., pp. rag f. 
* The Cardyvaniva-Siked hos, more realistically, mdsdd utpodvate rorigah, . . 
* CE also tho so-called anundithopadhd oroptti (RP ii. 67), og. acd indrah 
for sucaa +-indrah., 

* CE RP, 63. appiy ddydn avanine" pragphydn dediryd dhur enundsikdn svorde. 

Sorvmammata-Sikpd 46. pluto ‘tareah paddnta-~tha ndnikyo rorgra-samjiakal. 

"RP xiv, 56. rektai rdgah somecdye mardndm, CE sles zi¥. 9. 

* Cf tan survarn beside tam apl, &c., hangea beside Germ. Gant, 
“mye (cL Wackernagel, op. cit., § 283c}. 


PROCESSES 41 
respectively (see above), Its optional use ia further extended, even 
as early as Panini, to word-final position preceding a stop,’ where 
previous phonetic teaching had prescribed a homorganic nasal = 
later treatises extend this practice to morpheme-junctions within 
the word, and even to intra-morphemic position,’ being followed 
in this last extension by the graphic practice of manuscripts and of 
some printers. In Prakrit it is further extended to the position 
before an initial yowel.* 

The phonetic value of this feature, however, has provided a 
problem for phoneticians and commentators whether ancient, 
medieval, or modern, Some confusion may perhaps be avoided by 
first considering the evidence for its pronunciation in the earlier 
and more limited contexts, namely, before the fricatives, Sequences 
of the type -VinjS- (where V = any vowel and S = any fricative) 
were phonologically parallel to sequences of the type - VLL- (where 
L = any semivowel except r) or -VNT- (where T = any stop and 
N = homorganic nasal): sanj-skrta, for example, is parallel to 
sal-laya and to san-taana, sam-paata, &c. Thus the nasality 
in the types - VUL- and -VNT- conforms to both the sthana and 
the dbhyantara-prayaina of the following consonant; by its paral- 
lelism with these sequences one might also make the theoretical 
supposition that -VnjS- = -VZS- (where Z is a nasalized frica- 
tive), 2 form of realization that may be heard, for example, in 
Modern Icelandic, where in a phrase such as solin shin feeurst the 
word-junctions are realized with some overlapping of the nasaliza- 
tion and friction processes (in a sepmental representation -Z s-, 
-0 f-)5 In only one Indian statement, however, is there any 
implication that mn is to be considered as a fricative.* 

In a number of languages the tendency is in fact for the nasality 
in. such contexts to be realized in the preceding vowel,’ and for the 

* vith iv, $9 

* Cf, TP v. 27. makdrah sporia-paras tarya wuthdeqen anundsihom., 

' Ch Sarcesiqumata-S. 33 (e-¢. suny-jpaanam, danjkgru). 

" CE Pischel, § 343 (Homacandny, i. 24). 

CE Seefin Eimarsson, Icelandic Grammar, Pp. 19, 20) Bettrdge sur Phonetth 
der Iilindichen Sprache, p.. 18. Note uleo Petrovic, De ta nasalité en Roumaiw: 
'Ce n'est pas seulement le lieu ‘articulation qui devient identique 4 celui de la 
consanne survunte, mus aueai le mode d'articulation.’ 

* RP i. 10, with Uvata’s cormment. On the general rarencess of nasal fricatives 
cf. Grammont, Traité, p. 95; Martinet, TCLP viii. 282; and on the incom- 
Joiyreinibasicemietang voice In Skt, cl. p. 44, 1, 4. 

Cf. especially the development in Avestan (Bartholomar, Gr. § 62), e.g. 
dgstogm beside Skt, damiah, mq@ram beside Skt. mantram. 


42 PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 


syllabic quantitative pattern to be maintained by a lengthening of 
the vowel; as Sweet long ago pointed out with regard to Latin, 
m before the hisses and semivowels represented a naéal lengthening of 
The same development js postulated for *-n- in Irish? and is 
further attested in Old Lithuanian by alternations of the type 
handu (pres.): Adsiu (fut,).? Amongst the modern languages parallel 
alternations may be quoted from Polish’ and Spanish.’ 

On the basis of analogies in other languages it is therefore tempt- 
ing to assume that the value of nj was a nasalization and lengthen- 
ing of the vowel (if not-already long); this view was adopted by 
Whitney," and has support in the fact that the TP speaks of enus- 
wira 25 having precisely this value,’ whilst the AP makes no 
mention of it apart from anundsike.* Whitney further supports his 
interpretation by the fact that the anuseara symbol is written over 
the vowel-symbol (¢.¢ aa or Way for ampfa), The lengthening 
of the vowel. is implied in the statement of the 7'P that metrically 
a syllable which is nasalized is equivalent to a syllable containing 
a long vowel.® | 

But on the other hand some of our authorities quite certainly 
distinguished the terms anundsika and anusvdra, as the following 
passage from the VP indicates: 

According to Aupadivi anundnhka of a vowel occurs anly before a fol- 
lowing vowel (Uvaja, ‘eg. mahaa indrah’), whilst before p following 
consonant there is un insertion of agwedra (Uvata, ‘eg. gavayaanys 
traptre’),'” 

A simular view is taken even by the VS, which in most respects is 

1 Proc. Phil, Sec, 1882-4, p. xv. Cl. Sturtevant, op. cir., § nya. 

* Cf. Petersen, Keltiche Gr. i, $$ $4.10, 94.7. 

" Leskien, Litawischer Levehuch, § 25.3; note alan Present tense formations of 
the type regis. The nasalized vowels of Old Lith, (q, &<.) are now pronounced 
aa non=tasal. long vowels, 

* CE Broch, Slawirche Phanetth, § 124; Sokolnicks-Fedebaka, Etwade Experi- 
meniaie des Gonrortcs Nasales en Polonais, pp. 18 ff.: alan E. Roschmeider, 
&. f. wl. Sprachforechuny 69. 3/4, 1931, pp. 219 FF 

"Cl Navarro Tomas, Pranwhciacidn Erpefola, pp, 111 £. 

"On TP il. 30; cf. Grammont, op, eft., p: 365) 

" Loc. cit. amumdrottomdé amunddkih, with xv. i... , pilreesmars ‘stondodah., 

* Cf Varma, op, cit, pp. 148 ff, Renou rr, / 

‘axih 14. Cf modern developments such ws Hind) biles< Skt. Van) fa; sez 
abo BK: 1. “Turner, "The Indo-Aryan Nosals in Gujrati" (FRAS 1915), p. 19. 

fii, 130-2. anundriker wpadhd .. . cara Aupatieth: aumdrena fanfare 
(Uva: avem upedkd-nakdrayor entard bhatt), 


PROCESSES 43 


closely related to the TP! The attempts to describe the phonetic 
value of this ‘insertion’, however, are remarkably unhelpful. The 
PS describes it as ‘sounding like the lute’? the RP classes it with 
the vowels and fricatives as lacking contact,’ and elsewhere says. 
that it has either vocalic or consonantal qualities; and at least one 
ancient grammarian could not be certain whether it was a nasaliza- 
tion of the vowel or a separate nasal unit 

It is thua extremely difficult to determine the phonetic basis of 
our descriptions, ‘Translations of the difficulty such as “spirantical 
to vowel-like # (#)'® do not really help; metrical considerations 
alone provide no clue since syllables of the types VNC, VVC, 
VVC would in any case be metrically equipollent; and modern 
Sanskrit pronunciations are so various with regard to amusodra as 
to be of little assistance.’ It seems certain, however, that some of 
the ancient writers had perceived something other than a simple 
nasalization of the vowel; the linear nature of this feature is indi- 
cated in the VP quotation above, and we have also the statement 
of the 7'P that some authorities prescribe the insertion of a “nasal 
increment’ after the vowel.? In the present state of our knowledge 
it would perhaps be unwise to say more than that these authorities 
had observed some form of nasalized glide in the transition from 
the vowel to the fricative.? ‘Their disagreements as to its vocalic or 
consonantal nature may perhaps have a dialectal basis; in this 
connexion the following slight indications may be noted on either 
side: 

(i) In describing the mode of transition from @ to i/u in the 

\ VS 1bp (Ladders, p. Bs). 

: 23 \oprmend etka ed 

KUL PE. Pea fropmande acprptam mutam. 

‘ig, sucess vyaianmet ed spare til, 

' Ch RP ii. a7. Pydiir ndnkyam amundrikam vd. 

* CE Buiskoal, op. cH, 1 PP: 145 £. 

' CY. Grierson, On the Modern Indo-Aryum Vernoculars, p. 101; also 
FRAS Cent, Supp. rgz4, p. 11g (‘In echools, to prevent certain sounds being 
neglected, the teaching Pandite have afl sorte of expedients to enforce their 


exmtence upon the pupils’), An extreme example ia provided by. the realize- 
tion. of a it Vajurvedic recitation as [ghum], «g. [aghumfunaa) for 


a 
aeces 2, nave: tates te omuedrak ( Tribh.—rvardt pare ‘mirtsira dgamo 


Ci, Tiacunton Berguigne-Whitney in MSE i. 30 ff, 194 fi. 

" Both Bloch (op. c., p. 37; Cimyuantenaive de I"deole pratique des heutes 
fiudes 1921, Purtiv orientale, p. 65) and Chatterji (op, cit.,.$ 130) seem to suggest 
a lengthening of the vowel with nazalization of the second partion. 


44 PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 


diphthongs aifau, the RP compares it to the union of a with 
anuscdra;' this comparison, with its implication that any in some 
way resembled a diphthong,? is on the face of it reminiscent of the 
Portuguese ‘sonorization’ of nasals (cantdo< Lat. cantan(t), &e.) 
Some support for such a realization is perhaps provided by Oriya 
batisa< Skt. vamfa, &c.* 

(ii) The treatises which insist on a consonantal interpretation of 
anusvdra (generally velar)* are of late composition,® and this pro- 
nunciation ia expressly condemned by Uvata in his commentary 
on the RP.7 North-western developments, however, as exemplified 
by Sindhi waviyhu<vemsa, hatiju<hamsa, are suggestive of a transi- 
tion -NS->-N'S- (cf, the Sanskrit sandhi mahaantsan for 
mahaan-+-san, &c.).* 

The extension of anusrdra in Classical Sanskrit to cases where 
the following consonant is 2 semivowel provides no fresh difficulty, 
Hut, as already mentioned, Panini allows the optional use of my in 
certain cases Where earlier treatises prescribe a homorganic nasal, 
It has been suggested that this extension was purely graphic, and 
based on the convenience of the simple symbol * to represent 
nasality;? this seems less than fair to Panini's linguistic competence, 
though the possibility of a phonological rather than phonetic basis 
for the extension must not be overlooked, 

Graphic considerations may well underlie the later extension of 


" siil, gt (Aramdmumdre-tyatipatyarat). 

* alfa are in fact contrasted with e/o, where the quulities of a and tfu ure 
“filsed” (xiii. 40. gid): ef. 2. 15 below, 

NCE Bourciez. hiémanity de dinguittiyiae Romene, 3 333¢; E. B, Wiliams _ Pron 
Latin to Portuguese, $157; A. R. Goncalves Vianna, Portagan: Pisoitipue ef 


“Of interest, though of doubtful historical significance, is the Marathi pro- 
nunciation of Skt. tetume, eg. af? (< exela-), mats (< mvigua-), ohitren 
(< ahimad), siWh?* (< smha-). [f thin doce in fact reflect an historical feature, 
the realization of amumdra might be simply stated in terms of homorganic 
articulation for every case, includiny the fricutives—e.g. *-ain+s- > *-a] 9-- 
fneion and voice being mutually mecompatible, the heavy quantity of the 
syllable, if it contains o short vowel, is nuintuined by a W-type vewel-clomure 
(cf. on wisorga-candhi, p. 68, nm, 1); thus *-a2% a- would > *-a" s-, Ac. 

"Cf Varma, op. cit., p. 15, and FS azo (Lilders, p. 87), Note also the 
present-day Bengali pronunciation of Skt. 1) as Q. 

* Note, however, the FP "s reference to a velarity of unspeciied nope (i. #4. 
fivdoifiydsursdrd hosu-nifena); ef. Ap. 8. i. 10. 

* 5. K. Shastri, RT Notes, p. $4; cf, Bloch, op. cit., p. 40. 


PROCESSES 45 


anusvara to replace homorganic nasals within a morpheme.' Of 
such extensions Whitney has said: 


To... write the anuitdra sign in the interior of a word for a nasal mute 
which 4 i equally radical or thematic with the succeeding non-nnsal . 
seems an indeferible practice, and one wholly ta be disapproved and 
rejected. 


These strictures are directed against Max Miiller's support of the 
practice referred to,’ but there is much to be said on the other side. 
For although this ‘slovenly and undesirable habit’* may well have 
grotn out of mere graphic convenience, it incidentally recognizes 
an important phonological principle, namely, that the n or m in 
a sequence Vat or Vimp is a very different functional unit from 
that in VoV or VmV;; for whereas in the latter case n and m are 
mutually contrastive, this is not so in the former case.’ The 
homorganic nasals form a single phonological unit, and a phono- 
logical transcription will recognize this fact." ‘This is particularly 
the case in those modern Indo-Aryan languages where the only 
purpose of certain nasal symbols taken over from Sanskrit (velar, 
palatal,’ retroflex) is to represent homorganic nasality before con- 
sonants of the appropriate series. In some dialects, moreover, we 
find alternative pronunciations of the type VNT/V: ‘TY! ie. an 
alternation of homorganic nasal (para-savarna) with nasality and 
length of vowel (anundsika); in such cases the convenience and 
phonological appropriateness of a single symbo! for the two pos- 


* Lithusnian here provides another parallel, in that the indigenous grammars 
extend the nasal vowel-symbol (which is phonetically justified before the "the fries. 
tives) as @ graphic device for writing the homorganic nasal before stops (cq. piti 
for penti): cf. Leakien, op. cit., § 26, 

Note also that the SardatanmatasSiknd, 3 In prescribing thi extension (32), 
eeomeroare Suet exetedns Here ‘lacie. peculinr properties ('...dty atrdmm- 


: Hapa tee, =i 
i pp. x 
* Whitey, Sar. Gr., § 776. 

* Cé. J. R. Firth, Prov. ted Int. Cong. Phos. Se., p. 180. 

* Note also the use of a ppecial symbol (#f) for the homorganic nasal in 
Avestan, where there con hardly be any question of graphic convenience (mn = ), 
0 = 1,m = 6): ef. Bartholomae, Gr., § 263. 93. 

*- Sven fi Genuakeit the palatal 7s cannot ba ioatified On w distinctive: baste (cf 
Emeneau, Long. xxii. §> #f.). 

* Cf. Prasad, op. cit., pp. 467 ff. (e.g. lamba:/lii:ba:). Similar aleernations 
are historically suggested by doublets in Marathi (cf. Bloch, La Formation de la 
langue marathe, p. Bz) 


at PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 
sible realizations are obvious,' Possibly similar alternations were 
prevalent in more ancient times, and gave rise to at least some of 
the confusion which besets the carly phoneticians, 
The problem of anusedra has been considered at some length; 
for whilst it is in itself disappointingly unrewarding, it serves to 
demonstrate how little we might know if our sources had been 
equally imprecise on other points. In view of their generally high 
standard of competence it scems fair to assume that the phonetic 
problem in question was-a particularly difficult one, complicated 
perhaps by multiple contextual, dialectal, and personal fluctua- 
tian. Lf we were to:seek an attested feature of a modern language 
such as might give rise to uncertainties of a similar order, if not of 
type, it might perhaps be found in the Japanese so-called ‘syllabic 
nasal’ (q),? which has so strangely received special recognition 
‘amongst the otherwise general phonetic categories of the Inter- 
national Phonetic Alphabet. 


1.13. Tie Vargas 

With regard to the three extra-buccal articulatory processes dis- 
cussed above (glottal, pulmonic, nasal) it should finally be remarked 
that their combination with the intra-buccal process of maximal 
closure eres rise toa set of five sales letters for cach of the five 


relate laniiode a Is enditie veleut iq que l'amumdidha.’ 


the description of anurodra, it may be valutary to compare the diversity of 
Sree secre are aie in. question; the following may be 
to; 

H. Frei, Bull. deta Matron Franco-Japommier, vitt. i. 137, 

H. E. Palmer, The Principle: of Romanization, p. 111. 

re Eanarda, Erode Ath cael fexpiauel 

fuytee a fonguc if, 1. 

MG, Man, The Pronunciation of Japanese, § 23.18. me 

P. M, Sunk, The Phonetics of Fopanere Loguage, pp. 31 ff. 

B. mages ‘Studies in Colloquial Jepan Japanese IV (Phonemics)’, Language, xxvi, 
1950, p. 1 

5. E. Natta, Morphophonemics of Standard Colloguial Yapanee (Language 
Dinertatien No. <7), pp. iz ft, 

Whilst not implying adverse criticiem of all thease statements, we may wonder 
whether linguists m @ distant future, reading wach Various accounte—ranging 
from ‘semi-consonne ou semi-voyelle’ to 'yoiced frictionless mediovelar spirant’ 
—will have any clearer an idea regarding the phonetic value of the Japanese 
syllabic nasal’ than we heve regarding that af the Sanskrit entndra, 


PROCESSES 47 
places of articulation—t.g. for the velars k, kh, ¢, gh, 9. Each 
such set is known as a earga, ‘class’, the members of which are 
sometimes referred to by number as follows: 


Voiceless non-aspirate— rst." ( prathama) 
» aspirate = —‘and." (dvitiya) 
Voiced non-aspirate —3rd." (i7iya) 
» aspirate —"4th." (caturtia) 
Nasal —'sth,’ (faticama) or "last’ (1ittama), 


In the table on p, 20 the block of 5 by 5 cargtya letters is enclosed 
within the heavy line. 


- PART II 
LETTERS 
2.0. Consonants 


Ir isthe Indian practice to describe the p lnces of articulation in the 
reverse order to that of the IPA, Quite logically they begin with 
those which are nearest to the origin of the air-stream and work 
progressively upwards and forwards towards the lips. 


2.00. Pulmonic and Glottal 

Thus the first organs to be considered are the lungs, which are 
treated as the place of articulation for the voiced h [A] and voice- 
less -h. ‘This treatment, however, is optional; most of the treatises. 
also allow these sounds to be classed as ‘glottal fricatives'—a term 
which is still commonly accepted today, though in need of revision 
(the Greek term ‘breathing’ (+vedj:c) might be more appropriate). : 
The following statements illustrate the alternative prescriptions: 


“The fricatives bh and -h are glottal (kanjfhya); or, as some say, pulmonic. 
(uranya).* 

Bb and -h ore glotml; the lutter may alternatively be considered as 
pulmonic.? 
Certain of our authors allow the pulmonic alternative only in the 
case of h followed by nasals or semivowels: 

bh before nasals and semivowels is to Soe considered aa pulmonic; other- 
wise it ia glottal." 


" Particularly in view ofits frequent prosodic function (the Greek evrfpe is 2 
Ppeepaia); cf J. RB. Firth, TPS, 1948, po 131. 
‘RP t. 39-49. prethama-padiramau ca dod iipmaquim (sc. hantiryeu): hecid etd 


Bros, 
” LEAS Alb donptle: surasi tasnjaniyo tad. 


* PS 16 

hakiras pafiramar yubtam antahathdbha ca sarmeyutar 

aurora ton wypdniydt henthyam dhe oreyutam. 
Cf, Sareasammara-8, 42. 

siaralpcadteisa ATs gmat mahi 

wifimeye Pareye era . 7 
a ee but it is to be noted that for ane 


. : emai frelevunt (kin. tte, kif yah, i= 
Semsthas 5:1as Wllotth 5 c:h te cotuidacod ob pease sereocr tesa ol 


LETTERS sf 


We have already suggested that Sanskrit h [fi] might be con- 
sidered as an ‘overblowing’ of the following vowel; the ont 
relationship of both h and -h to their vocalic context is ‘mentioned 
by the TP: 

For bh and -h the glottis 1 the place of articulation; but in the opinion 


of some authorities h is homorganic with the beginning of the followtin 
vowel, and -h is homerganic with the end of the preceding vowel.’ 


Whitney's observations are for once entircly sympathetic; 
with reference to the pulmonic nature of these sounds he says, 

The authority who called the aspirations chest-sounds may also be 
commended for hit actiteriess, since in their production it may even be 


miid ‘that thi throat has no-past: it is only, like the mouth, the avenue by 
which the breath expelled from the cheat finds exit;? 


elsewhere he shows himself to be in agreement with the view that 
they are homorganic with their vocalic context: 

Why, then, shall we pronounce the larynx the ‘characteristic place of 
production’ of A, any more than of the vowels? ... An Ais a sound which 
it produced in any one of these sume positions of the mouth-organs 
(sc. a3 for the vowels), but with the vocal corda in the larynx only slightly 
LpnTrTiache 4.4 


The RP rather surprisingly lists this homerganic realization 
amongst the ‘faults’ in chap, xiv;! but Uvata quotes another com- 
mentator who considers this statement to be out of place, and who 
prefers to treat itas a rule rather than a prohibition— for not even 
the gods could pronounce it in any other manner’ !* 

“This will be a convenient point to give some account of various 


teathiness (cf. HSOAS xiii. 944 f,), the realization of which may occor aimal- 
tansounly- wish that of the phanematic unite, It is perhaps this peculimrity thut 
oUF treatises inferki to imdicate. 

fh flr, deepphet-ethdiencess hinkebra~esisceryeaniyann : ucdeeyer-roarraii- can thalen ho hade 
thepim: frirtidnta-rarthdne tirarjaniyah. Aa the Tribhdgyaratna expresses. it, 
they have no articulator of their own (enayok Aoriedthdoah). Ci. Sweet, NEG I, 
$237; D. Jones, Outline of Engtish Phonetics’, $§ 777 #.; Broch, Slariiche Phone. 


“2 On AP i. rg. 

1 canhot agree with Fry (Long. xvi. 199) when he states; "The use of the 
ee OS . does not appear to be more than a hary atternpt to localize 

Open aspirants representing A in paws. 

" 40S vill, g50. CED, Jones, op. cil, p. £3). 2; H. Abrahams, Etudes 
espe nln Tendances Bolutives det Ocelusivea Gernaniqué, ps rox. 


Ziv, 30. 
myvd-cthéne . .. depair apt met dahkya wetdroyitunn, 
mh cts . 


AN 

zo PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 334. 
problems connected with -h. This voiceless breathing primarily 
occurs only in final position mt pawsa, where historically it replaces 
*s (or less frequently *r).' Corresponding to -h im pausa, there 
appeared i if junction with initial voiceless consonants the appro- 
priate homorganic fricatives (viz. -x, -J, -g, -8, -p),7 Three of 
these fricatives, j , 8, 3, occur also in initial and medial positions, 
Where they are in parallel distribution and qualify as separate 
phonematic units, which consequently find their place amongst the 
other ‘letters of the alphabet’. -x and -¢, however, as also -h, are 
‘(a)yogavatha’ (cf. c.42 above), i.c. they are bound to final position, 
and are in complementary distribution (-x before velars, -) before 
labials, and -h mpausa). ‘This alternation is understandable enough, 
and it is impossible to agree with Whitney's evaluation of -x 
and =: 

Tt-may be fairly questioned, perhaps, whether these two sounds are not 
Pure grammatical abstractions.’ 

Since these variants are not included in the alphabet, special 
names are devised for them, viz. vfsarjantya(or later visarga) for -h, 

iipamiltya for -X, and upadhméniya for -). The last two terms 
provide no difficulty: surcamuiliya, lit. “formed at the root of the 
tongue’, is the general term for ‘velar’, and upadimdniya means 
literally ‘blowing upon'—the consecrated description of the voice- 
less bilabial fricative.’ The term for -h is not so readily explicable 
—a fact which is refleeted in Monier-Williama’s dictionary: 

eis called Visarjaniva cither from its liability to be ‘rejected’ or from 


ite being pronounced with a full ‘emission’ of breath, or from its usually 
appeanng at the ‘end’ of a word of sentence. 


The verb from which the word is derived (ey-s7j-) has meanings of 
the type translatable by ‘to discharge, relax, cast off’, &c.. We shall 


' CL e.g. Sharmah beside Gl. @eaudc, antah bealde Lat inter. 
* AP iL, 40, vinejaniyasya para-carthdine “phope, 
RP iv, at aghoge .. . copmdmem sparia uttare tatithdnam . . . tam evag- 
RT +77. sed Wines (Comm. dead ca para-rathdaum dpadyute). 
TP ix, 2. oghopa-pares tanya sosthdnan digmdnam. 
VP al 6-ta. 
| Ski. Gr., $69. Ch on AP i. go, “The division of this indistinct and tn- 
diftaine soond mito three bonds of indehniteness savore strongly of over refine- 
ment of analysis.” 
For other sceptics see note by Fry, op. cit. p. 1 
"eg. D. Jones, op. cit., § Gas, ‘One form of te sound made in blowing 
out a candle.” Cf. Sapir, Language, i, 37 1% 


LETTERS st 
perhaps be giving the most direct and phonetically appropriate 
translation if we render it by ‘off-plide’, as referring to the breathy 
transition from the vowel to silence. 

In later, though still ancient, times there appears to have been 
a tendency for -h to extend its usage to contexts other than i 
pause. “The earliest of these extensions was to the position before 
the Pee fricatives f-, p-, 5-, where it replaced the homorganic 
final -f, -s, -5 (indraf fuurah>indrah Juurah, &c.).' This 
practice was then extended to the position before the velar a 
labial voiceless stops: in connexion with this innovation we find 
mentioned the names of Agnivedya, Valmiki, Sakalya, and the 
Midbyandina school, whilst the ancient grammarian Sakatdyana* 
is gk as holding to the more conservative practice.’ | 
‘These changes have been generally accepted so far as the writing 
of Sanskrit is concerned, and A. H, Fry in his article ‘A Phonemic 
Interpretation of Visarga’* has suggested that the spread of -h was 
iiue to the writers of Classical Sanskrit ‘operating with 2 phonemic 
orthography’, Though the term ‘orthography’ once again begs the 
vexed question of writing, it is possible that this extension had a 
phonological rather than a phonetic basis; but in this matter we 
are faced with similar uncertainties to those which enshroud the 
extension of anusedra at the expense of the homorganic nasals. 


. Kedar 

ite velar series (ha-varga) i is most generally described as being 
produced at the piwd-milla, ‘root of the tongue’, which ts, strictly 
speaking, an articulator and not a place of articulation: the sthana 
of this series is in fact the hamu-mila’ or ‘root of the(upper) jaw'—a 
rather inadequate though intelligible designation of the soft palate— 

In the &-series contact ia made by the root of the tongue at the root of 
the jaw.* 
Seceest the velar consonants is also mentioned the velar fricative 
fya),? to which reference has already been made. 


"Ch TP i §: FP iil. to: Pde vin, iii, 36. 
4 Nor to be confused with the ninth-century author of the Sdkafdyana- b*yi- 
ans. 
ce TP ina: FP tik, t—ta. * Lenpuage, xvil. 194 fF, 
' CL AP i. 20. jiiminoilipdnn homu-meillam. 
. _ TP ti. ys, hunu-mriile jiieei-milfena ka-corpe ipariayati. Cf. VP i. 83. 
eg. VP i. 65; RPi, at; RT 4. For the general term ‘velar’ the ap, S, uses 
filteya, ‘lingual’ instead Of the costal jrAeenallty at. 


7859 


52. PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 

The Indian term ‘root of the tongue’ has found favour with a 
number of Western phoneticians, amongst them Sweet! and Pike.* 

It has to be mentioned that in the later Pininean scheme, as 
reflected, for example, in the Siddhanta- Kaumudt, the pulmonic 
breathings (alias “glottal fricatives’) are classed with the k-series,’ 
the whole group being referred to as ‘glottal’ (Aanthya),* The 
unequivocal name of the fricative fhedmuiliya preserves it from this 
confusion.®: 


2.02. Palatal 

No difficulty ts provided by the descriptions of the c-serics, 
which at the period described by our treatises appear atill to have 
been true palatal plosives rather than prepalatal affricates such as 
are general in modern Indian pronpncitioca. They are described 
as being articulated ‘at the palate (ta/u)'2’ mare specifically, 


In the C-series contact is made with the middle of the tongue upon the 
palute. 


2.03. Retroflex 

We have seen that the retrofiex series involves a special process 
rather than a place of articulation. Since, however, the Indian 
scheme treats this series as parallel to the other wargas, and next 
in order after the palatals, it will be appropriate to consider it at 
this point. Though the term for “retroflexed’ (prativestita) is well 
attested in the descriptions given by our treatises, the general term 
for the retroflex series, employed by both grammarians and 
phoneticians, is svirdhanya, an adjective derived from mirdhan, 
“head’—e.¢. 


Por the miirdhamyas the articulator is the tip of the tongue retrollexed ? 
In the (-series contact is made with the tip of the tongue-rofled back 
int the eur ; brcgay 2” 


Primer, § 73: cH, pp. r2of, 
' SK ro. aku-ha-visarjanivdndin haythah. Chae SL Lo. 
. in thie imprecec usage kaggkya is perhaps best rendered by the equally 


‘wuttural’, 
‘eK 10, pilimifiyarye: filed-miilam 
"See aly Grierson, FRAS, 1913, pp. ‘yor 
Tog. FP i 66; RT's. 
OTP ii: 76 tilau jiiod-madkyena ca-varge. Cf, AP iar; FP i yo, 
* AP i, 23. enirdhenydndm jilexigrom protivestitam. Cf. VP i <8. 
“TP i. 37. lbedgrega pratroyjya rvirdhand pa-parge. 


‘LETTERS 53 
Commenting on the latter statement, the Tribhdsyaratna says, 
Ty ise wooed earthed te wears ie upper part of the buccal cavity; 


But there is no evidence that the word was ever used in this special 
sense, and comparisons by modern commentators with Greek 
ovparos= (lit. “(vault of) Heenan thence applied to ‘roof of the 
mouth’) are hardly relevant. Mirdhan means simply ‘head’ or 
‘summit’,? and the Indian terminology is reflected in the still not 
entirely bbsoléte terms ‘cerebral’ and ‘cacuminal'’.* The term is in 
fact unusually imprecise, and Whitney is probably right in aug” 
gesting that it represents a traditional title surviving from a 

when phonetic science was less well developed! (cf. also the term 
tigman for the fricatives—t1.1t1 above). From the historical stand- 
point the retrofex sounds are relative late-comers into Indo-Aryan 
and they consequently occupy a peculiar place in the phonological 
system ;* they are thus likely to have attracted attention even at a 
period when specialist phonetic analysis was unknown, and the 
terminology, like that of Latin in the west, is likely to have per- 
sisted into a period of more precise description, 

In connexion with the role of the tongue in the retrofiex series, 
the Ap. 8. makes the. remarkably acute observation that the contact 
is made not with the tip but ‘with the part next to the tip, or the 
under-side of the tip’.? 

Functioning phonologically as a member of the retroflex series 
we have also the semivowel r; on the phonetic value of this letter, 
however, widely diverse accounts are given,” ultimately depending 
perhaps on dialectal variation. The same applies to the vowel r, 
which will therefore be most conveniently considered in connexion 
with the semivowel. 

The retroflex pronunciation of both semivowel and vowel is in 


* nvdha-iabdena vaktra-croaropari-bhdgo weaksyate, 
= CR Max Milller on ALP 44. 
* The PS (13), oi ac Aiea at sd sebonean, lao uses. the term dius in place of 


‘ CE. Pike, op: cit., p: 123. 

* On AP i 23, TP ii. 37. 

tl «3 tlso Jukobeon, Proc. ard Int. Cong. Phon. Sc, p. 40. 

* te 67. jihwopdgrena. miirdhanyiindten: jikoitgrddhahkaragam ed, Cf J, Ri 
Firth Ia Hasiey, op. ci, p. xix: “The Indiun { js not made with the tip in the 
English manner, but with the very edge or rim of the tip, which w slightly 
curled back to make thi this possible’, See alto BSOAS xii, 359, 

* Ci Varma, op. cit., pp. 6 ff 


54 PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 


fact prescribed by the PS,' but is exceptional clsewhere* The 
Pratisakhyas generally require an alveolar articulation’ (which 
agrees with the present pronunciation of Sanskrit and the general 
practice of the modern Indo-Aryan languages). 

The AP, VP, and RT refer to the alveolar position by the term 
danta-nrila, ‘root(s) of the teeth’ ," a name which has beenemployed 
also by Sweet." A slight difficulty is caused by the fact that some 
of the treatises refer to the dental series by this same term; in such 
cases, however, the reference is to the junction of the teeth with 
the gums (Sweet's ‘rim’),° and the alveolar position of r is then 
clearly distinguished by a further description, e-g. 

For r contact ts made by the centre of the tongue-tip behind (pratyak) 
the routs of the teeth," 


the word pratyah being further interpreted by the Tribhdsyaratna 
a8 meaning ‘within and above',* Certain authorities quoted by the 
RP also refer to r 28 “varitya’,” a hapax glossed by Uvata as denot- 
ing ‘the projection behind the roots of the teeth’,'® Le. the alveolar 
arch," 

The prescription of alveolar articulation corresponds well with 
the name repia interpreted as ‘tearing sound’ (see 0.42 above), in 
that a rolled rsuch as this seems to imply could hardly be retro- 
flex ;** excessive rolling, however, is listed as a fault bythe RP." and 
Uvata refers to this type of pronunciation as “indelicate’.“ Two 
treatises, the RP and the KT, treat r as dental, but mention the 
alveolar pronunciation as an alternative." 

oar fer mfirdhatd f-fiera-palt. 
pb. 8.1 13. pe fiera-pf sindhonvdh, but 14 ro danta-onile-1thdnom ehegden, 
1 CE AP i. 28; TP il ga; PP i. 68. 
* AP i; 38, ptt ick tb ate VP i. 68, ro denta-mides AT 6, 

* Primer, p. 8 

* (bid, (Sweet’ 4 terminelogy distinguishes this ‘rim’ from the ‘edgee"). 

iv Pa. 4. rephe fiedgra-madhyena pratyag danta-miledliyah. 

" pratyoy tty abhyantara wpari-bhdga ity arthah. 

* ob 46. eephoon vartryom ake. 

! portsa-tabdena danta-«mildd upanzgidd wechninah pradeia ucyate, 

Efe special term is required tw translate matey, ‘gingival’ might be appro- 

, Pike, op. cit, p. taa;". . . alveoler arch (which might with more 

justice be called! the gingival one, sinc the cantact ie made againet the gum, not 
the bone .. .)°{ Moomfiehd, Lomawnes. 1. 

“t "The fricative nature of the reetiniee Tw clearly indicated we Its. Ps iblninninns 
Lal in the sandhi *sarvalg-+-gunalh = parvair guraih, &c 

xiv. zh: afi parso bear bocar cated ta i tie 
- bearburutilpy 
WORE i. 4-463 RY 7-5 (dante ta telah: repho mulls od), 


LETTERS 53 


The disagreements on the pronunciation of rare duly noted by 
Uvapa: 

Some schools pronounce fF as a ‘cerebral’, some as an alveolar.’ 

As regards the vowel f, an alveolar pronunciation is suggested 
by the 7'P in a passage which reads: 

In fund ry... the tip of the tongue is approximated to the "harsvas’.* 


The Trihhasyaraina interprets the “barseas’ aa referring to ‘the 
elevations behind the row of teeth’? which i# reminiscent of its 
commenit on the semivowel r (sec above). Other treatises, however, 
agree in allotting ¢ to the velar class;* this preseniption is prob- 
lematic, and ts applied by at least one author also to |.$ ‘The latter 
appears only in the single root k]p-, and it has been suggested that 
in such a phonetic context } is likely to have been articulated with 
‘dark’ resonance, and that it ts this which has caused it to be classed 
as velar® (cf. on consonantal 1, 2.04 below). But no such arguments 
apply to yr, and indeed the Middle Indian developments point 
rather to a palatal resonance for both vowels.7 It is in any case 
diticult to believe that the Indians would have classified these 
sounds by their secondary rather than their primary articulations. 
It is just possible that in connexion with F we should interpret 
jileamailtya as “avular’ rather than ‘velar’; it is only strange that 
we have no such description of the semivowel Tr, except in so far 
as it 1s mentioned amongst:a list of alternatives by the Varpa- 
patalam.* 

In the retroflex series there remains only a peculiarity connected 


On RP i, iL Rasyuim sctichedyires repho mirdheryilt kaxysiay dantanmiliva iti. 


1 hanege ot danta-parnhter wpangtdd wcca-pradeiege tty arthah. 
' CL VP i 6s. vbhana jébedh-mtle; RT 4. jihvd-mille b kp: RP i. 41. 
eo Lt. Sopstay Ged athe paztha apd pAodonilivds prathamat a vargal, 
P| i, 2 
eg. kilitta < hipta, koa < dria, injeit < pei The Prakrit grammnarians 
tne a development to a, but thin iw largely a Mahirigtri peculiarity (e.g. 
hog << phrta: cf. Hemacandrn i. 126, and Pischel, $ 49 £.), The development 
too (ao eg. MM. ethes < bApta) i generally exsociated with a labial contest. 
There ix, however, comiderable fluctuation, and Bloch, L'/nlo-Aryen, 36, 
ROCs ao far ae to remark; "La colorstian de la vovelic est imprévisibic.” For 
CRANE Sane a Oe for a (Ptschel, § 58). 
a. §. 
Ticiwis-tntite tu rephah add danta-miilepu vd puna 
pratyay ed danta-milebhyo moirdhanva oi odpare. 


56 PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 

with the frieative g. In the Pratijia Stra we find the ‘state- 
Alone or combined with consonants (other than retroflex), § iv to be 

Pronounced as kh,’ 

a statement which is repeated in a mimber of the later Siksis.? 

This pronunciation of g is common in Sanskrit loan-words in some. 

of the modern languages (e.g. Hindi dokh beside Skt. doga), and 

is traditional in Yajurvedic recitation.’ ‘There is, however, no 

mention of such a pronunciation in the earlier treatises.4 


2.04. Dental 

The dentals are unequivocally described as being produced ‘at 
the teeth’? or ‘at the rim of the teeth’." The VP and AP go on to 
specify the tip of the tongue az articulator,’ the latter work further 
stating that the tip is ‘prastirza’,* a word which is most naturally 
translated by ‘spread, flat’ (not, as Whitney, ‘thrust forward’)—a 
characteristic feature of dental articulation.’ The RP, however, 
disapproves of excessive tongue-spreading in any of the stop series, 

lia generally treated as the semivowel associated with the dental 
class, and most of the treatises prescribe a dental realization. The 
RP includes in its list of faults an articulation ‘with both ends of 
the tongue’ ;"! on this rather strange statement Uvata is not illu- 
minting; and although the word anta may also mean ‘side’,!? Max 
Miiller’s “mit den Seiten der Zunge’ is phonetically unacceptable 
unless the reference js to opening and not contact*? (Le. bilateral as 

‘a4. atho mirdhanyopmape ‘samyuktana tom pte semyuktatva ca khakidroc- 


* Cf. Varma, op. cit., pp, 34 £ 

* Cf, Grierson, Modern Indo-Aryan Vernaculars, p. 58. 
nuncition aa velar fricetrye [x]; cf. Sachau, ‘Indo-Arabische Studien’ (Phil. w. 
Het. Ab d, Kies. Akod d. Wis. 2. Berlin, 1888), pp. 12 6, and Alberam’s 
india, trsl, Sechau, i. 399 (cf. ti, 188); see further 5. K. Chatterji, Al-brum 
Comme, Mel., p, ot; Indian Linguistics, vil. 4, po thr. 


‘og. VP i. 6g: RT. | "RPL aa: TP ii, 38, 
’ EP i. 76. daniyd jiledgra-haramih; AP 1, 24, 
* dant ydmdi stiwdgram prastinnsm, 


* CE J. R. Firth in ‘Gralume-Hailey, Teach Yourself Hindustani, p. xviii, 
". «= ia produced with « fat tongue apread out... ," 

7 RIV. 21. corgeyy sited-prathanam catury (Uvata: prveeadvaiy pret homer cule 
68 


"xiv. a7. jikodntdbindm ca vacanum lakdve, 
™ CEL TP ii. 40. 
MOC, the description of [0] aa rphya-uthdine (2.05 below), 


LETTERS 5? 


against unilateral articulation). The RP’s disapproval is perhaps 
directed against the secondary back-raising mentioned above, 
which would produce velar resonance or ‘dark I° [#], the typical 
Indian | being of clear quality. 

The vowel ] is also generally said to be dental; a statement pre- 
scribing velar articulation has already been referred to, and an 
alveolar articulation is required by the TP.' 


2.05. Labial 

The labial stops and the upadhméntya fricative are described as 
being produced with the two lips,* or simply as‘at the lip’) ie. at 
the upper lip as sfhima. For the semivowel v, which is regularly 
associated with the labial series, and which has a close phonological 
relationship with the lip-rounded vowel u, further observations 
are necessary. For whilst its earlier pronunciation was doubtless 
asa bilabial [w], it had by the time of our treatises acquired, at 
least in some dialects, the labio-dental articulation [v] which is 
typical of many modern Indo-Aryan languages—'The learned’, 
days the PS, ‘declarey to be labio-dental."* For [v] only the middle 
of the lower lip is in contact with the teeth, and the observation 
quoted by the Ap. S., that it is formed ‘at the corners of the 
mouth’,* is hence not inappropriate.* 


2.1. Votwels 
2.10, a. 

In the discussions of the vowel-system considerable interest 
attaches to the first letter of the varna-samamnaya, a. Mention has 
already been made of the tendency to group the long and short 
vowels into pairs designated by a single term, i and ii, for example, 
being referred to as -carna, ‘i-colour or quality’. In the case of 
i/ti and u/uu it would appear from the phoneticians’ accounts that 
there was no great divergence of quality as between the short and 
the long vowels.? Phonologically parallel to the pairs Hil and ujuu 

" ihe a8, * TP ii: 39. off wa Danryge. 

* VPi, 7. w-tob-pd othe: RT 9, we 

18. - dantyorthyo veh smpto budhath. Cf. TPik 44; VPP i. 82. 

. * 6-14, talsiro a capeva-sthdnam eke, 

* CLD. Jones, Outline, 4 603: “Indians generally replace v by a frictionless 
contingant 0 in which the lower lip touches the centre front teeth lightly and is 


 beld as to allow the air to escape chielly at the sides’ (with Fig. GO), 
" But cf, Bloch, L'mdo- Aryen, p. 33- 


58 PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 
is the pair afaa ; but it is evident from the ancient descriptions that 
the members of this pair differed considerably not only in length 
(Rala-bhinna) but also in their quality or “degree of openness’ 
(eivara-bhinna)}—in the modern languages in fact the distinction is 
more generally maintained by the qualitative than by the quantita- 
tive difference,’ aa is generally recognized by our texts as the most 
open (esrrta) vowel, whilst a is referred to aa relatively closer 
(samvyia) But the advantages of treating a and aa as members of 
a qualitative pair are, as Panini realized, considerable: on this treat- 
ment depends, for example, the rule that, 

When «short vowel is followed by = similar vowel, the correspanding 
long vowel jy substituted for them,’ 


$0 that parallel to junctions of the type yadi+ iechet = yadiicchet 
and saadhu--uktam = saadhuuktam the mile is capable of 
embracing, ¢.g. na—+asti = naasti, &c. Then, having based his 
phonological statements on the fiction of identical quality, Panini 
cancels out the error by the phonetic admission of his famous last 
aphorism, ‘da’, Le. 

The short a, which has for phonological purposes been treated as of 
identical quality with the long aa, is phonetically closer.‘ 

This simple though ingenious device of Panini's has given rise 
to.a spate of involved and for the most part unedifying controversy; 
a lengthy discussion is found at the beginning of the JMA., but 
perhaps all that really need be said has: been said in the varttike 
with which the discussion opens— 

. The treatmnnt of @ a open hea as ite purpose the inclusion of aa 
(se. a8 the long member of the ‘a-varna’).! 

Even from the phonetic point of view, however, a and aa are 

sufficiently similar to be considered under a single articulatory 


* See Ji R. Firth, Proc. amd Int. Cong, Phom. Se,, p. 179; cf. Bloch, op. cit., 
pe of. 
1 eg. APL 39-36; PP i 2. soperyonac ca (U vate: abtrarya mdtrikarya div 


Fea 9 the brevity af the original might be preserved by o rendering such 
‘+. 2, on Pap,, Sie. Si. 1 (Kiclhorn, & 15). akelr orton ) 
ahondrehal - 5 Baty tityptopadea dhdra- 


LETTERS 39 
heading, viz, a8 hanthya, ‘glottal’—a term which has already been 
used in connexion with the voiced and voiceless ‘breathings'— 


a is plottal" 

4 and bh are glottal 

a, h, and -b are formed at the glottia.’ 

To class the open vowels as ‘glottal’ appears at first sight an 
indefensible procedure. It becomes less so when we perceive the 
conceptual framework underlying these statements. It will be 
remembered that the 7P referred to a ‘neutral’ position of the 
articulatory organs, in which 
Phe Pecan ie extended and depressed, and the lips are in the position 

or 


The classification of a as glottal begins to make sense if we assume 
that it was viewed asa ‘neutral’ vowel in the sense of involving no 
special intra-buccal articulatory effort. Such an assumption is 
fully supported by a statement in the Mahdhhasya: 

The place of articulation of the a-vowels i extra-buceal: or, us some 
would have it, it is the whole mouth" 

In other words a has no specific intra-buceal sthdna or karana: as 
with h and -h, it is a case of karandbhava (cf. p. 49, n. 1). 

From this recognition we may proceed to the peculiar doctrine 
mentioned by the RP, in itself inexplicable,’ that all the vowels.are 
to be pronounced with the ‘articulatory condition’ (Aarenavastha) 
of a.2 This statement also becomes phonetically meaningful if a 
is interpreted as ‘vocalic neutrality’ or ‘unmodified voice’, an which 
are superimposed the vowel-articulations involving various degrees 
of tongue-raising.” 


’ RP 1. 38. kantiryo "ketrah. * PS 19. kantlepdo o-hau. 

' FP i. 71. e-ha-viterjentydh hanthe. Cf. comm. on AP i, 19. 

* Seer. 163, 

' Cf Sievers, Gr. d. Lawtphpriclogie, p. 332 "Bei a ist der Muniteanal durch- 
on gedfinet; die Zunge entfert sich nicht viel aua ihrer Indiffer- 


* tL 4, on Pax. 1.1, 9 (Kiethorn, i. be Sara ate ae oa eee 
tarva-mukha-ithinam avargam eka iechanti. C f Ap. S. is 11. 
, Cf, Max Muller (on 823), *... sehr peel oh cu ecin echeinen," 
* xiv. Gs. ahufrarya harandvasthaydnydn svardn britydt, Cf. 66, 

* The statement is of course nonsensical if Agramérarthd is simply interpreted 
as referring to the tongue-position; but the use of the term wturtid (not sthdna), 
a word otherwise unattested in the phonetoc literature, i some guarantee of the 

apecia! nature of the reference. CEM. Wallaser, 2// y..193 ff 


fo PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 


We are now in a position to understand a third problematic 
doctrine referred to the RP, viz. 

Seame say that the voice of the voiced consonants consists of a." 
“This last statement enables us to trace a consistent thread running 
through the series of apparently eccentric aphorisms, and to relate 
them precisely to the descriptive framework of the other ‘glottal’ 

(a) -h is considered as “pure breath’, liable to modification by 
the close vowels,? and capable either of independent function 
(= viarjanfya) or of providing the appropriate air-stream 
for the voiceless consonants.’ 

(4) h is considered as “breath+-voice’,* liable to modificatian by 
the close vowels? and capable either of independent func- 
tion (= hakdra) or of providing the appropriate air-stream 
for the voiced aspirates, 

(c¢) @ is considered as ‘pure voice’, liable to modification by the 
close vowels, and capable either of independent function 
(= averna) or of providing the appropriate air-stream for 
the voiced consonants. 

Artificial a3 such a descriptive basis may appear, it is in fact not so 
very remote from some statements of the most recent branch of 
phonetic analysis, “acoustic phonetics’; the following may be 
quoted for comparison: 

We therefore discuss vowel production on the hypothesta that the 
glottis emits a spectrum that ia independent of supra-glottal articulation, 
snd that the filtering which determines the ultimate vowel spectrum i4 
‘independent of the glottal adjustment; that is, the original production 
and the articulatory modification of the glottal tone are entirely indepen- 
dent of cach other, The spectrum of the vowel as it exists in the- open 


sir is to be reckoned, then, 'ss the glottal spectrim. multiplied for each 
frequency by the trimemisaion percentage of the articulatory fileer.* 


Two thousand years and more before the sound-spectrograph, 
‘a-sound’ was not an unreasonable substitute for the fiction of 2 


pure “glottal spectrum’.® 


Y widl, 2g. dim ghopam ghopavatdm akdram rhe... 
e Ch TP ii. 47-48 (eee 2.00 above). 
(Ch APL 125 AP sill, of: TP 2-10 (nee 1.20 above). 
" Sec 1.20 shove. * M. Joos, Aemiutic Phonetics, p. 19. 
* For disceesinn of the concept of a8 the ‘natural vowel!" or ‘princepa vocalium”™ 
ser Sievers, Phen, H1g7 ff ; cf ales Jakobson in ‘Trubetskoy, Principe, p. 376; 


LETTERS he 
With regard to a it remains only to mention that in later treatises, 
owing to the extension of the term kanjhya (see 2.01 above), a 
(like hand -h) is grouped with the velar series,’ thus adding con- 
siderably to the symmetry of the tarna-ramamndya at the expense 
of phonetic precision. 


2.11. 1, B 

The close front quality i is appropriately classified as ‘palatal 
(talavya),* and the TP says more specifically, | 

For t-quality the middle of the tongue is approximated to the palate." 

The close back quality u is classified by the lip- rather than the 
tongue-position, viz. as ‘labial’ (osfhya);* the shape of the lips is 
variously referred to as.‘approximated’, i.e. rounded,* or as ‘long’, 
Le. protruded." 


2.12: F, 1 

As to the pronunciation of the vocalic ¢ and }, the ancient state- 
ments are perhaps not as clear as we could wish, but their general 
trend is easily followed. Their places of articulation have already 
been discussed above. In distinction from the other vowels they 
are referred to as -‘mixed',’ ic. combining features of vowel! and 


Brondal, Proc. trd Jet, Come. Phow, Se, pp. 49 fh; TCLP vi. 62 In the 
sy tear al A is the “pocalis indifferens' (soe M, Heepe, Lawtsrichen, 
p. &). 

Cf, further Millet's observations on the role of the pharyngal resonator and its 
timbre—L' Articufation des poyeller, P. a: "Nous considérona la bouche . . - 
comme Je générateur efficace, |e résonateur déterminant de ly résonance 
vocalique; In cavité pharyngienne donne son timbre & la voir seulement qui 
enveloppe celui de la voyelle’; and Frode experimentale de la formation dee 
teyeller, p. 68: “Tl n'est pas de timbre de voyelle qui ne soit accompagnée du 
timbre de le vor." Allowing for the fact that the Incdiate seem not to have 
differentiated pharynx and larynx, we may say that their conception of i waa, 
in Millet's terminology, that of a pharyngal timbre without buccal determmation, 

We muy here note that a wimilar device was adopted in Indin with reference 
to nasality, anusedra berg treated as ‘pure nasaliry’, forming the baer of all 
nasal arunds (RP siti. as. .... anurdram enundiihdndin). 

" E.g. Siddh, Koeewm. 10 (cf. 2.01 above). Some authorities even gave to if 
the tithe fikeya, which means specifically ‘velar’ (nee Ap, S. i. 10). 

1 sPS a7 f~cn-yids tdlewydh Ch. Sweet, Primer, § 33. 

"ik 33. tdlaw prhed-madiyam wwarne, 


62 PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 


‘consonant (r/l);" for this reason some writers even refused to 
admit them to the vowel-system,* There is general agreement that 
their phonetic structure is of the type: consonantal element—vocalic 
element—consonantal element: 

F contains T (ax also does the first half of rr)... and the r is in the 
middle? 

The characteristic of F is that it i compounded of four segments; of 
these the first and Jast are vocalic, whilst the central pair are consonantal, 

viz. particles of r- 
in this connexion it is of interest to compare such Avestan parallels 
as poradu beside Skt. prthu, /erap- beside k]p-.£ Asto the quality 
of the vocalic element, the PP states that ¢ and | consist of r and | 
blended into one unit with the vowel a.* 

Regarding the method of combining the vocalic and consonantal 
elements we may note as:an example of picturesqueness rather than 
iumination the statements quoted by the commentary on the AP, 
which declare that they are connected 
like a-nail on the finger, or @ pearl on a string, of a: worm in the grass.” 


2.13. €, 0; ai, au 

fy will be conventent to consider im conjunction the gua and 
tpddii* vowels efo and al/au, The latter, as the transcription sug- 
gests, are diphthongs and are regularly so described: the former 
also were historically diphthongal® and continued to function as 
such for certain phonological purposes (c.g. vijnaaya+idam — 
vijnaayedam). But there are indications that whereas the phono- 


ee OEE th Fie ae ranupryia-repham earn , . tilakdrom fvarnam. 
_pevernaa}t. 


snopes 
OE tealoaik ce RID. 1 i. 4, G0 Pag 6. i. go. ampe tu fpat-spppfa-koranetedd 
em rary ca Papa lovey fdhApidin toyor psencap anacicam dah, 
44 ao “sty phdre oo pararya edrdhe ¢... madhye ef, 
APi. 38. dirgha-plutayoh pared wudrrd), cl rent 
Ym armani 19. ki ties 
rédrana coaripom tom pdda-catuitayam 
pddepa tems wijfirydy Addn ante roonitmakau 
oni npharya madhye tw viffleveu vvatjandtmakeu, 
" CE alo Pkt. Aititta < kipta, and Diente, ZDMG tai, 835. 
* iv. rg. ~oarne rephua-lakarcu pomilistde a-frufi-dkordy cha-eormnu, For. 
the quality of the vowel in Middle Indian dovkcnsalits Ree 2.03 above. 
1 On AP i. 47. yothtiguiyd mokhem tathd eltre wneamir teety ohe tre Avimir 


Meee aid aboe. 
* Cf. Gk. offa, Av. waddd beside Skt. veda, Ac. 


LETTERS 6 
logical value of e/o was a+-i/u, that of ai/au was once aa+ifu: 
this distinction may be illustrated by junctions of the type 

nagare-+iha — nagara iha 
beside striyai+uktam — striyaa uktam.! 
From the phonetic standpoint e/o are represented at a still com- 
paratively carly period by simple long vowels intermediate in 
quality between na and ii/uu. 

To consider now the ancient descriptions: the term for the diph- 
thongs (including e/o) is samdhy-aksara, ‘compound vowel’, in 
contrast to samanaksara, ‘simple vowel’. ai and au are designated 
respectively ‘glotto-palatal’ and ‘glotto-labial'*—as the IP says, 

In al and au the firat mora is glotral and the second palatal or labial 2 
both the AP‘ and the VP! paint out, however, that 


Although diphthongs are combinations of vowels, they are treated as 
single letters. 

As regards e and o, the PS seems to preserve the tradition of a 
diphthongal pronunciation (distinct from that of ai and au): 

Ine and © the glottal element hes a length of §-mora and in of and au 


I mora; 

the passage continues with the words ‘tayor wieyta-semeptam'’, 
iterally ‘in them there is openness and closeness’, which Ghosh 
interprets as referring to the fact that, in ai and au, ‘their first half 
or the a-element is open and the second half or i- and u-element is 
close’; but it is more probable that the words refer to the open aa 
which forms the first element of ai/au and the closer a which 
forms the first element of the narrower diphthongs e/o.? The 


* Note, however, that the attested sandhi of both a and aa+i/u je e/o (eg. 
a+ tiksate < baulekgate). 
* PS 18, ¢-ai tw happhe-tdlacyd o-~au kagphosthajau emptau. Ct. Ap. §.i. 12-13, 
‘L973. otkdraukdrayoh karthyd pared mdird tdle-opfhayer uttard. Cf. 
RP xii, 48-39, samdhydm! samdhy-akjardwy dhur che dvi-wthdnataitesy tatho- 
Shaver: omdhyepy adeiro '‘ediam thére wtteram yujor whdra in idhatdyonah. 
* 4,40. sandhy-ahgardnl samumpryfe-pargdny eha-vernavad vpttih. 


iv. t45. 

* Gl Reconstructed text, 13, 
amdha-mdird tu honjhyarva tharauhiirayvor bhacet 
andr ror mulird... ; 

* For the distinction of the two vaneties of diphthong one may compare the 
Nepali ‘falling’ type (al/un), where the first clement is considerably the more 
Prominent, and the narrower ay/aw ([ae]/[a0)), with closer and relatively leas 
Prominent eturting-point—c.g. bhalle beside mayle. There is also some 


fy PHONETICS [IN ANCIENT INDIA 


latter interpretation is supported by a passage in the Mohdbhasya, 
where the saqrezta a of efo is specifically contrasted with the more 
open aa of ai/au,' 

The monophthongal pronunciation of é/o seems to be indicated 
by the RP when it says that they are not, like ai/au, heard as a 
distinct sequence, because of the coalescence (samsarga) of their 
parts:* as Uvata goes on to explain, 

One does not observe where the @ ends and the f or u begins, because 
the two coalesce like milk and water,’ 

a type of combination which Kaiyyata, continuing the traditional 
simile, contrasts with the mixture of sand and water," 

There is little in the way of detailed descriptions of the monoph- 
thongal articulation of ef/o. ‘The 7P, however, mentions that for e 
the ips are more spread und for o more rounded than im the case 
of a 3! and the intermediate degree of closure for e (between a and 
i) is stressed by the Tribhapyaratna: 

In @ the raising of the middle of the tongue towards the palate ts legs 
than-in the case of 1, owing to the fact that the former ia mined with a.” 


It will be noted that even where the monophthongal value of e/o 
is phonetically established, the feeling for its phonological equiva- 
lence to a+ifu still prevails, and the basis of description is. still 


provided by the simple framework 
t u 
a. 


alteration of the second type with a monophthongal realication @—«.g. dhere, 
‘much, many; very’, beside sabay, ‘all’, where the final -@ ond -oy are morpho- 
logically comparable. 

* 4.14, on Pan. t. i. g(Kielharn, i. 62). pradliydirarndy etau (ac. es): cinrta- 
tardrarmite ete (xe. gir), 

* sii. go. mird-sayetargdd arure “prthak-iruti_ 

1 anure piroe # o tty #te eating neg. mirinvol naanaryol Avirodakarat 
romp ma peyote Aaxicorga-malted kee twecarppcarpayor ffi. 

* On Ahh i. 4. (pourtidinhowas). 

* i. rg-rs. o&dre co: ogfhaw tipanemphptotarau: tpat-prakryade ekdre. 

* On fi. a3, forge yothd jiked-madkyepaurmhdro wa dokalty ena ekdre hip tty 
tate myima ity arthah; ktah: akdva-milritatedd ekdrarya, 


PART III 
PROSODIES 

3.0. Definition 
Ix the technique of letter-abstraction various features of the larger 
units of utterance are left unaccounted for. It is the reintegration 
of these features that forms one of the taska of synthesis, and it is 
to therm that the title of ‘prosody’ is here applied.' The ancient 
accounts of these prosodic features will be considered under the 
following headings: 

1, Features of junction (samdhzs),* 

2. Features of syllable-structure. 


3.1. function 

The nature of our material makes it convenient to work with the 
following sub-divisions; 

(a) Word- and morpheme-junction. 

(6) Letter-junction. 
The treatment of word-junction and morpheme-junction under 
the same heading is justified by the close parallelism of the two 
classes of prosodies in Sanskrit,’ as also by the stated principles of 


our treatises, e.g: 
Unless directed to the contrary, one should treat the parts of » word 
aa words." | 
Morphological analysis must observe the same rules of finality as apply 
to word-isolates.* 


In both (2) and (4) certain of the prosodic features ure relatable to 
the basic processes conzidered in Part I; this is only to be expected 
in view of the fact that these processes had been arbitrarily seg- 
mented by the letter-analysis, and have to be restored in the syn- 


' See further J. R. Firth, "Sounds and Prosodies', TPS, 1948, pp. 127 7. 
* Ch VP iit, 3. paddmta-padddyoh sandhih. | 

F ee divergences cf, Whitney, Si. Gr. § 109; Thumb, Hab. dex Saméri amakret, 

7 TOG, 

* RP i. G1. apratydmndye poderae ca postydin. 

" FP a. ts3. avaprahah paddntawal. 


H tite F 


66 PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 
3.10. Word- and Morpheme-junction (cf. also 0.40) 

In the synthesis of the word-isolates certain of the features 
affecting initials and finals are capable of description in terms of 
letters: the fact, for example, that the junction-form of tat--ca ia 
tacca, may be and is described in terms of a ‘replacement’ of the 
isolate-final -t by -c, Other features are describable, as we have 
just noted, by reference to an extension or transference of certain 
processes such as were designated ‘distinctive fertures’ of the 
various letters; this is more particularly the case with the extra- 
buccal processes—e.p. 

Voicing: ansiit--raajaa — aasildraajaa 
Aspiration: labh----ta = labdha 
Nasalization; vaak+mama = vaanmama. 

The ancient methods of stating these features provide little of 
interest, and since it is with the statements and not with the phono- 
logy itself that we are primarily concerned, they need not be re- 
peated here; the information is in any case readily available in the 
sandhi section of any Sanskrit prammar—Macdonell makes the 
useful classification into “Changes of Position’ (j.¢. junctional pro- 
sodies of sthdna, such as in tacea above) and ‘Changes of Quality’ 
(ic, junctional prosodies of prayatna)., 

One exception is provided by the prosody of retroflexion,' more 
particularly in its application to morpheme-junction. Where the 
process of retroflexion is indicated by a non-sparéa letter (i.e. by 
r, f or g) the process continues within the word until an inter- 
fering articulation is initiated (ase.g. in pra-paat-ana) or the pro- 
cess is “signed off’ by a retroflex stop (as e.g. in pra-piid.-ana): 
if, however, un apical nasal appears in the sequence, it is realized 
with retroflexion and so closes the process; thus when to the verbal 
root rabh- are added the morphemes -ya- and -maana, the 
result is ja. ‘The ancient phoneticians were aware 


ya-miaay, 

of the remarkable nature of this prosody, and the RP and VP 

employ for it the special term ‘nati’? lit. ‘bending, curvature’, 
The term ‘interfering articulation’ referred to above is taken 


See further BSOAS xtit. iy. o3g ff. 
* RP v.61. ed natir dontya-enirdhan deat 

VP i. 4z. dantyarya emirdhanydpattir matin. 
* W356. coyaoetam tiprahe mplina-hydbhi rephoymdnay seree-pitrcan yathohtam. 


PROSODIES 67 
points out, to the three middle warpas,' viz, palatal, dental, and the 
retrofiex series itself. The full appropriateness of the term will 
be at once appreciated by any phonetician who has been concerned 
with palatography; in investigating by this method words which 
litstrate a particular feature of articulation, one has to restrict 
one’s examples to those cases where no interference is caused by 
other articulations such as would involve a further wipe-off on the 
artificial paiate.* 

Certain features of word-junction were found by our authors to 
require description in terms other than those of processes or of 
phonematic units. This is outstandingly the case where, so far as 
the letters are concerned, a ‘hiatus’ (eteyttz) is left between a final 
a-vowel and an initial vowel, Examples of this type of junction 
are— 

tée+- an = ia aa 
prabho+-ihi =prabha thi 
pasdau--ucyete = paadaa ucyete 
tasmai+-aksii —tasmaa akeill 


sutaah+ime = sutaa ime 
khyah-+-aa = khya aa 
vidvaan+agne = vidvai agne 
Beside these forms, however, we also find the following alterna- 
tives written: 
te-++-aa = tay sa 
prabho-+-ihi =prabhav thi 
tau-+-indraagnii — taay indraagnii 


(this last is the regular treatment before vowels other than u), 

In the above cases historical justification can be found for the y 
andy (e/o-<*ai/au, &¢.;cf, 2,13 above), and the distribution of y and 
Vv is in accordance with the historical facts (thus we do not find tay 
aa or prabhay ihi). But in the phonetic treatises we find similar 


* a madkyamaih tparia-rargair wyavrtam. 
* See expecially J. R. Firth, ‘Ward. Palatograma anid Articulation’, BSOAS 
an. Sy ff. {p. Seg: "For the study of urticulstions in this way the selection af 
utterances is determimed by knowledge that some articulations, bi-labiala, for 
example, give no palatogrum, and other homorganic or non-interfering 
articulations’), 

The fect that y, as ayainst J, functions ax non-interfering ix incidentally u 

argument against the Indian doctrine of a greater degree of contact for 

ris semivowel thin for the fricative; 1, however, like #, functions as an inter-- 
foring articulation (cf. remarks on pp. 27-28 abore}. 
* Cf. Woeckernagel, Ai. Gr. i, 272 ff. 


on PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 
prescriptions for those cases where no such historical evidence can 
be adduced, Thus with reference to examples of the type sutaah 
--ime and khyah--aa above, we find the statement that 

“h before an initial vowel > -y,! 
suggesting junction forms sutaay ime, khyay aa, &c.: and with 
regard to the type vidvaan+-agne, 


“spun before an initial vowel = -iify, 


suggesting Vidlvaay agne, &c. 

But whether written or unwritten, and whether historically 
justifiable or not, the quality of this ‘final’ y or ¥ was observed to 
differ from that of the phonematic letters y and ¥ in initial and 
medial position, As the Pratijia Siiira says, 

¥ hos three realizations, viz. tense in ‘initial position, medium: in 

medial position, and lax in final position.’ 
The lax articulation of these sounds. is mentioned by Panini tn a 
statement ascribed to Sakat@yana, where they are described as 
Vaghu-prayatnatara’, Le. ‘having a lighter articulatory process’*—a 
statement interpreted as follows by the Siddhdata-Kawmndt: 


A Tight articulation ia one in which there tm a relaxation of the tip, the 
rim, the middle, or the root of the tongue? 


' FP ix. to. otha mara-paro yakdram. CE AP ii, 41. svare yakdrah, This 
ie it fact @ rather muleadmg way of atating the matter, and stmilir obliquities 
etill mar the presentation af tisarga-andhi in modern grammmare The forme 
with final =h are absolute finale only, und elsewhere the aturting-point for the 
sandh) is "an, &e The final "+s follows the general seandhi laws us regurda 
‘woicing before voiced initiale—e.y. (1) *-38-—@- > *-a2 g-: (11) *-an+-1- = 
*-ual-; hut voice and friction being mutually incompatible in Sit. (ch p. 44, 
fn. 4), the syllable patterning js muimtained where necessary by the use of ¥ or W 
prosodic, which in (i) provide a vocalic closure maintaming the heavy quaritity 
of the syllable (*-uz ¢- > "<a" g- > -o g-), and in (a) a mode of vowel- 
separation (*-url- > -a¥l-) The w-prosody ia generalized before consonants 
and the ¥-prosody before vowel, though im the former case signe of o ¥-clonure 
are preserved in ‘fossilized’ phrases and in internal position (e.g. suure duhitas 
< “suuras-+duhita, seduh < *sa-zd-uh; cf. also the Migadh? develop- 
ment of-ah = -¢). In the case of a final retroflex fricetive, the prosody ie aleo 
of retroflex type (*-Ig > *-Ig > -iF, ée¢.), and is indiested by the eymbeol fur the 
phonematic fetrofie: continuant © (ef, 2.03 above)}—e.g. *munug+nauma > 

TUT i, *agnig+ive > agniriva, ec. 

* VP iii, 143. dhdrypadhe yakdram, 

‘ty. athdntyandntartidindm prudddi-mollpdnta-stharya frnietadham pura 
madhvema-loghw-cpttibler teccdropam. Cf 1.132 above. — 
with. ti. 1B. ever laghieprayattatarah Sak = 

"168, yaryoradrage pdgropdyra-madhya-milldndm iaithilvam jdyate sa 


PROSODIES 69 


Sikatayana is elsewhere quoted as referring to this articulation as 
‘a reduced realization or slight conract’.' Various other views are 
reported by the 7'P, which, having given the orthodox doctrine of 
hiatus, ascribes:to Ukhya the full articulation of y/y, to Vatsapra 
reduced realization, to Samkrta the realization of v but not y, and 
to Micakiya the loss of y/v when followed by u or o¢ The RT 
refers to these features as ‘half-clided y and v’,! whilst the RP gives 
to the v the peculiar title of ‘bhugna’, lit. "bent’.” 

What our treatises are in fact describing is not the phonematic 
y/¥ but the y/v junction-prosodies—as Uvata rightly says of the 
‘bimgna’ ¥, it is simply a ‘mode of junction’ (samdhana) # for, as he 
elsewhere remarks of the y-prosody, ‘if it were not there, how could 
the coalescence of the two vowels be avoided? ‘The weak articula- 
ton of these prosodic markers is closely paralleled by the ya-druti, 
‘y-sound” or ya-tea, “y-ness'* which serves aa a ayllable-divider 
in Prakrit, and by the y/v of, for example, the Hindi verbal forms 
aya, ave (infin. a-na; beside eg. bayt{ha, baythe, infin, 
bay h-na).’ 


3.11. Inthaltty and Finality 

Closely related to features of junction are features of initiality 
and finality in the breath-group. On the negative side, the RP 
lists those articulations which are excluded from the initial or final 
position and so indicate non-initiality or non-finality.° Bur posi- 
tive statements are few. 

Whitney, in a criticism of Lepsius, wrote, 

We ure not aware that the Hindu grammaeriana themselves—acute anil 


“19-33. lupyeie to averne-pirvau ya-na-kdrau: nokhvasya! cakdras tu 
Mrtarve: wkdrcukdra-parau lupyels micdhiyarya: leio edisapraryentayoh, 

* 61. ardham ed (sc. vakdra-palulrayor lumpanti), 

"ih. 3t. opfiya—pomyer bhugam anopthye takdro ‘trdntard-gamah. 

* Mognam mime cattat samdideam bhawati. 

* On FP iil, 142. Yad ht yahdro eyaijana-hdryam ma herydt hatham the 
sarayoh sonditr na rydt. In fact there are a few instances where the prosody ta 
emitted, with resultant coalescence: in the AV this i particularly the case with 
the pronoun sa (sed for xa id, &e.); the RP mentions thia pronunciation ae a 
fault (xiv, 60), Even when not indicated phonematically, the inter-word apace 
or the non-eoaltecence of adjacent vowels may be considered as a mark of the 
junction-proaody. 


: L tae, 
* Canda, Pritptalakpana, iii. 95; cf Tribhdvyaratea (MS, Bodl.)on TP ix. re. 
* Cf Firth; TPS, 1948, p. 145- ” xii, T=, 


— 


yo PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 


hairsplitting 2s they were in catching and noting the finest shades of 
sound, and much a2 they would have been delighted with, and made the 
most of, just such a nicety ms this—ever took any notice of a smooth 
breathing." 


By ‘smooth breathing’ Whitney meant the glottal onset of an 

initial yowel, but this statement is probably not entirely accurate, 

for in the VS we in fact find the isolated and notable observation, 
At the beginning of vowels which ore not preceded by a consonant, the 

glottis is anid to be the place of articulation.* 

It seems not unreasonable to interpret these words as referring to 

the particular feature of initiality in question. 

‘There are also some remarks of interest in connexion with final 
consonants. ‘The general role is that of the non-nasal spargas only 
the voiceless unaspirated stops may occur finally i pausa:? but an 
this matter there seems to have been some divergence of opinion." 
The RP quotes Sikatiyana for the orthodox view,’ but attributes 
to Gargya the doctrine that stops in this position were voiced,* and 
Panini permits either pronunciation.’ "The truth of the matter may 
well lic in the view somewhat abstrusely stated by the AP: 

Words ending (sc. according to orthodox doctrine) in voiceless atops, 


end according to Saunaka in voiced atops, but they are not so treated 
(sc, phenologically); they have lax contact." 


This observation is perhaps to be interpreted as indicating a 
realization as voiceless stops, but with the lax articulation charac- 
teristic of the voiced stops (i.c. as 2, qd, 6). Graphically they are 
always represented by the voiceless series. For further observa- 
fons on final consonants see below under 4.120 (abhinidhana), 


3.12, Letter-junction 

We are here concerned with those features of transition from 
letter to letter which may be considered without regard to the 
question whether a word- or morpheme-junctian is also involved. 

' TAOS vu. 724, 

* 285 (Liiders, p. 03). etveljanu-rrardniim ca didow hanpha iiritah. CL 
Verma, op. cit., pp. 185 f. 

' c.g. AP i. 6. tarda prathamotiamdh, 

* Ip recent times similar disagreements, regarding Lithuanian finuls, are to 
be found in the sccounts i Soblekes (Gir m 27), Kurechat (Gr. § 175), 
16. prathamom Sahkapdyanmeh. 


“Fc gpchramayece § 30). . 
* dag...» mannadne fptivane : Cavayeb sper " vin. iv, 96. edeanine. 


‘i 8-9. _Prathamants tiydutdnit? Squnakatya pratijAdnam ma vpitih: 


PROSODIES 7 


"These are principally related to various types of consonant-group, 
‘The general term for a group is samyoga or ‘conjunction’,* but the 
term pinda, “ball, block’, is also used in later treatises. The various 
types of pinda are classified according to their composition by the 
Yajriavalkya-Siksa under fanciful and largely irrelevant titles such 
as ‘iron’, ‘lame’, “wool’, &c= It is of same interest, however, to 
note that both the YS and the Varnaratnapradipaka Siksa describe 
the combination stop-+-semivowel as a “block of wood’ (ic. which 
can easily be broken) on account of the ‘laxity of their junction’ 
(tatha-bandha)? in the Greek and Latin grammarians we find 
groups of this type compared to a’ mixed yoke’ (e.g. ass and ox, or 
ass. and mule), the tractive effort of which is less than that of two 
similar yoke-mates.* In the Western examples the simile refers to 
the fact that such a group optionally fails to ‘make position’ in 
verse: no such option generally prevaila, however, im the case of 
Vedic or Classical Sanskrit,* and there is only doubtful evidence 
from Buddhist Sanskrit® and the statements of late metrical writers 

such as the ‘Prakrit Pingala’.’ 


3,120. Consonant+-stop (abhinidhdna) 

One of the most important features noted by our treatises goes 
by the title of ab/unidhana, ‘close contact’. ‘This refers to the non- 
release of a consonant, more particularly a stop, when followed by 
a stop, and parallels the French term ‘implosion’.’ The signth- 
cance of the term is indicated by the Indian statements, c.g. 

Abhinidhdna ie the checking of a consonant, making it obacure, 


Ch AP i. of: eyatjanday avyacetint imerath Up la 
* z02 (59, o 29), athe spta-—dindh copyoge-pinddh. .. . See also Varma, 
Op, cit, p. 1 
. Varn: rr 8tSS, p- 133) 
iperd apeficaned ye cdntasthdbins ca samnyutdh 
nena fe — Hathe-bandhah prakirtinih. 
CE YS 202. ... adntatthan daru-pindavat. 
The term #otha-bandha ia used of various other combinations by the Switiriye- 
Siked (72, 76). 
* Ch. Mar, Victorimis, Keil, vi. 38; Schol. on Hephaestion, Enchirigion, ed. 


Westphal, pp, 108 7. 
* But see Meillet, ‘Valeur des groupes -7°R- en Sanukrit’, MSL aviti, art &f., 


* Cf. Varma, op. cit, pp. 93 ff; Edgerton, BSOAS viii. soz f-; JAOS Ixvi, 
107 ff, Kuppoitiom Sastri Common. Fol., pp. 39 fL 
? Cf. Weber, nd. Sr. vill: aag (on Pidgala, Chandah Sdtre 1.9 €.). 
" Cf. Gremmont, Trotf/, pp. 36 ff For o full appreciation see Rosapelly, 
MSE x. 347 ff. 


~ PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 
weakened, deprived of breath and voice; it takes place when a stop is 


followed by u stop; it is also called ‘arrested’ (ahapita), 

In the case of stops and semivowels (except f) followed by stops, 
abhinidhdnta takes place, ic, a restraint or obscuring of the sound: it aluo 
Occurs im pausa.* 


The extension of the term abhimidhdna to finals in pausa is also 
of interest; the description of them as ‘obscure, weakened, de- 
prived of breath and voice’ goes far to explain the divergent views 
quoted above regarding their voicing or non-voicing.’ The doc- 
trine of unreleased final stops is strongly supported by the com- 
parative evidence adduced by Gauthiot in his La Fin de Mot ei TE. 
as also by later Indo-Aryan developments.’ 

In the RP we also find a description of the stop-clements of the 
aijiamdhdna consonants which distinguishes between voiced and 

The sound which follows the closure of an unreleased (voiced) stop is 
called ‘diruwa’, and it continues for the duration of the step; in the case 
of a voiceless atop the dirwea ia not audible; and in the case of a nasal it 
is nosalized.* 

‘Dkruca’, lit. ‘continuance’, is parallel to the ‘feaue’ of French 
phoneticians,’ "The Indian observation compares favourably with 
a modern statement such as, 


While the organs articulating a plosive consonant are actually in con- 
tuct they form what is called the stop. In the case of voiceless consonants 
nothing whatever is heard during the stop: in the case of voiced conso- 
nants some voice is heard during the stop." 


The stop-element is, of course, not only a feature of the un- 
released stops: but in other positions our authorities speak of the 


* AP 1. 43-44. 48. cyatijana-cidhtranam abhinidhdnnh piditah sonnataro hima 
nuisa-nddoh: spuriasye spurte ‘bhimdhdnah: dsthdpitem eu, 

1 RP vi, r18. ebhintdhdnem Avta-nimfatdndm sporkintasthdndm apatdalyu 
a fo 165, and Sarma, Critical Studier on Kaltydyana's Sublayafurtedaprdti. 

Aya, p. 198. 

"CE Prasad, op. cit, p. 2632, “The articulation of the utterance-finals ity 
Bhajpuri is very lax and they are pronounced with weak breath or voice’ fef 


Kymogrem Wo, 93, 2@). 

* Chap. v; " Cf Bloch, L’Indo-Aryen, pp. aa 

* vi. 30-41. mddih pare "Minidiuindd dhrwnwm tat tat-hdla-stheam « atruty ty 
aghopit: micihd-thdnam anuninkes crt, 
to gemunates (PP iv, 144. deivernem ehopernevad dhdrands Peare-pagel hye), 

* D. Jones, Outhar, | cha, | 


PROSODIES 73 
contact as only “momentaneous and so not deserving special 
description; they take note, however, of the especially brief and 
light flap-srticulation of intervocalic voiced retroflex stops? 
4.121. © +-consonant (svarabhaktt) 

A passage of the RP quoted above excluded r from the effect of 
abhinidhana; this exclusion finds its explamition in the following. 
Statement: 

After r ataniling between s vowel and «consonant, a vowel-fragment 
(ivera-bhakt) of F-quality is inserted 
This doctrine of svarabhakds, ‘anaptysis’, is elsewhere restricted to 
the sequence r--fricative* (in some treatises alsa 1-}-fricative).* 
The most detailed statement is that of the AP: 

Between © and 2 prevocalic fricative, a svarabhakti is pronounced having 

the length of 4 or } of a; before other consonants (than fricatives) its 
length is J or } of a." 
Regarding the greater length of the searabhakti in the sequence 
r-+-fricative, it is to be noted that manuscripts of the AV’ write 
vocalic ¢ for r in such cases; the metre also occasionally requires 
the pronunciation of a vowel which js not noted in our texts 
(e.g. darfata = 4 syllables).* 

As to the quality of the svarabhakti vowel our treatises show 
wide variation ; apart from p we find a, i, e, and u mentioned :° the 
AP also states that itmay take on the colour of a preceding or fol- 
lowing yowel.!® 

* Cf. RP xii. 9. sprytam asthitam. 

* e.g. Satiiriva-S. 22. ducprrtat eeti vijfieyo da-dhayoh mara-madhyayah (in 
the RP (kee 1.110 above) dukspryfa = iyatipryta and is used to describe the 


articulation of the semivowels), Cf. alo VP iv. 146, da-dhaw Ja-[hac chesdim: 
RP i. sz. For a kymographie etudy of this feature in Gujarati see T. N. Dave, 


ASOAS vi, br7 ff. . . 
“RP wi. gh. nepludt evoropehitdd tyefjanedaydd phdra-carnd searabhaktir 


“em: TP xxi. 05. rephopma-samyoge repia-maralvahtin. 
eg. FP ivia7. ro-ldc y-]-porndhigdm dymani sravrodeys icrnatra. CL Prati- 
7d Siitra ta-15. athipardutasthandyuktdnya-haluh semyuklaryorma-phdrair 
thire-salatoccarapam: evum tytiy tra Aart. 
"fh 101-2. repidd Dpnani peura-pare eoarabhaktir adraydrdham caturtham 
MY eke: anyermin tafe catertham ajfamapg od, 
* Cf, Whitney on AP i rea. | 
* Wackermigel, i Gri, § 30; In Proknt, on the other hand, 9 written 
rearabhakti may have sero metrical vulue (Pischel, 4 231; cf. 3.20 below), 
‘Cf Varma, op. cit, pp. t33.f.; Renou, Terminologie, iii, 131, 
vi. 53. pirwolterdsrvera-sardpatam ca. 


74 PHONETICS [IN ANCIENT INDIA 

The statement of the 4P an the lengths of the marabhakt vowels 
goes on to mention as being of Jength 4 aan element referred to as 
‘sphofana’;! from a later passage we learn that this occurs in groups 
where a stop is followed by another of a more back series,? espe~ 
cially a velar’ (e.g. in vagat-krtam, tad gaayatre), Uvata defines 
the term (which literally means ‘splitting’) as the (optional) separa- 
tion of a consonant cluster.* This would appear to indicate a type 
of searabhakti, whether voiced or voiceless, the infinitesimal dura- 
tion of which is suggested by the specification of a value | a, in fact 
4 minimal audible release. ‘The mechaniam of the feature referred: 
to is perhaps the release of the front closure during the formation 
but before the completion of the back closure, resulting in the 
momentary outflow of an air-stream attenuated by the back con- 
striction; it might then be identified with what Pike terms a ‘cross- 
ing glide’: 

When the releasing glide of one atricture is simultaneous with the 
approaching glide of another, a crossing glide is developed, ... One auch 
mudible crossing glide is the sound of open transition between two voice- 
less or voiced stops; in [apta] a type of crossing-glide aspiration may be 
heard if the lips hegin te open while the tongue is moving toward the 


alveolar arch.’ 
Prasad m fact reports just such a transition for Sanskrit loan-words 
in Bhoypurt: 


Inthe case of such sequences in the tataama loan-words aa pronounced 
by the educated speakers, the contact js first formed in one position and 
after that the organs tend to abruptly tale up the position for the second 
consonant before the first is properly released.” 

If the back closure were completed before the initiation of the front 
release, the result would be ahbhinidhana: if the front release were 
effected before the initiation of the back closure, the result would 

An exception to the occurrence of sphotana is mentioned in the 
case of a retroflex followed by a palatal," where a feature called 
Rurpand, lit, ‘dragging, extension’, is said to take place: the term is 


" PP Ww, 165, sphojonam co kokdra-varge ed spar idt. 
* On VP, loc. cit. sphojanam ndma pipdi-bhiitarya mmyogasya prthag- 


wccdranam . "Op, cit, pone. 
* Op. cit, p. 196 ” Cf. Pike, loc. cit, 


* Examples quoted from the AV ore gat ca, sad, jantan, 


PROSODIES 75 
further explained as kalawtprakarsa, ‘extension of duration',’ In 
the:absence of more precise descriptions we can hardly attempt to 
interpret this isolated statement; we may only note that the author 
evidently intends to distinguish the transition in question from 
normal abdinidhana or searabhakti. The term as here employed is 
thus not to be confused with the eiprakarsa of Prakrit grammarians, 
which refers simply to anaptyxis.* 


3-122. Stop+nasal (yama) 

Closely related to the preceding prosodies is the feature referred 
to by the Indian phoneticians as yama, lit. ‘twin’. The implications 
of the term will be discussed after a consideration of its cantexts: 

Within a word, when » non-nazal sparia ia followed by a nasal, it ia 
separated by the appropriate yam! 

Nonenatal spares followed by naaals become their own vam; the 
yover are in conformity with the sparfas.* 

After a non-nasal sparia followed by a nasal there are inserted the 
appropriate nasal sounds, called by some yamar.! 

‘The feature here observed is that generally described as nasal or 
‘faucal’ plosion of the oral stop;* the further statement of the VP 


The yamax are produced by the root af the nose (misikd-mila)" 
may be brought into line with modern descriptions if we interpret 
nastha-rmiita as ‘velum’. In this type of transition there is w slight 
nasalization of the oral stop, at east in its latter portion, and s0 a 
nasal off-glide to the following nasal.* The Indian recognition 
AP ld foowrgams cavarge kdla-ciprakarpas te atra bhenats .. . tam 
dha harsaga tik, cee | 

Note also the use of korpaya in the Puypanitra (ed, Simon, p. $18-—'Zichen, 
Vetlingern einer Silbe tiber ihre Zeitdauer und Gber ihren Haupttan hingus 
durch Einachieben eines andern odes mehrerer anderer Zwischentdne’), and 
amilarly Uvata in comm. on VP i. rz. 

2 Cf Vararuci, iii, fo. 


(ee. nyavadidnamt bhowati), } ey 

* RP vi 20, 32. pas tar hernia doett hark rity nd many > 
jyomah prokrtyan oe 
t dl Sn te-13, sparidd amuthamdd uttenue-pardd dnupdroydn msikydh> tan 
yard ehe. 


* Cf D, Jones, Gurfine, § «86: Pike, op. cit., p. 33, 
* . 82. ndvthd-mnilena yamdh. | 
" Statements onthe «yllabication of the yama (cf, Varma, op. at., pp. sof. 


would seem to suggest that there was some lengthening of the 


76 PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 
of this feature hus not always been duly appreciated; Whitney 
Phonetic snalysie does net, a8 it seema to me, help us to recagnize the 


yama of the Hindu yrammuarians 2a any necessary accompaniment of the 
Utterance of a. mute and nasal." 


Max Miiller refers to the Indian statements as ‘vollkommen klar 
und physiologisch begreiflich’; but it is only his own misinter- 
pretation of them that is so pellucid— 

Sie wiirds eben einfach die Thatsache hervorheben, dal wo cin Nasal 
out cine Muta folgt, der Muta sclbot cin leichter nasaler Aniats worher- 
geft® [my italics]. 

Muller, i in fact, a5 also Regnier,’ takes the yama to be a nasal 
articulation preceding the stop, But the 7'P speaks ‘of the yam as 
occurring ‘sparsad", i.e. after the stop, and this is yet more clearly 
brought out by the Naradi Siksa: 

If @ non-nasal sparta is followed by a nasal, then a yoma homorganic 
with the preceding letter ia to be inserted between them.’ 

The number of distinct yamas is given by the PS,* the Tribha- 
syaratna’ and Uvata® as four, Le. voiced and vovweless, aspirate and 
non-aspirate; Uvata mentions and disagrees with a theory that 
there are twenty? (i.e, one for each of the non-nasal oargiya letters), 
and states that only four types are distinguished ‘by their own 
qualities’"—a statement of which the precise implication is not 

We have no special mstructions regarding the realization of the 
aspirates in such contexts, and must assume that the faucal release 

On AP i. 99. For an appreciation of the yame-doctrme cf. Rosapelly, 
MSL x. 354 ff. ; also J. Chhomsk}, AN PE xi. 81 

"On RP 4os. 

* Journal Aviatipue, V" Ser, ix, pp. 333 f. 

" CE the porthhdpd Pdv. 1, i. 6p—tanmedd ity wttaratye. 

' SS. p. 428. 

crantyad co bhemset parma ‘etyed co parnate pedi 
tata madhye yamar tisphet nvarnah pirtr-narmayedy, 
Pct jpomd coy tally, 

¥ aN TP-iexi. 18: --- drpireydd yathd-sromes edekyd dom bheconti: 
prathame-rparidt prathinna-wbiilyak: aeativedsd deatival : roar anyatrdge, 

"On FP i. 82, yowd! cotedrah. ... CE oni. 74, viii. 24. 

* On RPL 50. eran vrpintir sad hatmrcdndie bhavant und vi. 2p... . ivi 
datited? athdnimim ddeditndm cpt yomednctm titiatina-pranigak: sa ai ‘bint; 
a eva yomdndin prathamdl prathamem deitivd deitiyenn eoom J puficeenlel 


ity wcyate, 
"On RP i §0. peeripeid citndra ena. 


PROSODIES a7 


‘was follawed by an expulsion of voiceless or voiced breath through 
the noses’ the RP, however, objects to the teaching of Girgya that 
the sana is then followed by a nasal fricative:? with the nasal 
breathing there is likely to be some degree of cavity friction, but 
the RP is perhaps only referring to some objectionable form. of 
local friction.’ | 

a ee the discussion of the yamas the T'P has the 


After ht followed by 1, 1, of ™ is inserted u nasal sound (ndrihya),* 
A similar nile is also found in the AP.* If, as Whitney assumes, the 
reference is simply to another yam, it is strange that a special rule 
should be stated, and the Trihh@syuratna interprets the statement, 
in spite of its wording, as referring to a nasalization of the h,* an 
interpretation which is supported by the explicit statement of the 
Sarvasammata-Siksa@ and, even more significantly, by the VS," 
Whatever the precise interpretation of the rule in question, it 
evidently recognizes the fact that the two processes of breath and 
nasality may overlap, whether partially or wholly; that this was the 
case in Sanekrit (¢ strongly sugpested by the so-called metatheses 
in Prakrit developments of the type bamhana<braahmana, &c.,* 
as also by Pinini’s optional prescription of junction-forms such as 
kin hnute beside kiny hnute,"” 

As regards the figurative implications of the term yama, we per- 
haps have a hint in the statement of the VP that 


Medially a non-nasal step before s nase! undergoes division (viccheda)."' 


' Cf kymogrum by A. C. Sen, Proc, amd fmt. Cong. Phon, Sc., po rt. 

vi. 37-38. dimd sopmonah (Uvaja mdsikd-sthdnal): earjayer tam. 

* Ag eg. Pike, Phonetic, p. 141, “Saaale with local friction ot the yelic are 
fricatres natals (very rare, Limited almost tu types of rouvh clearing of the nose}. 
CE Sweet, Primer, $73, referring to a “strongly snorted’ [1D], occurring in ‘a net 
uacemmon and very disagreeable form of eniffing’. 

‘sxi. 14, hakdnds mo-oeme-pardn mdeileyan. 

* i. 99-100... Aokdinin mdakyewa (sc. cyovedhdnam bhavatt). 

* fone sia pe-mve- paar kakdrom drukye mitikpon bhewati; sdtundnkye 
akceoah nd ity arthak, 

. _itaremepy pares etn mebrbyotrvm thalalhi here. 
Dire 01 (Liders, pp. 83,93, 101). “The nasalization of h is, however, pro- 
d by the Cantpmiva-Sikgd (see Varma, op, cit., p. 80), 
* Pischel, $330. Cf. Bharuta, Ndtyalidecra, xvii. 22, riparitiin ha-wy-yore 
0° Pan, vit. iii, 24-27, he ma-pare od (gc. mah): na-pare nah, Cf Wirt on 26, 
yorur-la-pare yeild vets paktaryam, 
"iv. 063, antih-pade “paficommth paficameny vicchedam, 


7 FHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 


Uvata equates the term tiecheda with yama,’ and it is understand- 
abJe that in ‘2 sequence with nasal plosion, e.g. [pad"ma]), the 
oral stop and its nasal release might have been considered as a 
division of the d into two parts or ‘twins’ ([pad“ma]). In the term 
wiccheda we should then have a parallel to the German ‘Brechung’, 
a description which at least two scholars have m fact applied to 


the yamas? 
3.123. Fricative + nasal 

Tn the sequence fricative+-nasal one phonetician is reported as 
observing the insertion of a voiceless stop homorganic with the 

nasal;? thus krgsa, @riigma would be realized as [krp*nal, 

reclame .* the oral closure for the nasal being completed before 
the lowering of the velum. As both Bloch and Varma have pointed 
out,* this type of transition ts strongly supported by developments 
in later Indo-Aryan. 
3.124. Slop+-Fricatrve 

There are certain peculiarities connected with the sequence 
stop+-fricative. Our treatises mention that the stop may be aspi- 
rated,° an observation that is to some extent supported by Prakrit 
developments of the type mocchara<<matsara, khara/chara<— 
kgaara, &c.’ This treatment, however, is restricted by Saunaka 
and Bidabhikira to those cases where the stop and fricative are 
heterorganic;* by far the most frequent group of this type is kg, 
and we may note the Sanskrit alternation of kg- with khy- in the 
root ksaa-/khyas-;* an identification kg = khy is also required 
by Srectegesin the Satepatha-Brahmana and in Vaska's Nirukta.! 

* picchedo yam iti 

® Wober, Ind. St: Se, 123; Trapp, on Mbh., p. 1¢2z, nm. 196. 

: TP xiv, It. uttume-pard? te Plakplyanarya (cf. Gg. aghoydd apmanah parah 

Tati perth Eros}. , 

om in English (e.g. [sents] = oenze), 

1 Bloch, E! Indo- Arven, Fy 83; Varma, op, cit,, pp. ca3- ff, 
* AP i. 6 doitivdh fa-po-s0gu. 

RP vi. 54. Geeadayam prathamam speriam eke doitivam dur. 


TP av. 12. prathama iipma-paro deitivan, 

Ch Nar. 5. (SS, p. 437). 
T Cf. Pischel, $916; Varma, p. 73. Note alo AV pecherd hesicke PS phpald, 
* FP iv, t2z. resi geatoerce eae om Stunakasya. 

Apo 13. 


i Vedie Variants, j i. 99 ff. 
M CE Scheltelawita, IF xiv. 249; WZKM xxi ry £. 


PROSODIES 79 
We are also told of a realization as kf, going back as far as Girgya.' 
It thus seems likely that the complex which we transcribe as kg 
may in fact have been in the nature of an affricate unit not precisely 
describable in terms of k and g.* Ramagarman, in his commentary 
on the Pratifia Safra, points out that it is a single and indivisible 
letter;? this statement simply refers to the fact that it is written 
in Nagari with a single symbol (@ or g) which bears no evident 
relationship to either element(a, q); but the results of a recent com- 
parative study are of some phonological interest—Sanskrit kg, as is 
wellknown, combines the reflexes of TE *ks and "kp, and Benveniste 
has now convincingly demonstrated that on structural grounds the 
latter (*Ap) must be treated as a single phonological unit.* 


3.125. Gemination 

We need not here consider in detail the doctrine of krama or 
‘doubling’, which occurs in most of our treatises. This refers to 
the lengthening of consonants in contexts and would be of 
considerable interest were it not for the fact that ideas regarding. 
the identity of these contexts are so diverse. ‘The matter has been 
discussed at some length by Varma.t The most general agreement 
ts to be found in the case of a consonant preceded by r, where both 
manuscripts and printed works frequently show the double symbol. 
The 'doubling’ has no phonological consequences, and Panini's 
observations are as follows: 

After © or h preceded by a vowel, und us the first member of a group, 
aconsonantimay be doubled. ... But according to Sakalya there is no such 
doubling, and all teachers agree that it is inoperative after a long vowel." 


3.2. Syllable Structure 
3-20. Vowel and Consonant (see also 1.112 above) 
When considering the processes of articulation we encountered 
a phonetic criterion for the class of vowels, namely, openness of the 
' FP iv. 067; RP vi. ssf. 
* Cf also the wide variety af developments in Kafin: (Morgenatieme, Lin- 
uittic Mision to Afghwemstan, pp. 56 #.), | 
* On ig(ed, Weber, p.85), * BSE resviil. 139 ff. 
’ Op. cit.. pp. oof. Cf Fouché, Bauder de Phondtique Générale, p. 36. 
* vin. iv. 66, aco ra-hdbhydin ane (ec. cof) 
47. anati ca, 
51. £armatra idkalyasya (3c. ma) 
For discussion cf. Wackernmgel, op. cit., § 93. 


$o PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 


buccal articulators.. By this criterion h and -h might also-be classed 
gs vowels, but such a possibility is excluded by the existence of 
phonological criteria related to function rather than to mode of 


articulation. This phonological distinction between vowel! and 
consonant is made in the following statements: 

A vowel forms a ryllable ;' 

A vowel with a consonant or even alone forms a syllable: 

A syllable is composed of a vowel, together with initul consonant(s) 


‘and, i peusa, a following consonant ;" 


The consonant is subordinate to the vowel < 
which the Tribhagyaratna augments by saying, 

A consonant is incapable of standing aleme, and so is dependent, whereas 
oe vowel ie independent, 
Thus the vowel is phonologically defined by the fact that it forms 
a syllable, or the nucleus of a syllable’—a criterion for which 


‘western antiquity provides parallels:? indeed the statement of the 


Tribhésyaratna is almost exactly duplicated by that of Dionysius 
Thrax.* One result of this phonological interdependence of syl- 
lable (@hjara) and vowel (stra) is that the term akgara is frequently 
extended to mean ‘vowel’. 

The distinction between the phonetic-and phonological criteria 
is further exemplified by the case of svarabhakti. We have seen 
that from the phonetic standpomt this feature is defined as vocalic 
Im character; our sources are careful to add, however, that from the 
phonological point of view it does not break up the consonant- 
group nor does it form an independent syllable." 

"AP io}. rare “kperamt. 

" RP xviii. 92. sovyofijanah. . . diddho vail spare “egarr gett. 

* FP i. 99-101, soaro ‘Aporam; sahddyair wyeitjensifh: uttarail cbiasitaih 
(Urata: eg. mo: dru: rd: pri), * TP xxi. 1. ryoiijanam rearingam. 

* eyetjmam hevalam avathdtem mq faknoti kimi ti ipekgam? seoras fy 
toe Trubetrkoy, Prenciper de Phonnlogir, tol. Cantinenu, pp. 196 th; 
De Groot, “Vovyelle, Consonne et Sylahe', AN PE xvij. 2) ff. 

’ Cf. D. Thrux, od. Uhlig, p. 16, Bekker, p. 632. Dedkad) Bf don «nplue 
TAAgS cyOe ped perqerros F durpiyrer, For similar Latin definitions cf. 
Frochde, Die Anfangigrinds der rim, Grasenatih, Pr. dod ff, 

* Ed. Ublig, pp. 9, ot; Bekker, p.631. Guriura B A‘peras Gri dune det 
mrcondpern dé perk rae duweqderon duke aroteled. 

* And thence also, like warga, to mean simply ‘fetter’—cf. Avbk. DL 2, on 

un. SSe. 5-8 (Kicthorn, i. 36), | 

™ CE RP vi 35. ma seprpogam rvarabhaktir vikanti; Uvaja on VP iv. 17, ne 


PROSODIES Rr 

The etymology of the term aksara is a matter of some doubt. 
Most usually it is derived from the negative prefix a- plus the 
verbal root Asar-, ‘flow, perish’, i.e. ‘imperishable"'—a term which 
is not inappropriate as applied to its non-technical meaning of 
‘holy writ’. The Vaidikdbharana has an interesting alternative ; 
taking aksara as meaning “vmvel’ and accepting the derivation 
from @--+-ésar-, it interprets the verb as meaning ‘to be moved as 
subordinate to something else’ (amydrigatayd)2 The consonant was 
referred to in the JP itself as the ‘subordinate member’ (aziga), and 
the implication of the etymology is thus that the consonant is 
‘moved’ by the vowel.’ 

Etymologies of the word for ‘consonant’ (eyavijana) are various. 
Uvata, deriving it from the verb cy-afj- in the sense of ‘to manifest", 
explains that the consonants are so called ‘because they manifest 
the meanings’* This suggestion that the consonants rather than 
the vowels are responsible for the differentiation of meanings is to 
some extent justifiable in a language where there are only three 
hasic vowel-classes, and where one of these (a) occurs approxi- 
mately twice as frequently as all the rest together;5 and in a notable 
discussion on paradigmatic lines regarding the semantic function 
of individual letters the Mahabhasya selects consonantal values for 


its examples (yipa, Ailpa, siipa).* 


3-21. Sywllabic Division 
Statements quoted above treat the vowel as the nucleus of the 


tdites cornu repAa-lakdreyor Sigrmasqudops 6a mmadhye-wariid ap panian samy 
garya banal aes paresis AP i 1 eae eesah acs pe a ca. aie 


I Por the terminology cf. Arab mutaharnk (opposed to cudwun, with which 
cf. Skt. eirdma). For full discussion of the Arab terminology cf. M. H. A. 
Fl Saurmn, A Critical Study of the Phonetic Obpervation: of the Arab Gram- 

marians (Thesis, FrD., Landon, 1953) PP pp. tic ff. = 

7 tL. 6, eyaijayanti prakat a hucroanity ‘art in cyatjandna, Other- 
‘iis Pueiibhouare oP ie. Ac parena marena cyajyate iti vyaitjanam. 

Se eae Skt. Gr., 22, 75. Cf. also Stetson, Motor Phonetics, p. 36; 
the, doe. et 

‘nit seni Pil: $56: < (Kiethoen, 4. 40). Cf O. Straus, ZDMG x. 6, 
PP) 129 H, 

Boies G 


Ba | PHONETICS IN ANCIENT [INDIA 


syllable; and they go-on to describe the consonantal structure of 
the syllable in terms of the attachment of the consonants to the 
vocalic nuclei, The general rule is that an intervocalic consonant, 
#3 also an absolute initial or initial group, belongs with the follow- 
ing vowel, but that the first consonant of a medial group belongs. 
with the preceding vowel, as also does a final consonant im paused." 
Some variation of doctrine is, however, found; the RP allows either 
the division of a medial consonant-group or its attachment im foto 
to the following vowel and the 7’P attaches to the following vowel 
3 group consisting of consonant+semivowel or stop-+-fricative 

The Indian statements are partially paralleled by those of Greek 
grimmuariana, more particularily of Herodianus Technicus in his 
work [epi Surdfews raw Orovyelaw (‘On the Combination of 
Letters'.)* The principal Greek miles are that single intervocalic 
consonants belong with the following vowel, and that medial 
groups may be divided between syllables unless they are such as 
could stand at the beginning of a word, in which case the whole 
group belongs to the following syllable (a treatment reminiscent of 
the Slavonic languages). Geminates are specified as being always 
divided, and the group stop+-liquid as belonging to the following 
syllabic." ‘The statements of the Latin grammarians are similar to 
those of the Greek, stresaing in particular the principle of possible 
initial groups.’ 

It ts to be noted, however, that these rules of the Indian phoneti- 
cians are not put to any further phonological purpose, nor can their 
basis in utterance be certainly established. But we may surmise 
sae pad ib Flot ee Marranyes tyutlparidea : ere pores: 

* 4. 23, 25. mardatere tyanjandny ullorarya: ....conrpogdair od. Cf. xviii, 33, 
a5. Cyatjondny uftoroyaind eeorandntyam tw pirva-bhda: .. . sewyogdeld ca 
taream ca, Chutterji, op. cit., § 124. suggesta that the Niguri graphic system 
omy be based on such a evllabie structure. 

! xxi. I~}, Gyeijanam mordigam: tat pard-rworam: urantam fairvanya: 
| : Sees Ghurmirah marobhektd ea; nistothiperan anpcurnan: . . - 

in Most of the tehects ere to be found in vol, ii, pp, 407 ff,,.of Lente's 
edition. The stutementa are collated in Kihner-Blai, dusfubrl. Gr, d. Gr, 
Sprache, i. 349 H.; see aleo Hermann, Sibenhildung im grischihen und in den 
andern idg. Sprachen, pp. 123 f© 

1 Cf, Broch, Slavische Phonrtih, } 216. 

: Gi tatetie te ok ES: 

' (C4. Secimann, Ove Anerpracks di ith, op. | E.; Hermann, op. cit., 
pp. 431 41; Hale, ‘Syllabifieation in Roman Speech, Harvard Studite in Clasica 
Pinfolagy, vil. 299 ff. 


PROSODIES $3 


that they were formulated with reference to the perceived termina- 
tion and onset of certain prosodic syllable-features such as promi- 
nence and tone; the PS speaks of tone as a characteristic only of 
the vowel,! but the VP remarks that it may be shared by « con- 
sonant,* and the Vadtkabharana makes the acute observation, 
which we have no particular reason to doubt, that in certain cases 
the final portion of a falling tone was borne by the consonant 
closing the syllable, which was accordingly lengthened.” In any 
case we should hardly be justified in following the example of the 
Western Sceptic, Sextus Empiricus, by referring to discussions on 
syllabic division as ‘a lot of empty linguistic nonsense’.* 


3.22. Length and Duration 

From the point of view of syllabic structure the prosody of 
vowel-length is of great importance.$ The device adopted by the 
Indians for purposes of phonological description is that of the 
matrd or ‘mora’: 

A short vowel = 1 midtrd; a long vowel = = madras.” 

A pluta vowel = 3 mdirds.7 


A vowel having the length of a is short, and its value is 1 mated: a vowel 
twice 2s long is long, and a vowel three times as long is pluta." 


The matra device has an evident utility in a system where the basic 
vowel-units are considered as members of qualitatively similar 
pairs-each comprising a short and'a long member, and where the 


* i. 107. wyafijanam mare mrporam, Cf, Pike, Tome Languages, p. 
‘Although the tonemes are usually placed on the vowel of the syllable , . eaehe 
may end on a voiced consonant in the same eyllable’ (see ales pp. 11, jo n., 31). 
Hoth views are presented in the commentary on AP iii 74. arcane cyoi- 
jJandng: ever . 

* On TP i: 37. . +» fad enuddita-samatnam kepueit searite-scaree wa bhawati 
aint: aad —arrtgea~bhtitegte treyanee end! fn vorifa-grdhinify wucpante: ted 

cincciranam mae ghofate, CE. Varma, p. 168. 

* Advermi raft Reapsnrntyct 169, . 2. te wale wal parodies wapa roils ypagpa- 
roeoty capi roadra pupodloyer. Tt has in fact been suggested that the basis of 
the Greek statements 8 orthogmphic; cf. Havet, Reouw Celtique, xvi. 126; for 

| practice see also Srusrt-Fores, Cio. Ren, xv. 396 F.: Hermans, 
Op. cit,, PP. rg2ff.; K. E. A. Schmidt, Beitr. 2. Geach. id Gram. a. Gr. wu. Dos, 
1p. rez 

* CE RP i. 17-19. hrormdh .. . dirghdh . .. ublerye te akpeordsi, 

* AP i. 29, 61. thacmdtro leash: dei-mdtro dirghah. 

* RP i, 27, 29-30. eudted Araprah: doe dirghah: teal pluta ucyate erorah, 

* VP i. 55-68. c-msitra-reoro firareah: multrd ca: der tdedn dirghah: plutas 
trih, CE TP i. 91-36; Sarpasagrneta-Sikpd, go: Upalekha, i, 8 ff. 


ay PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 
junction of two similar short vowels results in the corresponding 
long vowel (e.g. divi+-iva — diviiva).' 

The plute or protracted vowel mentioned above is of rare occur- 
tence and 1s bound to a very limited series of contexts; it represents 
the over-lengthening of the final yowel of a word or phrase and is 
used “in cases of questioning, especially of a balancing between two 
alternanves, and also of calling to a distance or urgently"* (e.g. 
idam bhuvyaaa idaaam iti, ‘Is this more, or that?"). For most 
phonological purposes, however, the plita vowel may be ignored: 
as the AP points out, it occurs but three times in the RV and it ia 
in. all cases related to the special type of speech-function,? 

The statements on vowel-length are followed by a reference to 
the length of consonants, the general prescription being | matra,4 
though the AP says 1 matra;3 the VP is even more specific in its 
detail: 

_ 4 consonant has o value of | mdird: | mdtrd ia known os an anu 
(moment’) and 4 aan i¢ known as a paranuiny." 

But the maira concept has no justification in connexion with con- 
sonants; certainly it might have been used in conjunction with the 
rules of syllable-division for purposes of stating syllable-quantity 
(see below), but in fact our treatises do not so employ it. ‘Their 
statements are thus only of value as generalized prescriptions of 
relative duration; this unphonological approach undergoes a 
further degeneration in statements such as the following (from 
the PS): 

1 omuiird te equivalent to the cry of the blue jay, 2 matrds to that of the 
ttow, 3 madtrdas to that of the peacock, and 4 maird to that of the mon- 
gone,” 

Here we have an attempt to define phonological length in terms of 
absolute phonetic duration, a practice comparable with a modern 
statement in terms of centiseconds. It is gratifying, however, to 
find that these attempts are almost certainly late interpolations by 

CL Trubetskoy, Princtpes, pp, act ff. 

* Whitney, Skt. Gr., § 78. 

4.31. ‘adhah seid detsd' ‘wpari eeid Asizd” arthe plutir ‘bhir toa vindattity' trih, 

: iy Ft i. 99; Sarvarummata- Sikhs, 46; Upelebha. ios. 

° : so-O1, eyaijomem ardhe-mdtnd: tod-erdham ana: peranadae ordhdnn- 
crab fi fu wedale mlinka deoi-mdiran cates reyacah 

nkhi rowtt fri-mdivom tu makes ty ardiv-ndtrakam, 


PROSODIES 8s 
phonologically incompetent scholiasts: they appear in almost 
identical form in many of the late Siksas,' and itis significant that 
a similar verse which appears in our text of the RP? bears no com- 
ment by Uvata. 


3-23. Quantity 

Beside the terms ‘short’ and ‘long’ (hraswa, dirgha) we find listed 
in the introduction to the RP and in the concluding stanzas of the 
TP the terms ‘light’ (laghw) and ‘heavy’ (gurw).? ‘These latter terms 
refer primarily to the quantity of the syllable for metrical purposes; 
but since the term ahgara, ‘syllable’, is also used to mean ‘vowel’, 
the vowel rather than the syllable is regularly stated to be ‘light’ 
or "heavy’, Whitney's statement that ‘for metrical purposes syl- 
lables (not vowels) are distinguished by the grammarians as heavy 
or light’* is unfortunately not true: but we cannot but agree when 
he remarks, 

The distinction in terms between the difference of long and short in 
vowel-sound and that of heayy and light in syllable-construction is valu- 
able and should be observed," 

The failure of our authors to observe this distinction in fact leads 
to some confusion. The actual rules as to syllabic quantity, how- 
ever, are not in any doubt:* 


"Heavy" are: 
(a) (A syllable containing) a long vowel (including a nasalized 
vowel) 


(4) (A syllable containing) a short vowel followed by a consonant- 
group or by a final consonant in pausa. 
*Light’ is: 
(A syllable containing) a short vowel not followed by a consonant- 
group. 


' Cf Ghosh, PS Notes, p, 77. * xii. £0. 
" RP Introd. 5g: TP xxv. s. * Saét. Gr. § 90. 


* Ibid. Cf Firth, TPS, 1948, p. 139. 
* Cf TP xxii. 14-15. 
yad tyanjandntam yad w capi dinghawe 


hanyaga-purcam ca tothdimundmkem ; 
cfd serrded purden eidydt 


tesdny ato ‘nydet tate Laghiny. 
cmaieminton ved direrran asamyegd-param co yal 
| aramrmira-amyukion etal laghw mibedhata. 
CE AP i, 51-34; RP i, 20-21; Pig. tiv, 10-12; Pifgala, Ch. 5. Introd. 4. 


Bh. PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 
A final short vowel in pausa may be lengthened and so form a 
heavy syllable.' 

It will be noted that syllable-division and length of consonants 
are not employed in these statements of syllabic quantity, One 
exception is provided by the RP, which states, 

(A avilable containing) a long vowel i@ heavy; and heavier if secom~ 
panied by a consonant; (a syllable containing) a short yowe! with a (pre- 
ceding) consonant is light; and lighter without a consonant.* 

This suggests a series of four quantitative values, viz. 

‘Heavier’ (24 m.) 

‘Heavy’ (2 m,) 

‘Light’ (x4 m.) 

“Lighter’ (1m) 

But this distinction has no metrical consequences, and is not other- 
wise mentioned by the phoneticians,? who regularly apply the 
matra-concept to vowel-length and not to syliable-quantity. But 
a dangerous step has been taken in the statement of the VP that, 

A (short) vowel before « consonant-group is equivalent to 2 mdindr.* 


We may assume the logical background of such a statement to 
have been somewhat as follows: 

(a) Short vowel before consonant-group = heavy syllable. 

(4) Long vowel = heavy syllable, 

.{¢) Short vowel before consonant-group = long vowel. 

(d) Long vowel = 2 mdtrits, 

..{2) Short vowel before consonant-group = 2 miitras. 
The phonological consequences of such reasoning are serious 
enough, but the greater danger lies in the temptation to take the 
next step, viz 

.. by (a) and (¢), heavy syllable = 2 mdatras. 
And this step has in fact been taken by the metrical authorities, 
who employ mdtra in a quite different sense from that intended by 
the phoneticians, with the convention that a light syllable is a 

1 Cf. VP iv. 109; AP loc. cit.; Pingala, loc, at, See also Gauthiot, Fin de 
Mot, chap. ix. 

* svili. 4t-44. guru dirgham: Lmbcng tw wedi srvyatjanam bherer: laghu sep 
yaiijaaam hrarvam: laghlyo tyatjandd ste 

1 Except in sn interpretational quibble by Patafijali (discussed by Konow, 


op. cit. p. 310) ; | 
“by 10g. namryoga-pitrod (-2yuitjandnidvaidna)-gatdh spard dei-euiirdh. 


PROSODIES Ry 
lent to 1 maira and a heavy syllable to 2 matras.'' That the two 
uses of the term hive’ aithing tn\comamon’ te tecogntced by the 
author of the VyHanuktavalitarala, a manuscript work quoted by 
Varma, whose translation I take the liberty of reproducing:* 


By a conventional tradition the quantity of a lang syllable is measured 
zs two moras, which are attributed even to the pluta vowel (that has three 
moras). In the game way, although the quantity of a consonant is a half- 
sitesi Soca ending In @ comsonsnt is measured two moras. That a 
comonant should not increase the quantity of the syllable is due to con- 


ventions. 


The last sentence is reminiscent of the remarks of the RP quoted 

It is most unfortunate that the term mdfrd should have been 
employed at two different but related levels of analysis. The con- 
fusion is ultimately traceable to the equation of syllable with vowel, 
and the extension of the single term aksara to cover both. 


3.24. Tone (svara) 

The Indian authorities recognize the existence of three tone- 
classes in Vedic:* 

“There are three tones, uddffa, anuddtta, and svarita'! udatta 
means literally ‘raised’, anudatta ‘wnraised’, and svarita ‘intoned'. 
These are described by the AP as follows: 


In a given register a syllable with high tone is uddita, with low tane 
say and with falling (@egpta) tone seanita; the first half of the rvarita 
wadtia,® 


The literal meaning of dksipta is ‘cast down’. The description 
given in the VP reads: 


The uddtta is high, the aeuddtia low, and the reerita « combination of 
the two; ... the first half of the rearita is uddtta and the latter part 2 made 
ro fall (pranihanyate)," 


oa Ca. Ss 4. off, with Haliyudha’s comment, 
p 
Mela bans el Sad pecan yo ira the neutralization of tonal dis 
: epecch (pri. g-11; cf. Pike, Tone Languages, p. 34), 
’ PS i. rihdital cdieudtitted ca sooritad ca suards trayal 
* i 14-17. somine-yome "Aporam wccatr addttam: nico anuddttam: dhaptam 
mer tam: roartarldite eitrdrdhom wddttan. 
* 1. ro$-10. wear wadttak: micarr anuddtrah: wubhoyeodar eearitah, 
126, taryddita wddtteng roaridredhag- emul reset, 
iV. 140. Peerntarya cotfaro detah pranthanyate, 


88 PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 

The wddtta fe ugh, the anudatta low, and the trartta a compound 
tone ....it begins at the level of the wadtta and the reat is at the level of the 
anuddtia: s0.say the teachers: some say it ie a continuous fall (pravena),' 
The term praveana means literally ‘downhill slope’, ie. >, 

An exception is provided by the RP, which states, 

"Phe frat } or } mtrd of the soarita is higher than the uddtta: the rest 
is amddtia.* 

This statement suggests a relation of wdatta: peartta: anuditta 
somewhat as follaws:—; ~ : _;and this is supported by the peculiar 
system of tone-marking employed im the texts of the RV, where 
the sverifa, and not the wddtia, is indicated by a vertical stroke 
above the syllable;? thus a word such as agninaa, where the order 
of tones is amudatta—uddtta—rvarita, in marked agninaa, the 
medial wddtia syllable being unmarked. This peculiarity of mark- 

ing is.also followed by the AV’ and by certain texts of the YI’; 

elsewhere in the VI’ the marking is in accordance with the pre- 
scribed realization, e.g. adninaa. 

For the svarita we find various other terms occasionally em- 
ployed, for example, in the 7P ‘det-yama’, i.e. ‘of two pitches’, 
and in the RT ‘un-nica’, i.e. *high-low’ ; the Naradt Siksa says of 
the svarita that it 1s pronounced ‘between the xdétta and the 
anudatta' (udittGnidadtta-madiye),° a description that is reminiscent 
of the marking found in the texts of the Sdmaveda, where the 
udiitta is marked with a figure 1, asudatta with 3, and searita with 


2 (e.g. agninaa), i | 

The searitas are phonologically divided into two main sub- 
classes, the so-called ‘independent’ and ‘dependent’ (or ‘enclitic’), 
The former is generally explained as the result of a coalescence of 


an wddfta with an anudaita syllable (e.g. — = — ey ape 


"38-40, 46-47. wecnin wddttah: mica ameddttah: nemdhdrak rearitah (cf. 
Pinot ti 91)... ddie anveddtta-ramah frro ‘nuddtta-rama ity dodeydh: sarah 
propamad ify eke. CE. FLP iti. 

4 iit g-9. taryeddttataredditdd ardhe-midtrdrdham eva vd: anuddttah paral 


perpetfi. 

1 CE aleo Varma, “The Vedic Accent and the Interpreters of Pinini’, JAAS 
Bomibay 25. 1, 1950, pp. 1 & 

= sit, 3. a 4. " SS, pg 

F Ch Varma, "Studine im the Accentuation of the Samuveda’, fae FY A. 
India Oriental Conf,, Patna, 1930, pp. 417 ff. 


PROSODIES Li) 
= =); the latter is a variant of the amudatta immediately 


following an wdafte—as Panmi puts it: 

After un uddtta a reerita is substituted for the anuddita,' 

Theclose phonetic relationship of theindependentand dependent 
svaritas, however, is not dented,* and in some texts we find inde- 
pendent seurtfar indicated, like the enclitics, by an wdatta on the 
preceding syllable. In both cases it seems certain that its descrip- 
tion as a “falling” tone was justified, whether it represented the 
glide from one ‘register’ tone (udafta) to another (anwdatta), or an 
independent ‘contour’ tone (to use Pike's terminology).* Thestate- 
ments which refer to the first | mora as high and the remainder 
as low are probably speaking not in phonetic but ina type of phono- 
logical terminology that is prophetically redolent of Prague.* 

it will have been noted that the AP, in describing the uddtta as 
high and the anudatta as low, made the important specification, 
‘within a given register’ ; the pitches, that is to say, are relative and 
not absolute—a point which is specifically made by Patafjali: 

The terms "high’ and ‘low’ have no absolute signification." 

To quote a modern parallel, 

te te the relative height of the tonemes, not their actual pitch, which 
pertinent to their linguistic analysis.” 

Certain of our treatises attempt to give some account of the 
physiological processes whereby the tonal distinctions are effected. 
The AP's statement ts as follows: 

The three tones are wddtia, qruddita, and rearita: they are effected by 
tenseness, lnxnces and ‘dkyepa’ respectively." 

T with, tv. 66. Stnerieneoprgatsenp Cr. TP xv, 29. udidifdl pero 

nuddttah rcaritiam. Upalirkha vill, 7. addttdd anuddttam 

to 2 Wackernagel, Ai. Gr. ig sees Bue for various pueices. which we can 
as hope to interpret, cf. TP xx. Be PPL ras. 

CE Maedonell, Ped. Gr., 4 84.45; 85. 


. Tone Language, pp. 5 tf. 
* CE Trobetzkoy, Principes, pp. 204 F; Martinet, Phonology ax Functional 


Phonetict, pp. rT 4 (Me. we make use of the concept of mora, we can consider 
al} melodic tones a successions of two punctual tones and thus reduce the 
number of distinct prosodical unite . . ."); Jakobson, “Die Betonung und thre 
Ralle in der Wort- und Syntagmaphonologie’, TCLP iv. roy ff. On the lpnita- 
tions of this technique, cf, Martinet, Lingua, t- i. st, 
Yio ton Pim tt: Roh Sunpse i. 207). idam ucce-nicam anovatthita- 
iirthaka ? Pike, Tone Languages, p. 4) cf. Phonetics, pp. 27 ff. 
Yi. 


uddtiad cdmuddtie! co reorital ca trayah roardh 
dvdma-vitrambhdiyepars ta weypante 


90 PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 


The term “ahrepa’, ‘casting down’, has already been encountered 
and can hardly be related to a physiological basis: the other terms, 
however, are extremely suggestive of a reference to the state of the 
vocal cords, and this is in fact borne out by the explicit statement 
of the Pari- Siksa,' examined by Varma,‘ as also by the correspond- 


ing passage in the 7P; 

The high tone is effected by tension, hardness and constriction of the 
cen low tone is effected by loxness, softness and widening of the 
These statements are not so very remote from a modern descrip- 
tion such as that of Forchhammer: 


Im Mittelregiater kGnnen wir die Tonhihe sowohl durch Spannen wie 
auch durch Abschlanken bew, Verdicken der Stmmilippen verindermn,“ 
and certainly do not merit the criticism made of them by Whitney— 

There ia evidently much more guesswork than true observation in this 


nile... . There 1s nothing at all to commend in much a description of the 
way in which low tone ia produced. 

Even today the precise mechanism of pitch variation is a difficult 
and debated topic. 

Tt should here be mentioned that in the musical treatises each 
octave is referred to as the ‘dtuguna’ or “double' of its predecessor,® 
and it would be tempting to conclude from this that the authors 
were further acquainted with the theory of vibrational frequency- 
ratios; this interpretation is invalidated, however, by the com- 
mentator's statement that ‘double’ means simply ‘double in effort’? 
The west is thus here in advance of the cast with Euclid's 
observation : 


Of the sound-movements some are of higher and eorne of lower fre- 


quency: the high frequencies produce sharp sounds and the low fre- 
quencica decp sounds." 


'Sr-Rs, ... aontd kanpha-telasya ... vistytd happha-bilarya, 

* Op. cit., p. rhs. 

Vail 9-10. dydimo iiinenym aputd khesyety uccah-hardri tabdarya: anne 

mind wrutd Miaryeti sfenif- herd. 

* Op. cir, p. 201, 

"Cf. Russell, Spvech amd Fotee, pp 198 ff, See further R. Cory, ‘The 
ear of Pitch Change in the Voice’, Journ. af Phyriolagy, uci, 1937, 
vr 334 

e. Sanygitaraindéara, 1. ii. 

+ iinatee: te cle (Lam indebted to Dr. A. Dace for es Selerence.) 

" Sectio Camoraz 34 (MM). Tide 34 eticcuw al eds epesdrepel cime, al 
oi ot pale cveirepa cferdpors mosodion rong p@dyyors; al Gd dpacdtrepas 


PROSODIES ee 


If the ancient linguists employed any graphic method of indicat- 
ing tone, it has (apart from the orthographic systems of our texts) 
been long since lost to us; but we have something closely parallel 
in the manual gestures prescribed to accompany recitation of the 
Vedic hymns. We in fact find the terminology of these prescrip- 
tions to be related to that of the phonetic accounts. ‘The root 
ksip-, ‘to throw’, which was used in the phonetic description of the 
svarila appears also in the gestural terms dirdhva-Agepa and adhak- 
hstpa, ‘throwing up’ and ‘throwing down’, referring to the manual 

accompanying the udatta and anudatta tones respectively: 

the gesture for the svarita is said in this case to consist. of a com- 
bination of the two.' The verb pranihamyate, ‘is made to fall’, like- 
wise used in. the phonetic description of the svarifa, again appears 
in the description of the gesture accompanying it.* Uvata, com- 
menting. on the RP’s phonetic use of ‘fksepa', had equated it with 
‘tiryag-gamana’, ‘a moving across,’ and this term also appears in 
the gestural section of the VP, where Kanva is quoted as teaching 
that for one type of svarita the hand is to be moved ‘across and 
downwards’! ec. diagonally downwards. It thus appears probable 
that some of the tonal terminology is really based on gestural move- 
ments, which are of course related in turn to the kinaesthetic and 
acoustic phenomena.* 

| The Vedic tonal system has left little if any trace in the modern 
Indo-Aryan languages.® Haug, in a study of contemporary Vedic 
chanting, = eliimnad to have found the ancient tonal system preserved 
(a searita, for example, being sung on two notes of which the first 
was the higher) ;? these claims cannot be accepted, however, without 
further investigation. 

Greek, like Vedic, had preserved the Indo-European tonal sys- 
tem with considerable fidelity, and it will be of some interest to 

i Vail. ~§. 58; Rimadarman on Pratijad S., ed. Weber, p. ga. Cf Uvate on 
FP i. rat. tatroddte irdhva-gamanom fattarya onmuddtte : 


Aasterya. . 
PP i ia, pum mhatyo pramhonyate wddtre. 
1 On AP iu. &. Sindh WNP tl AD COU 


PP 203 fi. 
7 Cher dar Ween und den Werth dex wedischen Accents, pp. 48-32. 


oa PHONETICS IN ANCIENT [NDIA 


see to what extent the parallel systems have given rise to parallel 
descriptions by the native authorities,*’ As regards the high and 
‘low tones, the Greek writers are agreed in according to them the 
titles df, ‘sharp, acute’, and Bug, ‘heavy, grave’, terms which are 
parallel to the Sanskrit wddtfa and anudatta. For the compound 
tone we find the terms Groves, ‘of two tones’ (comparable with the 
det-yama of the TP) and ofvBdpeca, ‘acute-grave' (comparable with 
the wn-nica of the RT); the common traditional term is repuesui- 
pevoy, ‘bent round, circumflex’, but according toa Byzantine source 
this term referred simply to the graphic prosodic symbol and was 
substituted for ofvfdpaa by the great Alexandrian marian, 
Aristophanes of Byzantium, when he changed that symbol from 
* to *; the same source also provides a phonetic description which 
parallels that of the Indian svartta, viz,, that for the ‘circumflex’ the 
voice starts at the acute pitch and falls to the grave, thus constitut- 
ing a combination of the two Dionysius Thrax distinguishes 
various types of ‘circumflex’, which are further subdivided by 
Glaucus of Samoa, but, as in the case of the Indian descriptions of 
particular sub-categories of svarita, their precise identification is 
impossible. 

Regarding the physiological processes of tonal differentiation, 
Glaucus provides a parallel to the Indian sources when he de- 
scribes the acute as émsrerayey, ‘tense’, and the prave as dveiern, 
‘lax’. We may also note that for tone in general the Grecks use not 
only the term zpoowSia (“tune’ = Lat. accentus, equivalent to Skt, 
svara) but also tieds (‘tension’) 

The Greek sources also mention a further type of tone, the yécor 
or ‘middle tone’; the identification of this with the circumflex, 
as assumed by many scholars, can hardly be supported in view of 
the fact that we find them mentioned as distinct categories within 
individual statements. "The ‘circumflex’ tones referred to by our 
authorities are those which we find marked as such in our texts, 
and these are all in the nature of ‘independent’ tones (cf. the ‘inde- 


* "Texts of the Greek etutementa which follow will be found collated in Post- 
gute, Guide to Greek Accentuation, Sturtevant, op. cit., pp. o4 ff. 

* «Ou fawe reiy mrpurridrot Aiden elites doyoulene poy deurte fe ry 
bryyeie marae id wee og rd Bap, olddy dAda fj pltr wal xpdow @€ dudoir, ral re 

* “The etymologically equivalent Skt. :dna is used only in the sense of “mono- 
oi (ef. Aeris on FP i, 130; Rimedarman on Pratijfid Siitra 8; Weber, nd, 

. 423 ff). 


PROSODIES OF 


pendent svarita’ mentioned above); but on the evidence of Greek 
musical fragments Professor Turner has long since made the 
observation that, 

When a long unaccented vowel wre sung on two notes, there was a 
tendency... in the case of those following an accented syllable to make 
the firet the higher. , This is in agreement with what we may surmise 
to have been the nature of ha vowels Follcweas an accented syliable from 
a comparson with the Vedic accent;’ 


the unmarked syllable following an acute was thus equivalent to 
the ‘dependent’ or ‘enclitic’ searita of Vedic. It seems reasonable 
to proceed, with Grammont, to identify this tone with the péoov of 
the Greek authorities: 

Ce ton figure toujours 4 cété de I'nigu; c'est qu'on ne peut pas retomber 
de |'aigu au grave par une chute dépourvue de durée, mais par un état 
Intermédiaire, qui partant de la hauteur de l'sigu arrive progressivement 
celle du grave... . Le ptoos est cxactement équivalent du ton que ies 
Hindous sopellens svanta (descendant) ct qui est intermeédiare entre 
Vwelitta (haut, aiggu) et )aneddita (non haut, bas, grave)? 

Sturtevant's objection that ' “intermediate’’ would be a pecu- 
liarly inept name for an accent which contained within itself both 
the extremes’ loses much of its force in view of the description of 
the swarita by the Ndradt Siksa (viz. udattanudatta-madhye) and 
the marking-system of the Sd@maveda (see above). 


3-3. Fempo 

Tt will be appropriate te conclude the discussion of synthesis 
with a feature which is pre-eminently related to the major units 
of utterance, The following statement on the subject of tempo 
appears in the RP; | 

There are prescribed three speeds of utterance—reduced, medium and 
rapid; for repetition one should employ the rapid speed, for recitation the 
medium speci, and for the instruction of pupils the reduced apeed,* 


This recognition of the pedagogical function of the ‘reduced’ tempo 
(eilambita) finds an echo in Paul Passy’s*. . . “prononciation fami- 
© Class, Revi. xm, 1915, p, 19%. 
* Phonétigue du Gree Ancien, p. 355. 
ot also Vendryts, Tratté d° Accentuation Grécque, dager ‘Le mot jleos 
alors ici non pas intermédiaire . . . mais combine des deux.’ 


“+ xii, 46, 49. tirro vptiir upadiéanti odco vilambitdm madhyamidm ca drutidim ca: 
ebhydrdrehe drut tpttin prayogdrthe tw prececd A yenseecion 
jivindm upadeidrihe hurydd epttim wilambitdm. 


4 PHONETICS IN ANCIENT INDIA 


litre ralentie", que je tiens pour spécialement convenable 4 |'en= 
seignement’.' Hut of preater interest would be a recognition of the 
‘significance of tempo as a linguistic category ; in addition to impor- 
tant semantic functions its consequences are evident at all levels of 
analysis? and modern linguistics must sooner or later find appro- 
priate measures for ity description. The IS does in fact go so far 
as to observe that the medium speed is the basis for the establish- 
ment of phonological length-distinctions.’ In this, as in so many 
of the matters discussed, the Indian pioneers have pointed the way 
for future research; the details of their work are such as often to’ 
evoke the comment, 

nihil est iam dictum quod non dictum sit prius 
—their principles are such as may inspire us to disprove it. 

' Comeration Frangains, p. vi. 

* Sec c.g. Stetson, Motor Phonetic, pp. t7 ff, voz, 124 £., and (with Hudgins 
and Moses) "Pulatogrums change with rates of articulation’, ANPE xvi. <2 ff. 
Fries and Piice, Language, xxv, a6 f. Cf aloo TPS, roso, pp. roo f. 

1 546 (Lilders, p. 97). 


INDEX OF ANCIENT TECHNICAL TERMS 
Tug following list refers to terme discussed in the main text, und does not 
include instances occurnng only in footnote quotations. 


fi) SANSKRIT 
eee Nid Gr, 85, 87. dirgha, 8s, 
duhipyyta, 25. 
mr e794. dti-vanma, $5, o2 
anundstka, BO, 21, 39) 42, 45. | divine, 72. 
. a0, 33; rout, 66, 
anumdra, 16, 20, 40-41, 42-46, $1. ida, a4, 48. 
ania, <6. nana mela, 75 
antahuthd, 29, 3%. | mth, 30, 77. 
ablimidhina, JO-75. Mend sppia, 25 
ayugermdAd, 16-177, 50. pada, 12-11 
alpaprdna, 24. pardiraya, 16. 
arpytfa, 24, 29. paminy, ah 
dkpipta, 87, prakyt, 10. 
dkgepa, By-gr. pratreepiita, 52. 
dhhyantara (-propatra), 22, 41 praydind, 22, 93, 41,60. 
dsthdpita, 72. prrawana, 88 
drya (-prayatea), 23 praitinns, 
ipat-spyiia, 25. prdtifrutha, 23-24. 
uddtia, R73 barsma, § 
n-nica, 88, oz idirya (~prayatna), 22 
, 16, 50, 57 bheypena, Oo. 
uratya, 4 mohdprdna, 38 
aprvcee, 26, 5}- medird, 55-85. 
bhdta, 9. mirdhon, 52-53 
8 - mirdhanya, 52 
yatnd, bg. 
pariah, ‘a 52, 5%, 61. yoma, 16, 75-78. 
harape, 177-18, 23-24, 59- yegardha (see ayeyardha). 
karpana, 74. rahta, | 
i, 22. niga, | 40 
_shdra, 14. raved, 
hala, 58. replat, Ty 54. 
krama, 79. haha, Be. 
derma-pritha, 01 laghuprayainaiara, 63. 
guna, 15, G2, targa, 46-47, 32. 
gura, 35. vorma, 19-16, 
fear, 53 marna-kula, 14. 
igra, 28, vorna-romdmmivd, 8, 4, 15, 16, 20, 
sir et 57,61. 
cma a 58%; 55. wikdra, 10, 
tdiowya, 64 tircheds, 78, 
illu, 18, 52. caprakarta, 75 
danta-mailfa, 18, ¢4. tmdra, 56, 


yb INDEX OF ANCIENT TECHNICAL TERMS 
a ao 6, 63. tamdhyakgara, 6}. 


ithdna, 1718, 24, 41) 51, ST $9) 66: 
sparia, 24, 39, 46, 7% 75- 

wpeite, 34 50 29. 39: 

rplofand, 7 

mura (vowel ),. She 29 Bo. 


| evarita, 87-93 
homi-relia, 18, 51 
hrana, 55. 
(@) GREEK 
Egicurvet,, BQ. mipurmeapieror, 92. 
Tylana, 39, 34. - mpoodin, 92. 
picow (tome), 92 raver, Oz. 
fd, 92. d6byyor, 10. 
dfufdpra, 92. dusjerra, 29. 
oiparat, 55. poder, 40. 
fii) LATTES 
arcentua, 92. media, 2, 70s 
aipirata, 30-37 nome, 14, 1 
figura, 14, 16. potestar, 14, 16 
fortis, 76, 37: nemipocalir, 39, 31 
lenis, 36, 37 tenuir, 2, 46. 


a 
| ! 
‘Se 
: 
= 
r 
7 
& 
a 
* 
= 
i 
! 


ee Bae fas L 


be | 4 ’ | 


= “y | = wo! 
‘os yaa Goes Qe he ae \ < 


, a — 
—— | 1 » = “a a 
a= F 
-_ ’ ' 
a & i 
= | = 
i a 
- 7 . 
7 = | 
a 
oa & 
j 


: 
i 
7 
- 
Fr i 
= 
= = _ — a : 


‘s, 


fue revcerg, 


4 


| 


stalootie No. 2k = SL 2084 mid 7a58 | 


i 


14h, Weds 


Author wal 


Fionetice In SsHéeient Indie 


Title— 


